ONE HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Administration of Union Territories
(Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
180
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS


95
C.S.(H.A.)-352
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT
Administration of Union Territories
(Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i )-(iv)
2. C OMPOSITION  OF THE S UB-COMMITTEE ............................................................................ (v)-(vi)
3. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (vii)-(viii)
4. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (ix)-(x)
5. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—51
Chapter-I Dadra and Nagar Haveli ........................................................................... 1—13
Chapter-II Daman and Diu .......................................................................................... 14—24
Chapter-III Chandigarh .................................................................................................. 25—51
6. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND R ECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE 52—63
7. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 65—87
8. A NNEXURE
List of the Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs .......................................... 88—94

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
†4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
♣5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
#25. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
† Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy nominated w.e.f. 4 th July, 2012 vice Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ceased to be Member consequent upon expiration
of term of membership from Rajya Sabha on 2 nd April, 2012.
♣ Shri Satish Chandra Misra nominated w.e.f. 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal who resigned from the membership
of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 13 th March, 2012.
# Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu nominated w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012 vice Shri Bishnu Pada Ray who was nominated to the Committee on
Rural Development w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012.
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
^2. Vacant
†3. Shri Santiuse Kujur
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
#8. Vacant
*9. Vacant
##10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
%16. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
^ †Shri Santiuse Kujur, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the resignation
of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.
† Due to the Appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries on 28 th October, 2012.
^ #Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 28th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the appointment
of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet on 28 th October, 2012 and Shri D. Raja, Member, R jya Sabha
ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25th July, 2013
* Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, MP , Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the Appointment
of Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary as Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. 17 th June, 2013.
# ##Shrimati Kanimozhi ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013
% Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013 and
Dr. V . Maitreyan, MP, Rajya Sabha was re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27 th July, 2013.
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2013)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Kanimozhi
6. Shri Santiuse Kujur
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
14. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
15. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
16. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
(iii)

SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE FOR ADMINISTRATION
OF UNION TERRITORIES
(Constituted w.e.f. 18 th May, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
(1) Shri Tariq Anwar – Convenor
(2) Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
(3) Shri Baijayant Panda
(4) Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
(5) Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
(6) Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
(7) Shri Neeraj Shekhar
*(8) Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
(v)
*Nominated to the Sub-Committee w.e.f. 19 th July, 2012.

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATION OF
UNION TERRITORIES OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 7 th October, 2013)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu – Chairman
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan – Convenor
3. Shri D. Raja – Co-convenor
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
6. Shrimati Kanimozhi
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anandrao Adsul
8. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
9. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
10. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
11. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
12. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
13. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
(vi)

(vii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs having been authorized by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Eightieth Report on Administration of Union Territories on Daman
& Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh UTs.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs identified the
subject in its meeting held on 15
th May, 2012 and constituted a sub-Committee on Administration
of Union Territory ( w.e.f. 18 th May, 2012) to study various aspects of Administration in different
Union Territories. The Sub-Committee in its first sitting held on 21 st May, 2012 and discussed its
mandate and future programme. The Sub-Committee in its next sittings held on 9 th July and
26th July, 2012 heard the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs along with Administrator, UT
of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli on various aspects of administration of both the UTs
and the status of various sectors of economy of the UTs– viz. tourism, agriculture, fishing, small
scale, medium and tiny industries, projects on connectivity with mainland etc. The Sub-Committee
also undertook study visit to UT of Chandigarh from 26
th to 28 th July, 2011.
3. The term of the DRPSC on Home Affairs came to an end on 31 st August, 2012 and hence
the Sub-Committee got dissolved. The Chairman of the DRPSC on Home Affairs again re-
constituted the Sub-Committee on Administration of UTs w.e.f. 7
th October, 2013.
4. The re-constituted Sub-Committee on Administration of UTs in its first meeting held on
9th October, decided to visit UTs Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, to have in-depth
understanding of the Administration and other dimensions of the UTs. The Committee in its sitting
held on 21
st October, 2013 heard Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs along with
Administrators of UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep on various
aspects of administration of UTs in order to take stock of the implementation of projects/schemes
and programmes undertaken by the above said three UT Administrations. The Sub-Committee also
undertook study visit to UTs of Daman and Diu and Dadar & Nagar Haveli from 5
th to
6th November, 2013. The study visit of the Sub-Committee to Lakshadweep was postponed.
5. While preparing the report, the following documents have been relied upon:–
(i) Relevant extract of Annual Report (2012-13) Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) Copies of presentation on Union Territories of Lakshwadeep, Daman & Diu and Dadra
& Nagar Haveli;
(iii) Presentation on UT of Daman and Diu as received from Ministry of Home Affairs; and
(iv) Memoranda received from individuals/organizations during study visit;
(v) Replies to questions received from Ministry of Home Affairs; and
(vi) Material received during study visits.
6. The Convenor of the Sub-Committee presented the draft report to the Chairman of the
DRPSC on Home Affairs for consideration of the latter.
7. The Committee in its sitting held on 17
th February, 2014 considered and adopted the present
Report.

8. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
17th February,  2014 Standing Committee on Home Affairs
(viii)

ACRONYMS
UT Union Territories
SC&ST Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes
T&D Transmission and Distribution
V A T Value Added Tax
MW Mega-watt
CHCs Community Health Centres
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging
PHCs Primary Health Centres
BPL Below Poverty Line
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility
SFC Standing Finance Committee
K V Kilo volt
VBCH V inobha Bhave Civil Hospital
DNHPDA Dadra and Nagar Haveli. Planning and Development Authority
OIDC Omnibus Industrial Development Corporation
SMC Silvassa Municipal Council
CPWD Central Public Works Department
NIT Notice Inviting Tender
MO Medical Officer
AYUSH A yurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy)
V C Video confrencing
ECG Electrocardiography
DNH Dadra & Nagar Haveli
SWIFT Single Window Investor Friendly Timebound System
NOC No Objection Certificate
NHAI National Highways Authority of India
DANICS Delhi, Andaman Nicobar Island Civil Services
JERC Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
OPD Out Patient Department
CT Scan Computed Tomography (CT) Scan
ICTC Integrated Counseling and Testing Centre
OT Operation Theatre
(ix)

(x)
INTACH Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage
DPR Detailed Project Report
PWD Public Works Department
PGCIL Power Grid Corporation of India Limited
PYKKA Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan
GIDC Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation
SI Sub-Inspector
ASI Assistant Sub-Inspector
UPSC Union Public Service Commission
PSK Passport Seva Kendra
GSPC Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation
CTET Central Teacher Eligibility Test
GTET Gujarat Teachers Eligibility Test
IAS Indian Administrative Service
JNNURM Jawahar Lal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission
NCERT National Council of Education Research and Training
RTI Right to Information
RGCTP Rajiv Gandhi Chandigarh Technology Park
ASIDE Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities
IT Information Technology
ITES Information Technology Enabled Services
NCR National Capital Region
EDC Entrepreneur Development Council
GMCH Government Medical College and Hospital
MCC Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh
MSMED Act Micro, Small And Meduim Enterprises Development Act
SEZ Special Economic Zone
RW A Resident Welfare Association
GPA General Power of Attorney
NGO Non Governmental Organisation
CEA Central Electricity Authority
DANIPS Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Police Service
LIG Lower Income Group
EWS Economically Weaker Sections
SIU Report Staff Inspection Unit Report
JERC Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
DADRA AND NAGAR HA VELI
1.1 INTRODUCTION
1.1.1 Dadra and Nagar Haveli was born on 17 th December, 1779 as a result of a treaty between
Portuguese and Marathas. The Marathas assigned 72 villages to Portuguese in return of their
friendship and the group of 72 villages came to be known as Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The
Portuguese ruled this territory until its liberation on 2
nd August, 1954. After its liberation, the
Administration was carried on by local body known as Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli Administration
till its merger with the Indian Union on 11
th August, 1961. Consequently, the Free Dadra and Nagar
Haveli Administration was succeeded by formal statutory Administration headed by an Administrator.
1.1.2 This UT has an area of 491 sq.km. and comprises of two enclaves viz. (1) Dadra and
(2) Nagar Haveli. Five villages in the UT viz. Dadra, Naroli, Samarvarni, Masat and Rakholi are
treated as statutory Census Towns in population Census 2011. Besides, this UT has 65 villages, one
District Panchayat, 11 Village Panchayats and one Municipal Council. Silvasa is the capital city of
this UT.
1.2 PRESENTATION BEFORE THE SUB-COMMITTEE
1.2.1 The Sub-Committee on Administration of UTs in its sitting held on 21
st October, 2013 heard
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs along with Administrator, UT of Daman & Diu and Dadra
& Nagar Haveli on various aspects of administration of UTs in order to take stock of the
implementation of projects/schemes and programmes undertaken by the UT Administration.
1.2.2 The Administrator holding charge of two UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
made power point presentations on UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The highlights of the
presentations were as follows:
● The population of UT is about 3.44 lakh consisting of about 1.94 lakh male and
1.5 lakh female with 1.8% and 52% SC and ST populations. The sex ratio is 774
against the national average of 940. However, the sex ratio in the 0-6 years age group
is 926 against national average of 914.
● The literacy rate is 76.20% as against 74.04% of India. The male and female literacy
rates of UT are 85.20% and 64.30% respectively. The SC literacy rate is 78.25%
against 54.32% national average; however, ST literacy rate is lower at 41.24% against
47.08% national average.
● Budget allocations to the local bodies and municipalities have been on increasing trend,
it has been increased from R41.00 crore and R13.03 crore in 2008-09 to
R156..35 crore and R36.90 crore in 2013-14. However Committee notes that the
allocations in percentage terms have dwindled down from R48.66 in 2008-09 to R28.74
in 2013-14.
1

2
● Toal revenue receipts in 2012-13 has been at R6163 crore and it is estimated to be
R6907 in 2013-14. The total allocation in 2012-13 and 2013-14 has been R564.70 crore
and R672.38 crore respectively. The allocation in 2012-13 was fully utilized and about
62% has been utilized upto September, 2013.
● In Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 98 per cent power is utilized by the industries and
100 per cent recovery of charges is made. Silvassa is basically the marble capital of
the country as all the Italian marble imported in raw form is cut and polished for being
supplied to the rest of the country. Since T&D losses are lower than Daman and Diu,
tariffs in Dadra and Nagar Haveli are lower.
● Major achievements of lowest T&D loss in the country at 5.23% and electrification of
all villages with continuous supply was done. Other achievements like starting of
construction of six high level bridges, computerization of V AT, study of science
subjects in Government College, dialysis facility in hospital have also been made.
● Cost of construction of six high level bridges has been estimated at R54.17 crore and
cost of construction of nine new bridges has been pegged at 49.67 crore. A ring road
is also proposed with an estimated cost of 47.99 crore.
● New projects include construction of Transport Bhavan, New Circuit House,
International Sports Complex, New Collectorate, State Library and Kala Kendra, etc.
● New energy projects include Strengthening of Transmission and Distribution Network,
Generation of Solar Power at various locations as well as setting up of 3 MW Solar
Plant, implementation of Integrated Solution for electrical network and Smart Grid in
Silvassa Town.
● Water Supply/irrigation projects comprise Integrated Management Plan with Estimated
cost of 
R255 crore and construction of several Check Dams at several locations in
Forest and non-Forest Areas.
● The area receives enough rain falls and rain-water harvesting has been made
compulsory in all buildings. Apart from that, in villages the administration is making
ponds for irrigation source for the rest of the year besides check dams on different
rivers to increase water availability.
● As Health infrastructure, one 241 bedded District Hospital, one 50 bedded Community
Health Centre, 7 Primary Health Centres, 3 Rural Dispensaries, 50 Sub Centres and one
Mobile Medical unit are functional. Up-gradation of CHC into Sub-District Hospital and
Expansion of District Hospital to 480 bed at the cost of R225 crore is in progress.
Starting of MRI services and setting up of Medical College and Nursing College is
proposed. Specialists have been stationed only in Silvassa. Doctors posted in PHCs
visit sub-centers under a rotation policy and for that purpose they have been provided
vehicle and people don’t have to come all the way to Silvassa.
● Laptops are provided to the students of 11th std. and 1st semester of diploma courses
in polytechnic. Silvassa College of Engineering will start from 2014-15. 100% and 50%
scholarship to girl students of BPL and others category is provided for higher
professional courses.
● For tourism, several projects like Lake Front Development at Dudhani, River Front
Development on Daman Ganga River at Silvassa, development of Silvassa Haat,
construction of State Museum at Silvassa, Development of Butterfly Park and Prakruti
Parichay Kendra have been completed.

3
● About 9000 old age, disabled and widow beneficiaries are getting Pension. Bicycles
have been given to 3500 girl students. 14000 students are covered under
Supplementary Nutrition Programme and free text books, stationery and uniforms are
provided to all SC and ST students.
● New initiatives such as Sankalp- development of model village, other rural
infrastructure under CSR, Sanjeevani- Health Insurance scheme for free medical
cashless treatment upto R2.00 lakh with accidental death/disability coverage upto
R1.00 lakh to BPL families and families having income less than R1.00 lakh per annum
have been taken.
● Common Effluent Treatment Plant, Sewerage Treatment Plant for Urban Towns,
Integrated Solid Waste Management Project, and Barrier free access for all Government
Buildings are also other new initiatives taken by the UT Administration.
1.2.3 The UT Administration also raised the following issues/demands for attention of the sub-
Committee:
● Opening of Passport Seva Kendra at Silvassa/Daman is required
● Clearance of the proposal of construction of Ring Road pending with MoRTH is
required.
● SFC clearance for Integrated Water Management Plan is pending with Department of
Drinking Water.
● SFC clearance for 220 KV Electric Sub Station is pending with Ministry of Power; and
● Allocation of Power has been reduced by the Ministry of Power, which needs to the
restored.
1.2.4 The Committee notes the submissions made by the Administrator of the UT and
makes following recommendations:
● The Ministry of External Affairs should consider for opening of a Passport Seva
Kendra either at Silvassa or Daman to cater to the needs of people of both the UTs.
● The construction of ring road in Silvassa Town area is necessary as there has
been fast increase in population growth in recent period. The Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways should accord early clearance for proposed construction
of Ring Road. Besides, the UT Administration should also make endeavour to
improve existing road networks as well as construction of new
roads for improving connectivity which will help best flow of goods and services.
● The Committee is of the view that UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli in tandem with
Government of India should address the issue of water supply on priority basis.
This integrated water management plan with a cost of R255 crore should be
implemented as soon as possible as it would help solve the problem of drinking
water throughout the UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The Committee is of the
considered view that the Standing Finance Committee clearance for Integrated
Water Management Plan pending with Department of Drinking Water, Ministry
of Rural Development of Government of India should be prioritized.
● The Ministry of Power should give clearance for 220 KV Electric SubStation at
Waghchhipa. The Committee also recommends that allocation of Power which
has been reduced by the Ministry of Power should be restored as the present
allocation is not adequate for the full requirement of the industries.

4
1.3 ISSUES
1.3.1 The Sub-Committee on Administration of UTs made study tour to the UT of Dadra and
Nagar Haveli on 5 th November, 2013. During its tour the Sub-Committee visited new circuit house
building, Daman Ganga River Front Development Project, Municipal Drinking Water Supply Project,
Vinobha Bhave Civil Hospital (VBCH) in Silvassa. The Sub-Committee also visitied Integrated Dairy
Development Scheme in Masat, New Hospital Building at Khanvel, SANKALP project at Kalsunpada
and proposed school building at Mandoni.
New Circuit House Building at Silvassa
1.3.2 The Sub-Committee noted that the new circuit house building was under construction. The
Sub-Committee noted the building plan of the proposed circuit house, the proposed amenities, etc.
there.
1.3.3 The Committee desires that the construction of new circuit house building at Silvassa
will be completed soon without time and cost overrun.
Daman Ganga River Front Development Project
1.3.4 Daman Ganga River Front Development Project is being undertaken on river Daman Ganga
at Silvassa. The objective of developing the River Front along River Daman Ganga is to develop
the place as one of the major tourist attractions and to provide an appropriate place for recreation.
A master plan for the River Front for a stretch of about 3.00 km. on the bank has been prepared
by the DNHPDA. According to the UT Administration, work order has been issued for construction
of retaining wall 1
st Phase (entire stretch of retaining wall which is approximately 3 kms.) for an
amount of R12.89 crore. The UT Administration has informed that the project will be completed
in June, 2015.
1.3.5 The Committee recommends that Daman Ganga River Front Development Project on
river Daman Ganga at Silvassa may be completed as per schedule. The Committee also
recommends that the UT Administration should make all out efforts to project Daman
Ganga River Front as an important tourist destination and give due publicity to it so that
tourist flow to the UT could increase.
Municipal Drinking Water Supply Project, Silvassa
1.3.6 The Administration is making efforts to provide drinking water supply in all habitations of
the territory throughout the year. Besides, the Administration has initiated long term plans like
Integrated Water Management Plan, Urban Water Augmentation Plan and water harvesting
structures, the piped water supply schemes in interior area of Mandoni and Dudhani in 2011-12
and so far 85% of work has been completed.
1.3.7 The existing scheme is designed for 40000 souls while population as per 2001 census itself
is 50,456. Thus the present system is not adequate. The tax concession given to industry in 1994
has increased industrial activities in Silvassa and there is manifold increase in population. Present
house connection is 2,000 against required 15,5000 connections. As drainage system is to be
implemented in near future, minimum 135 lpcd flow rate is required. Thus the present system
cannot match with present requirements. The existing distribution network laid in is not
commensurate with requirement, leading to uneven distribution of water. The UT Administration is
implementing water supply scheme for Silvassa and Amli Township in UT of Dadra and Nagar
Haveli. The project is to be implemented within Silvassa municipal area.
1.3.8 The work of water supply scheme in UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli has been entrusted
to OIDC as deposit work from Silvassa Municipal Council (SMC) on 28/09/20011. The documents

5
regarding project and the fund for this project amounting to R26,63,00,000/- were transferred to
OIDC on 1 st November, 2011. OIDC after taking necessary approval and scrutinizing the tender
document and also following the CPWD guidelines published the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) on
12th December, 2011 for the above work with an estimated amount of R23,93,10,745/-.The
Sub-Committee visited OIDC Water Treatment Plant.
1.3.9 The Committee recommends that a comprehensive study should be done to address
the issue of drinking water for the population as well as for industrial units. The
Committee recommends that the UT Administration should expedite completion of long term
plans like Integrated Water Management Plan, Urban Water Augmentation Plan and water
harvesting structures, the piped water supply schemes in interior area of Mandoni and
Dudhani without any procedural delays.
Vinoba Bhave Civil Hospital, Silvassa
1.3.10 As stated earlier, the public health services are provided through one 241 bedded District
Hospital at Silvassa, one 50 bedded Community Health Centre at Khanvel, six Primary Health
Centres (All 6 PHC are 24x7 with 1 MO, 1 AYUSH doctor, 3 Staff Nurses) and three Rural
Dispensaries. The Sub-Committee visited the VBCH hospital, a multispecialty District Hospital. The
Hospital is providing high quality, affordable and accessible health care services to the community
through timely, safe, effective, patient centered and efficient quality healthcare efforts.
1.3.11 The Sub-Committee made a round of the Hospital and visited several departments including
the Telemedicine Centre installed in the Hospital to see the patients being treated through video
conferencing with other specialist doctors of other States. It was informed that the reports like
blood reports, X-rays, ECG, etc. of the patients are scanned and are sent to the specialist
concerned. The specialist, after analysis of the reports and after having conversation with the
patient through VC, recommends treatment. In case they are suggested to see the specialist
personally for further treatment, they are referred to these doctors and they are treated on priority
basis.
1.3.12 The Committee was impressed with the modern medical facilities available in Vinoba
Bhave Civil Hospital using new technologies. However, the Committee recommends that the
existing infrastructure in the said hospital should be upgraded for treatment of chronic
diseases. Sufficient fund may be provided for this purpose. The Committee recommends
that the administration should further improve health infrastructure in the UT of Dadar and
Nagar Haveli so that people residing in the UT could avail best health facilities.
Integrated Dairy Development Scheme, Masat
1.3.13 Dairying is an important source of subsidiary income to small/marginal farmers and
agricultural labourers as agriculture is mostly seasonal and there is a possibility of finding
employment throughout the year for many persons through dairy farming. According to the UT
Administration, the scheme has been implemented during last financial year 2012-13 for exclusively
women beneficiaries. The pattern of Assistance is @ 35% (40% in case of SC or ST or BPL
farmers of the project outlay (capital outlay), subject to a ceiling of R1.75 lakhs ( R2.00 lakhs
for SC or ST or BPL farmers) for unit of 10 animals by UT Administration of Dadra and Nagar
Haveli.
1.3.14 Besides, financial assistance, hundred bags of cattle feed (concentrate of 50 kgs. bag each)
and 100 kgs. of mineral mixture (1 kg. bag each) per beneficiary are provided @ 50% of the actual
purchase cost of cattle feed and mineral mixture as one time initial benefit by UT Administration
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, from its Annual Budget through Village Level Milk Co-operative

6
Societies. It was informed that 18 Dairy Units with 350 beneficiaries have been covered and it is
proposed to establish 20 Dairy units during current financial year 2013-14. Individual beneficiary
earns R3,500 to R4,000 per month as an additional income. There are sixteen Village Dairy Co-
operatives run exclusively by 465 women beneficiaries. Organization of five new Village Dairy Co-
operatives is under process. The Sub-Committee visited the Dairy farm and interacted with the
beneficiary women.
1.3.15 The Committee understands that Dairy Development is an important source to
enhance the level of income of small/marginal farmers and landless agricultural labourers
on a sustainable basis besides increasing milk supplies in the areas by increasing milk
production. The Committee recommends that Village Dairy Cooperatives should be opened
in every village of the UT which would help not only improve self sufficiency to the village
families but also enhance milk production and improve soil fertility and crop yields from
the manure obtained from animals. The Committee desires that more and more women
should be involved in the scheme as it would lead to their economic empowerment as well
as their participation in economic process.
Visit to new Hospital building, Khanvel
1.3.16 The Sub-Committee was informed that Khanvel is now developing as next capital town of
southern region of UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The population of the town has to travel to
Silvassa to avail better medical facilities and therefore is facing hardships. Presently, these peoples
are availing medical facilities from existing 40 bedded Community Health Centre which remains
over crowded. Therefore, the UT Administration has decided to convert existing Community Health
Centre into a 100 bedded Sub-District hospital. The total built up area of the building will be
5756.00 sq. mt and the construction work has been awarded at the cost of Rs. 9.99 crores. This
work is proposed to be completed within 18 months and as per agreement, date of completion is
23
rd June, 2014.
1.3.17 The Committee notes the progress in the construction of 100 bedded Sub-District
Hospital to cater to the needs of people of Khanvel .The Committee desires that the
construction should be completed within stipulated time.
Visit to a village Kalsunpada adopted under CSR project ‘SANKALP‘
1.3.18 The Sub-Committee was informed that the UT Administration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli
has initiated CSR projects in the UT. The UT Administration under Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) has involved corporate sector and initiated a programme called “SANKALP” through which
all the tribal villages and hamlets have been divided into units and development of these tribal
villages has been entrusted to the industries which are coming forward under CSR.
1.3.19 According to the UT Administration, there are 70 villages and 515 Padas in the UT of Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and the work under the CSR activities started two year back in which one company
Jaicorp adopted a village named Sindoni to develop the basic facilities like Pakka Houses, Toilets, etc
and the work is under progress. Another 12 companies have shown their interest in the said scheme.
It was stated that there are more than 147 companies which are having turnover of more than 100
crores and are required to participate in the said project as per new Company Act.
1.3.20 In the village Kalsunpada, a company, Sterling Generators Pvt. Ltd., has taken up SANKALP
project Under CSR for transforming it as a model village by providing basic civic amenities,
community hall, etc. The nodal officer of the company explained about the local tradition and
attempts to change the lifestyle of the 90 houses of the village. The nodal officer also stated that
after a medical check-up in the village, it was found that some people of the village need extra

7
attention for their health. He apprised the Sub-Committee that they are facing problems in
convincing the villagers for their rehabilitation as villagers are reluctant to change their life style
and want to live in their kuchcha houses at the very same location with their animals. The
Company has therefore planned to build 6 pakka houses in first phase by demolishing some
kuchcha houses of the convinced villagers after shifting them to temporary accommodations to
construct pakka houses. They will be reverted back after completion of construction. He further
submitted that by observing them, other villages will follow and construction of more houses will
pick up. He further stated that they propose to complete the project within a period of three years.
1.3.21 The Committee understands that Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) can play an
important role in the socio-economic development of rural people. The vast majority of our
country’s poorest people live in villages and these villages are in a state of neglect and
underdevelopment. The problems of hunger, ignorance, ill health, high mortality and
illiteracy are most acute in rural areas. In this context, the business houses can supplement
the efforts of Governments.
1.3.22 The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the UT Administration in
involving the industries through the Corporate Social Responsibility of adopting the villages
cautions that corporate should not be allowed to tamper with local culture, way of life, etc.
The Committee during the visit to the village noticed that most of the villagers are
accustomed to their way of life and in particular design of their houses which is proposed
to be changed. The UT administration should remain vigilant to check if CSR initiatives are
according to local needs and sensitivity. The Corporate houses involved in development
should also respect local sensitivity in terms of their culture, way of life etc.
1.4 ISSUES PERTAINING TO INDUSTRIES
1.4.1 The Sub-Committee during its study visit interacted with representatives of trade and
industry associations and Trade Union and other Associations of UTs of Daman and Diu and Dadra
and Nagar Haveli at Silvassa. During the interaction, following issues emerged before the Sub-
Committee:–
Tax Exemption
1.4.2 According to the UT administration, Dadra and Nagar Haveli is predominantly a backward
area both economically as well as industrially. After liberation from Portuguese regime in 1954 and
merger with the Union of India in 1962, the industrial development made a low key start in the
year 1965 by establishing a industrial estate under co-operative sector namely Dan Udyog Sahakari
Sangh Ltd.
1.4.3 The Sub-Committee was informed that in the beginning there was no sales tax leviable as
it was backward territory inhabited by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. However, with the
increase in Industries, trade and commercial activities in the U.T., there was persistence from the
neighbouring States to discontinue the exemption of tax to avoid unhealthy competition of prices
among the neighboring States; it was decided to impose sales tax in the UT of Dadra and Nagar
Haveli. Thus, Sales Tax regime came into force from 1983 and the Industrial Units who so ever
established were eligible for sales tax exemption for the period of 15 years. This Scheme was in
force upto 1998. At present the newly established Units are getting the benefit of Central Sales Tax
exemption which is available upto the year 2017.
1.4.4 Further with the implementation of V AT Policy at all India level, the Dadra and Nagar Haveli
Regulation 2005 and Dadra and Nagar Haveli Value Added Rules 2005 were enforced with effect
from 01.04.2005. Thus at present following tax laws are in force.

8
● The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956
● The Central Sales Tax (Dadra and Nagar Haveli) Rules, 1983
● The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Value Added Tax Regulation, 2005
1.4.5 It was further informed that w.e.f. 1 st April 1993, 100% deduction is available to the
Industrial establishments in their profit and gains, for the 1st five years and the same were available
up to March, 2002 implying that those units which began to manufacture or produce articles on
or before 30th March, 2002 were entitled for 100% income tax holiday for the 1st five assessment
years. Also after the initial five years benefit, such industrial undertakings are entitled to the
deduction at the rate of 25% for their profits and gains for the next five assessment years.
1.4.6 The industry associations of the Dadra and Nagar Haveli submitted a representation before
the Sub-Committee with a request to take up the issue of tax-exemption. Responding to
the request, the Ministry informed that Tax benefit is available in the U.T. of DNH upto
31st December, 2017 and Proposal for extension of benefits received from the UT Administration
vide its letter dated 30th November, 2013 is under consideration in the Ministry.
1.4.7 The Committee takes note of the submission of the UT Administration that they
have requested the Ministry for further extension of tax benefits. The Committee
understands that due to the exemption of V AT, many big industries have set up plants in
this Union Territory leading to development in the Union Territory. The Committee
recommends that the proposal made by the UT Administration may be approved so that
industrial development may continue to grow in the UT.
Stimuli for industrial development
1.4.8 The representatives of trade and industry from the UT made following suggestions before
the Sub-Committee for industrial development. The Sub-Committee took up the issues with the
Ministry of Home Affairs. The suggestions and comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs are
given as under:–
● In 1971, Government of India declared U.T. as industrially backward area/district and
extended the Scheme of 10% cash subsidy to the industrial units on their capital
investment. The quantum of subsidy was increased gradually to 15% and 25%
subsequently which resulted in speedy industrial development of the territory. This
Scheme was closed/terminated from 30
th September, 1988. The subsidy should be
given to the industries to provide stimuli for further industrialization of this territory
and for further growth of this territory, as many states particularly neighbouring States
and other states like Chhattisgarh and Punjab are providing capital subsidy of upto 50%
or 25% for investment.
Response of the MHA
There is no specific Scheme in this U.T for 25% subsidy on plant and machinery.
● The administrative set-up, procedure in the UT should be investment friendly.
Acquiring land, granting construction permission, pollution control procedures, issuing
occupancy certificates, power allocation and other licences/registrations should be
hassle free. The Administration as well as the Home Ministry should ensure that
licence, registration and permission should be granted in a time bound manner, so that
they can start the industry at the right time, save the interest loss and compete in this
recession period with neighbouring States.

9
Response of the MHA
An investor friendly procedure is already adopted by the Department of
Industries, U.T. of DNH since 1996 by introducing Single Window Investor Friendly
Time Bound System (SWIFT). Simplification of procedures and increasing
transparency is a continuous process of improvement and the U.T. Administration is
committed to it.
● Industry should be asked for suggestions/views while this Administration is framing
policies and rules regarding industries. As industrialists in Dadra and Nagar Haveli are
the biggest stakeholders in Dadra and Nagar Haveli their members should be
significantly represented and they should be involved at the UT level as well as the
Ministry level.
Response of the MHA
All policy formulation in the UT is carried out in consultation with concerned
stakeholders, including Industry Associations and one representative of Silvassa
Industries Association is already included in Administrator’s Advisory Council and UT
Innovation Council has six representatives from the Industries.
● The UT does not have its own power generation facility. It is solely dependent upon
the national grid. Recently, 50 MW power earlier supplied to this UT was withdrawn
and transferred to J&K and another 25 MW taken back and given to Bangladesh. The
power transferred was the cheaper power which this UT was getting since long. This
will result in hike in average power purchase price. All consumers will be adversely
affected. Our products will become uncompetitive in the market. This withdrawal has
also created shortage of power for expansions as well new industries.
Response of the MHA
The Ministry of Power had reduced the allocation of power to UT of DNH by 50MW
and 25MW while allocating 150 MW power of Central Sector to J&K and 250 MW
power of Central Sector to Bangladesh. The matter was promptly taken up by the U.T.
Administration with Ministry of Power and the withdrawn 50 MW Power of DNH, has
been reallocated w.e.f. 06.11.2013.
1.4.9 The Committee is aware of the fact that despite India being an attractive investment
destination, entire exercise of the procedure and legal formalities make it tedious and
confusing. The Committee is of the view that long legal formalities and procedural delays
make frustrating impact on the investors. The Committee recommends that UT
administration should introduce single window composite application form for all the
procedural clearances such as acquiring land, granting of construction permission, pollution
control procedures, issuing occupancy certificates, power allocation, environment and forest
clearances and other licences/registrations which would make this region investment
friendly and boost industrial growth in the UT. The Committee also recommends that
suggestions/views of representatives of industry and trade associations should also be taken
into account while framing policies and laws pertaining to industries as they are the people
who know what are the bottlenecks coming in their way. The Committee also recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should positively consider the demands of representatives
of trade and industry as subsidies given would provide stimuli for further industrialization.
1.4.10 The Committee appreciates that the 50 MW power, reduced earlier has been
restored. The Committee also recommends that the 25 MW withdrawn may also be
restored.

10
Eco-sensitive zones
1.4.11 It was brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee that almost one way or the other way,
the forest laws influence every area in the UT of D&NH. The land falling within 10 kms. of the
boundaries of National Parks and Sanctuaries has been notified as eco-fragile zones under
the Environment (Protection) Act. The Additional Director General of Forests (wildlife) in
February, 2011, had asked all the Chief Wildlife Wardens for listing out such areas within 10 kms.
of the boundaries of National Parks and Sanctuaries and furnish detailed proposals for their
notification as eco-sensitive areas under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. On this basis, the
Forest Department of D&NH has stopped giving NOC for the Construction Permission in the
notified area.
1.4.12 It was argued that since the length and breadth of the Territory are only 28 kms. and
22 kms. respectively and the whole D&NH falls within the limit of 10 kms. radius of Wild Life
Sanctuary, if Eco-Sensitive Zone is implemented within the UT, then all the private/Government
development works will be stopped. UT administration suggested to the Ministry of Environment
and Forest for sparing 100 mtrs. as a sensitive zone.
Response of the MHA
1.4.13 The proposal for declaration of 100 mtr. area from the boundary of Dadra and Nagar Haveli
Sanctuary on all sides, as Eco-Sensitive Zone to maintain the fragile ecology of the sanctuary area
was sent to Ministry of Environment and Forest on 13
th February, 2013 as any declaration of Eco-
Sensitive Zone in excess of 100 mtr. would not be feasible in this small territory. The UT
administration, again on 11
th October, 2013 requested that the default Eco-Sensitive Zone of
10 kms. around the Wildlife Sanctuary be immediately revoked and the proposal of the UT of Dadra
and Nagar Haveli to create Eco-Sensitive zone of 100 mtr. around the Wildlife Sanctuary be
approved and notified.
1.4.14 The Committee notes that the MHA has taken up the issue with Ministry of
Environment and Forest for sparing 100 mtrs. as a sensitive zone. The Committee is of the
opinion that this territory is very small and for the development of this territory it will be
virtually impossible to have industries or any other development activities in view of having
eco-sensitive zones of 10 kms. around. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should remind the Ministry of Environment and Forest for early clearance
of the issue. Otherwise this policy will lead to driving out the industries and developmental
works of the UT will come to a stall.
Granting Excise licences
1.4.15 The issue of discrimination in granting excise licences was brought before the Sub-
Committee. It was informed that under New Excise Rules, 2012, only 4 licences have been issued
out of 11 applications.
Response of the MHA
1.4.16 Four new licenses have been issued on 2
nd November, 2013 to applicants who fulfilled the
requirement as per Dadra and Nagar Haveli Excise Regulation, 2012 and Rules 2013. Three
applications are under process and scrutiny and six applications pertaining to villages having more
than 50% tribal population are under consideration.
1.4.17 The Committee recommends that the UT administration should grant Licences as per
Rules and Regulations and there should not be any discrimination in the process. An early
decision may be taken in the matter.

11
1.5 OTHER ISSUES
Vadodara-Mumbai Express Highway Road
1.5.1 The National Highway Authority of India has proposed the Vadodara-Mumbai Express
Highway which is going to pass through the villages of Demni, Dadra, Tighara, Naroli and
Kharadpada in the UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. As per the original alignment the intersection was
proposed in village Tighra in UT and Lavacha village of Gujarat State. However, the villagers of
Tighra opposed the said intersection and on the request of the then Administrator the intersection
was shifted from village Tighara to Dharampur road in Gujarat which is 5 kms. from Tighara
village. The UT Administration again requested the NHAI to shift the intersection back to the UT
but, not to its original location of Tighara village but to Athal junction part of Naroli village. It was
submitted that there are more than 200 odd residential houses on both sides of the road and if the
said intersection is placed at Athal Junction, the Industrial traffic, which will come in from
neighbouring Industrial hubs like Vapi, Daman, Sarigam, Bhilad, Umergaon, will be so huge that it
will need the road to be widened and thereby forcing thousands of residents to be homeless.
Further, it will also make an accident prone zone as the village of Naroli is a densely populated village.
The Naroli village would be polluted and almost 12-15 Hectare cultivated alluvial land would be lost.
Response of the MHA
1.5.2 The intersection is required to serve the need of industries, tourists and local population of
UT of DNH and steps will be taken to ensure that least displacement takes place and proper
compensation is paid as per law.
1.5.3 The Committee takes note of the concerns of the villagers of Naroli village and
recommends that the UT Administration in tandem with Ministry of Home Affairs should
look into the matter. The Authorities involved should adopt a balancing approach and
try their best to minimize negative impart. The issues relating to displacement and
compensation may be looked into.
Posting of DANICS officers in the UTs
1.5.4 The issue of posting of DANICS officers in the UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar
Haveli without sanctioned posts was brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee and that there
was resentment in the officers of local cadre.
Response of the MHA
1.5.5 As per DANICS Rules, there are 16 posts sanctioned in the Entry Grade and 5 posts can
be filled against Reserves for Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli Administration. Against
21 posts, 16 Entry/Selection Grade and 5 Junior Administrative Grade officers of DANICS have
been posted at Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli to meet the Administrative
requirements.
1.5.6 The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that The UT Administration
while sanctioning posts, the interests of the Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli
Administration Services should be kept in view.
Increase in Grant-in-Aid Fund (Plan fund) for the District Panchayat
1.5.7 Grant-in-Aid Fund (Plan fund) for the District Panchayat should be increased.

12
Response of the MHA
1.5.8 The U.T. Administration has been allocating the fund in the form of Grant-in-Aid to local
bodies including Distt. Panchayat as per their need and Plan funds allocated to the UT. During last
five years the Administration has released following amount of Grant-in-Aid to Distt. Panchayat,
which shows a steady increase over the years:–
Financial year Amount of GIA released (Rs. in crore)
2008-09 33.51
2009-10 36.44
2010-11 68.21
2011-12 79.96
2012-13 136.30
2013-14 156.35 (budgeted)
1.5.9 The Committee takes note of the submission made by the UT Administration. The
Committee notes that for the last five years the allocation to the district panchayat of UT
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli is on the increase and hopes that this trend will continue in
future. The Committee hopes that increase will help financing of the important projects of
district panchayat.
Recruitment of Staff in District Panchayat of DNH
1.5.10 The Sub-Committee received a suggestion that recruitment of more Staff should be made
in District Panchayat of DNH.
Response of the MHA
1.5.11 The Ministry commenting on the suggestion stated that the UT Administration in exercise
of the powers conferred under section 28(1) and 28(2) of the DNH Panchayat Regulation 1994 has
created 87 posts under District. Panchayat and 55 post under Village Panchayat vide order dated
14
th May, 2012. Further creation of posts and filling up of vacant posts is under examination.
1.5.12 The Sub-Committee notes the reply that besides creation of posts, the matter of
filing up of vacancies is also simultaneously under examination. The Committee
recommends that the matter of filling up of vacant post should be decided on priority and
filled up at the earliest. The matter of creation of posts also needs to be expedited. An early
decision may be taken in the matter.
Medical College in Silvassa
1.5.13 On the issue of expediting process for opening medical College in Silvassa, the UT
Administration has informed that tender has been re-invited for selection of transaction advisor for
the project by the UT Administration.
1.5.14 The Committee recommends that the procedural bottlenecks should be cleared soon
for expediting of opening medical College in Silvassa. The Committee desires that the
medical college should start working from the next academic session.

13
Powers of the Administrator
1.5.15 During discussion of the Sub-Committee with the Administrator holding charge of both the
UTs, attention was drawn to the constraints in his financial powers. According to him at present
the Administrator has the power to sanction up to 35 crore per project and he approached the
Ministry for more powers to sanction. He also stated that even after follow up in the concerned
ministries for allocation of additional funds for the UT it takes more time to get it sanctioned and
the ministries do not attach much priority for the approval of projects/views and by the time the
UT Administration gets the sanction, the time for utilization of fund gets over. With regard to the
query of the Sub-Committee on criteria of allocation of funds and comparison of the financial
powers of the Administrators of some UTs with the Lt. Governors of other UTs, the Sub-
Committee was informed that the powers of the Lt. Governor are more than the Administrator.
1.5.16 The Committee is of the view that just as the Lt. Governor is the head of a UT, in
the same way the Administrator is also the Head of a UT. The Committee recommends that
the financial powers of the Administrator should be enhanced appropriately so that various
important decisions could be taken at the Administrator level. In view of the Committee
this will result in fast approval and implementation of all major projects for the UTs and
avoid cost escalation due to time overruns.

14
CHAPTER-II
DAMAN AND DIU
2.1 INTRODUCTION
2.1.1 For over 450 years, the coastal enclaves of Daman and Diu on the Arabian Sea coast were
part of Portuguese India, along with Goa and Dadra and Nagar Haveli. Goa, Daman and Diu were
incorporated into the Republic of India on 19 th December, 1961 by military conquest. Portugal did
not recognize the Indian annexation of these territories until 1974. The territory of “Goa, Daman
and Diu” was administered as a single Union Territory until 30
th May, 1987, when Goa was granted
statehood, leaving Daman and Diu as a separate Union Territory.
2.1.2 Daman is on main land on sea-shore near southern portion of Gujarat State. Diu is an island
near Una Taluka of Junagarh District in Gujarat State. For administration purposes, there are two
Districts namely, Daman and Diu, two tehsils, two blocks, two towns, fourteen Village Panchayats
and twenty six villages in the UT with Daman as the Head Quarter of the UT with 100% of grant
from the Government of India in the form of Central assistance.
2.1.3 There is one parliamentary constituency and one District Panchayat in the UT. The
Committee was informed that Daman and Diu has the oldest history of urbanization as it has oldest
Urban Local Bodies viz. Municipal Councils. The total population of the UT is 2,42,911 with
Literacy rate at 91.48 per cent. The UT has total urban area of 24.26 sq. kms. with 36.25% of
the total population. There are two Municipal Councils one at Daman and the other at Diu. UT of
Daman and Diu does not have its own power generation. 93% of the electricity is consumed by
Industries. JERC determines the tariff for all classes of consumers.
2.2 PRESENTATION BEFORE THE SUB-COMMITTEE
2.2.1 The Sub-Committee on Administration of UTs in its sitting held on 21
st October, 2013 heard
the presentation of Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs along with Administrator, holding
charge of the UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli on various aspects of administration
of the UT in order to take stock of the implementation of projects/schemes and programmes
undertaken by the UT Administration. The Administrator made a power point presentation on UT
of Daman and Diu. The highlights of the presentation are as follows:
● The population of UT is about 2.43 lakh consisting of about 1.5 and .93 lakh male and
female populations with 2.52% and 6.31% SC and ST populations. The sex ratio is
618 against the national average of 940. However the sex ratio in the 0-6 years age
group is 909 against national average of 914.
● The literacy rate is 87.10% as against 74.04% of national rate. The male and female
literacy rates in the UT are 91.54% and 79.55%, respectively. The SC and ST literacy
rates are 85.13% and 63.42% as against 54.32% and 47.08% of national averages.
● Budget allocations to the local bodies and municipalities have been on increasing trend,
it has been increased from R22.10 crore and R5.01 crore in 2008-09 to
R108.98 crore and R59.23 crore in 2013-14.
14

15
● Total revenue receipts in 2012-13 has been at R3889 crore and it is estimated to be
R4054 crore in 2013-14. The total allocation in 2012-13 and 2013-14 has been
R425.00 crore and R630.05 crore respectively. The allocation in 2012-13 was fully
utilised and about 52.29% has been utilised upto September, 2013.
● T&D power loss is among the lowest in the country and tariffs are among the lowest
in the western region. All villages have been electrified and 37 km. underground cabling
has been completed. Besides, setting up of different electricity sub stations, 4 MW
solar plants (3MW in Diu and 1 MW in Daman) are proposed to be set up.
● As Health infrastructure, two Government Hospitals, two Community Health Centres,
three Primary Health Centres, four evening clinics, one trauma centre, four ICTC for
HIV , one Blood Bank are functioning in the UT. Financial incentives are provided to
mother and girl child for institutional delivery of birth under Matru Samruddhi and
Dikri Development Yojana. New OPD block and CT scan facility has been started at
Government Hospital. Addition of 30 bed facility and dialysis facility at Government
Hospital at Daman, construction of Ayush Hospital at Kachigam, Daman and modular
OT at Government hospital are new schemes to be undertaken.
● A new building for the hospital is being constructed and the old building of the hospital
is proposed to be converted into a State Museum in coordination with INTACH. The
hospital is in a heritage building.
● Sanjeevini Health Insurance Scheme for health cover of R 2 Lakh and accidental
death/disability coverage of R1 Lakh for BPL families and families with income less
than 1 lakh per annum is also proposed. The administration proposes to enlarge the
health insurance scheme by requesting other families, pensioners, industries to join by
paying their premium. The scheme is better than Rashtriya Suraksha Bima Yojana.
Under the Health Insurance Scheme, it is proposed to empanel the private hospitals in
Mumbai and Ahmedabad also so that people can walk in there for a cashless service
by producing a given card. However there are not many private hospitals in both the
UTs.
● Laptops are proposed to be provided to the students of 11 th std. and 1 st semester of
diploma courses in polytechnic. First ever degree college and education hub at Kevdi,
Diu including a College, Polytechnic and Food and Craft Institute is also proposed to
be setup, besides upgradation of infrastructure in all schools. 100% and 50%
scholarship to girl students of BPL and others category, pursuing professional courses,
is provided for higher professional courses. Free text book, writing materials and
uniform are provided to all SC/ST students besides cash awards to meritorious SC/ST
students. All girl students studying upto class VIII numbering 1120 have been provided
bicycles under Saraswati Sadhna Yojana.
● With regard to construction of bridges, construction of Pataliya Bridge on Kolak River
will be completed during the year and construction of bridge over Kalai River at
Bamanpuja to Pali has started. With regard to new bridges, some projects are under
submission for SFC while DPRs in respect of some bridges were received/under
preparation and in some cases, tender are under evaluation.
● With regard to roads, development of industrial roads, major district roads is being
undertaken. Coastal Highways from Ambawadi to Bamanpuja is also being constructed.
National Highway connectivity from NH 8 for Daman and from NH 8E for Diu is
proposed as new work.

16
● Present water requirement in the UT stands at 30 MLD while the existing water
treatment capacity stands at 21 MLD, which is proposed to be increased to 42 MLD
for future requirements. Construction of water treatment plants at Dabhel, Magarwada,
Dunethan, Daman is underway along with laying of pipelines from Madhuban Dam to
these treatment plants. Water supply scheme from Sardar Sarovar pipeline in Diu
District is also underway.
● The UT administration proposes to construct a new building for Circuit House and a
multi-story building at Nani Daman. It also proposes to construct PWD Office Building
and Lekha Building at Moti Daman.
● Both Daman and Diu contribute quite substantially to the fisheries and pomfret fish of
Daman and Diu is very famous. Construction of fisheries harbour at Vanakbara and
Ghoghela in Diu was underway. Police jetty at Nani Daman and several jetties at Diu
are being constructed.
● For development of tourism, development/upgradation, beautification, maintenance of
gardens, ponds, beaches and other tourist spots is being done. Development of new
garden adjacent to Fort wall and near Light House, Moti Daman is proposed. For Diu,
construction of Floating Jetti for Panikotha, Diu and cycle track in Diu is proposed.
Promotion of tourism by a professional agency is under consideration. First ever
Daman Heritage Festival was organized on 15-16 October, 2013.
● Several new initiatives like underground sewerage system, solid waste management
project, conservation of heritage structure through INTACH, public transport facility
named Sarthi Bus Seva, starting of polytechnic college in Diu and engineering college
in Daman, barrier free access in Government buildings, improvement in quality of
education under the project Sarvottam, upgradation of computer labs and provision of
smart class rooms in all secondary/higher secondary schools are proposed to be taken.
● Treasury Computerization is proposed to be done through Mission Mode Project.
● There are a large number of industries in Daman and there is some problem of water
pollution rather than air pollution.
● Connectivity of both UTs is only with Gujarat district roads depending on the
maintenance made by them. The roads are presently in a terrible shape and may lie in
that shape. Therefore connectivity with a National Highway is the utmost requirement.
● With regard to the number of students aspiring for medical and engineering colleges,
about 200 or 300 students are graduating from Silvassa every year in Science.
Similarly, in Daman and Diu together, there are 200 or 250 such students. Against the
all-India quota of seven seats for the Union Territories from the Government of India,
hardly three or four people are able to get the admissions because the standard of
education is little low; competitive spirit is a little low. The only way is to improve
the education standard to enable students to compete nationally. A medical college is
being set up while a nursing college has already been started.
● On the issues of acknowledging contribution of industries under CSR, the
administrator submitted that according to the plan every industry will be felicitated and
acknowledged formally at a function. Industries, which do outstanding jobs, will be
felicitated in a different way. The industry people can write that particular hamlet is
adopted by such and such industry. However, it is not binding on them to spend 2%
of profit under CSR as their plants are located at these places but their head offices

17
are in Mumbai, Kolkata, Bengaluru, etc. Preferably, it has to be spent in the local area
only but under the Companies Law, there is a provision that they can deposit in a fund
to spend somewhere else.
2.3 ISSUES
2.3.1 The Sub-Committee on Administration of UTs made a study tour to the UT of Daman &
Diu on 5 th November, 2013. During its tour the Sub-Committee visited 220/66 KW sub-Station,
Magarwada, Rajiv Gandhi Setu and proposed bridges, construction sites of bridge at Nani Daman.
Power Supply
2.3.2 The Sub-Committee was informed that the UT of Daman and Diu does not have its own
power generation. The electricity Department of UT of Daman and Diu is the agency which is
responsible for the procurement, transmission and distribution of electricity to the various
categories of consumers. The bulk power supply is drawn from the Central Sector Power Stations
in Western Region through PGCIL Grid. At present, Daman gets power from 220/66KV Vapi
SubStation and 220KV Ambethi-Magarwada Central Sector line and Diu gets power from 66KV Una
Substation in Gujarat.
2.3.3 The present power allocation of Daman and Diu is 341 MW. Against this allocation, the U.T
is getting only an average of 230-250MW as a daily power schedule. The actual demand of the
UT’s is about 270MW (restricted) and 290 MW (un-restricted). There are eight 66/11 KV , sub
stations at Dabhel, Kachigam, Dalwada, Bhimpore, Varkund , Ringanwada & Magarwada in Daman
and Malala at Diu.
2.3.4 The Sub-Committee visited Magarwada sub-station at Daman. The Nodal Officer briefed the
members about the power distribution mechanism functional at Magarwada sub-station. He also
briefed the members about the existing connectivity of various sub-stations in Daman.
2.3.5 The Committee notes with appreciation that T&D power loss in Daman and Diu UT
is among the lowest in the country and tariffs are among the lowest in the western region
with all villages electrified. The Committee also notes that 93% electricity consumption is
in industry sector. The Committee was also given to understand that 37 km. underground
cabling has been completed. Besides, setting up of different electricity sub stations, 4 MW
solar plants (3MW in Diu and 1 MW in Daman) are proposed to be set up. The Committee
recommends that need of the industries for power should be met so as to maintain the
tempo of economic development. Project of clean energy in the field of solar energy should
be completed without time and cost overruns. Other sources of clean energy like wind
energy should also be explored.
Increase of rate of Electricity
2.3.6 The issue of increase in the rate of electricity charges for industries was brought before
the Sub-Committee. The Sub-Committee was informed that the rate of electricity charges for
industries has been increased which might lead to exodus of industries from the UT and
consequently unemployment. There was also demand for not increasing in the electricity charges
for agriculture and domestic consumers.
2.3.7 The UT Administration in its reply has submitted that the Tariff for UT of Daman and
Diu is determined by the Joint Electrical Regulatory Commission as per Tariff regulations notified
under IE Act, 2003 and there is no proposal to increase any rate for any category of consumer
for 2014-15.

18
2.3.8 The Committee while noting the reply of the UT Administration feels that the rate
of electricity charges should be decided in a very balanced manner so that while on one
hand it should not cause disincentive for industries in view of the special position of the
UT where various measures such as tax benefits, etc. are given to industries for setting up
their units in the UT, on the other hand, it should not make the power supplying entity a
loss making one. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should
look into the matter very cautiously.
Rajiv Gandhi Sethu and construction site of bridge at Patalia
2.3.9 The UT administration has constructed a new bridge called Rajiv Gandhi Sethu. It connects
two parts of Daman i.e. Nani Daman and Moti Daman. The Sub-Committee visited Rajiv Gandhi
Sethu at Daman and was briefed about its capacity, construction cost etc. The Nodal Officer
briefed the members about the various proposed bridges which are at various stages of
construction/approval such as Jampore in Moti Daman to Kalai Village in Gujarat on River Kalai.
Kadaya in Nani Daman to Kolak Village in Gujarat on River Kolak, Magarwada in Moti Daman to
Kachigam in Nani Daman across River Daman Ganga. Bamanpuja Plai in Moti Daman to Village in
Gujarat on River Kalai and high level bridge at Rakholi across Daman Ganga river.
2.3.10 According to UT Administration, in Daman, construction of two bridges at Patalia and
Bamanpuja are in progress and are expected to be completed soon. The Detailed Project Report for
the cable stayed bridge has been received. The design of a new bridge for Coastal Highway on
Daman Ganga has been approved. A consultant has also been appointed to design the new
pedestrian bridge linking Moti Daman and Nani Daman.
2.3.11 The UT administration further informed that proposals for the following bridges has been
submitted to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways for conducting S.F.C./E.F.C. and
conveying Administrative Approval and Expenditure sanction.
(1) Bridge across Daman Ganga River connecting Kachigam at Nani Daman and Zari at
Moti Daman in Daman district. Estimated cost R41.77 crores
(2) Bridge across river Daman Ganga connecting Kachigam village in Nani Daman and
Magarwada in Moti Daman in Daman District. Estimated cost R62.04 crores.
2.3.12 The Committee notes that the UT Administration is striving to enhance the
connectivity of various parts/areas of Daman and its adjoining areas by constructing new
bridges. The Committee desires that proposed bridges should be constructed without time
and cost overrun. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs in
tandem with UT Administration of Daman and Diu should impress upon Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways according early administrative approval and expenditure sanction
for the bridges.
Construction of Police Jetty at Daman
2.3.13 The UT Administration is in process of beefing up its Coastal Security and in this direction,
construction of police jetty at Moti Daman for coastal police is underway. The Sub-Committee was
informed that the construction was to be completed by 5
th September, 2013, however, due to heavy
monsoon, the completion date has been extended upto 31 st March, 2013. The sub-Committee visited
the construction site. The Sub-Committee was also briefed that that the UT Administration was
constructing Coastal Police Station at Vanakbara, Diu and police jetty at Moti Daman.
2.3.14 The Committee notes that the UT Administration is making efforts to further
strengthen coastal policing in the UT. After the Mumbai terror attack, coastal security has

19
emerged as one of the important areas of internal security. The Committee recommends
that the UT Government should complete construction of the proposed coastal police station
and police jetty in a time bound manner.
2.4 MISCELLANEOUS
2.4.1 The Sub-Committee during its study visit also interacted with Peoples’ representatives of the
UT. During the interaction, following issues emerged before the Sub-Committee:–
Allocation of fund
2.4.2 The issue of increased allocation of fund to the U.T. of Daman and Diu was raised before
the Sub-Committee. The UT Administration in its reply informed that the UT Administration of
Daman and Diu has proposed requirement of funds for developmental works/projects, etc. to the
Ministry of Finance through Ministry of Home Affairs with reference to collecting Revenue
Receipts. The UT Administration furnished the following details of UT Tax and Non-Tax Revenue
Receipts, Central Excise Tax Revenue and Income T ax Revenue and funds proposed by UT Daman
and Diu and funds allotted by Government of India, Ministry of Home affairs, Ministry of Finance
for last three years as under:
Revenue
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. No. Sector 2010-11 201 1-12 2012-13
A UT–Revenue Receipts
1. Tax Revenue 391.79 478.66 551.32
2. Non-Tax Revenue 63.54 4.54 6.68
T
OTAL 455.33 483.22 558.00
B Central Excise Tax Revenue 2348.95 2641.36 3231.80
C Income Tax Revenue 5.45 15.70 17.33
TOTAL (A+B+C) 2809.73 3140.28 3807.13
Allocations
Year Proposed by UT Funds Proposed by UT Funds
Daman and Diu allocated Daman and Diu allocated
Plan Plan Non-Plan Non-Plan
2010-11 561.00 167.11 668.14 668.14
2011-12 540.00 324.95 929.00 885.74
2012-13 1246.13 425.00 855.00 838.60
2013-14 1199.95 630.05 947.00 929.51
2.4.3 The Committee notes that funds under plan allocation to this UT had been quite
low in reference to demand of the UT. The Committee recommends that Government of

20
India should increase plan funds to enable the UT to take up important proposed projects
and most importantly, the allocation for major sectors such as Roads and Bridges,
Education, Health, Water Supply and Irrigation etc. should be increased. The Committee
is of the opinion that since the UT is contributing immensely in the Government of India
coffer, the Government of India should enhance allocation taking into account its revenue
contribution.
Assembly for the U.T. of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
2.4.4 There has been a demand for an Assembly in the Union Territory of Daman & Diu and
Dadra & Nagar Haveli. According to the representatives due to non-existence of Assembly, local
people face many problems to get their work done by the officers from Government of India. The
UT Administration on this issue has submitted that the existing system/set up is considered
appropriate for the present. According to UT Administration, the Administrator’s Advisory Council
and Home Minister’s Advisory Committees (HMACs) are in place wherein sufficient political
representation is already there.
2.4.5 The Committee finds merit in the popular demand for creation of an assembly for
both the UTs and desires that the Government of India may look into this issue on the lines
of Puducherry.
Setting up of High Court, Mumbai Bench
2.4.6 A demand for separate bench of Mumbai High Court in the UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra
and Nagar Haveli was put forward before the Sub-Committee as people face difficulties for going
to Mumbai for court cases. The UT Administration in its written reply has stated that
correspondence received from various persons regarding setting up of High Court, Mumbai Bench
for the UTs of Daman & Diu & DNH was forwarded to the Hon’ble Bombay High Court and reply
is awaited.
2.4.7 The Committee is of the opinion that demand for creation of a separate bench of
Mumbai High Court for the UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli may be
examined.
National Stadium for the U.T. of Daman and Diu.
2.4.8 There was also a demand for a national stadium in the UT of Daman and Diu. And
implementation of Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA). On this matter, the UT
Administration has informed that in UT of Daman and Diu following grounds exists:
1. Dabhel Cricket Stadium.
2. College Ground, Nani Daman.
3. DMC Football Ground, Moti Daman.
4. DMC Bandodkar Sports Ground, Nani Daman.
5. Naila Pardi Stadium (Under Construction)
6. Padma Bhushan Sports Complex Diu (Under Expansion)
2.4.9 Regarding Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), the UT Administration has
informed that that this scheme has become operational in Daman and Diu in March, 2013 only. UT
Administration has already distributed 1st installment of R1,00,000/- to all the ten Panchayats

21
in the year 2012-13. The activities of PYKKA have started and meetings with Headmasters and
Physical Education Teachers were held on 2 nd April, 2013 and 1 st July, 2013. Meetings with
Sarpanch and Panchayat Members will also be organized.
2.4.10 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may consider the
demand for a national stadium in the UT.
Connecting U.T. of Daman and Diu with NH-8
2.4.11 A demand of connecting UT of Daman and Diu with National Highway-8 was also made
before the Sub-Committee. When the UT Administration was asked about it, it replied as under
“The UT Administration of Daman and Diu submitted a proposal for declaring road stretch
from Mohangam Railway Crossing in NH-8 Karembeli Phatak (Gujarat) to Bamanpuja
Dholar Road (Gujarat) and Bamanpuja Road (Daman) to Patalia Coastal Highway (Daman
and Patalia (Daman) to Udwada (Gujarat), as National Highway. Ministry of Road
Transport & Highways, New Delhi vide their letter dated 17/09/2013 informed the UT
Administration that as a part of the Government mandate to declare 10000 kms roads as
new National Highway, Ministry has already declared 10000 kms roads as new National
Highways keeping in view the requirement of connectivity and it may not be feasible to
declare any more roads as National Highways.”
2.4.12 The Committee is not convinced with the logic put forward by the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways. The Committee feels that going beyond the target by few steps for
welfare purpose is not a bad thing. The matter of declaring certain stretches of roads
running in few kilometers in an industrial area is minor one but involves good stake for
industrial and economic activities. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs in tandem with UT Administration of Daman & Diu should
impress upon Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to reconsider the matter.
Railway line from Daman to Shirdi via Silvassa and Nasik
2.4.13 A demand for Railway line from Daman to Shirdi via Silvassa and Nasik was made before
the Sub-Committee. The UT Administration has submitted that the issue will be taken up with
Ministry of Railways.
2.4.14 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the
matter with the Ministry of Railways as the UT of Daman and Diu has no railway
connectivity and the proposed rail link may help in decongestion of heavy road traffic
leading to Mumbai.
Increase of Diesel/kerosene quota for the Fishermen
2.4.15 Regarding demand of increase in diesel/kerosene quota for the fishermen, the UT
Administration has replied that the ceiling of Diesel quota has been raised from 24,000 litres to
28,000 lts by the UT Administration in May, 2013. According to the UT Administration, it has also
implemented a new plan scheme namely “Replacement of kerosene driven OBM engine by LPG
driven OBM engine (8-10 HP) of small fishing traditional boat owners of Daman and Diu” for the
financial year 2013-14 for the welfare of fishermen of Daman and Diu.
2.4.16 The Committee notes that ceiling of Diesel quota has been raised from 24,000 litres
to 28,000 litres. The Committee is of the opinion that fishing community is largely a
disadvantaged community whose livelihood depends upon fishing and enhanced diesel quota
will help them economically. The Committee also notes that the UT Administration is

22
implementing a new plan scheme namely “Replacement of kerosene driven OBM engine by
LPG driven OBM engine (8-10 HP) of small fishing traditional boat owners of Daman &
Diu”. The Committee hopes that this scheme will go a long way in terms of conserving
coastal ecological environment as well as livelihood of fishermen. Assistance may be given
for replacement of the kerosene engine by the LPG engine.
Exemption of V AT on Petrol and Diesel
2.4.17 There was also a demand for exemption of V AT on Petrol and Diesel as in the State of Goa.
The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that as and when, the proposal is received from the
UT Administration, the same will be examined on merit.
2.4.18 The Committee understands that the matter now stands referred to the Ministry of
Home Affairs and the Ministry of Home Affairs should examine the demand of exempting
V AT on Petrol and Diesel in the larger public interest of UT.
Ferry Boat Service from Mumbai to Diu via Daman
2.4.19 On the issue of providing Ferry Boat/cruise Service from Mumbai to Diu via Daman, the
UT Administration has informed that it has included the project of Ferry Boat Service from Daman
to Diu in the Twelfth Five Year Plan and this work shall be taken up only after assessing the
feasibility of the services.
2.4.20 The Committee notes that the UT Administration has included the project of Ferry
Boat Service from Daman to Diu in the Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee recommends
that feasibility study of the said project may be completed at the earliest. If the study finds
it feasible, the project may be implemented at the earliest.
Pollution in Damanganga river
2.4.21 The matter of Polluted water released in Damanganga river by the industries of Vapi GIDC
was brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee. On this issue, the UT Administration has
informed that Zonal Office, Central Pollution Control Board, Vadodara carries out regular monitoring
of the effluents released by the industries and common effluent treatment plant of Vapi in the
Damanganga river makes sure that the standards of effluents are within the norms of environmental
Protection Act, 1986.
2.4.22 According to the UT Administration, further joint monitoring by the staffs of Pollution
Control Committee and Gujarat Pollution Control Board is also being carried out regularly to
ascertain the status of Damanganga Water pollution. The matter will also be pursued by the UT
Administration with Central Pollution Control Board and Gujarat Pollution Control Board to make
sure the effluents released from the industries of Vapi are within the standards set under
Environmental Protection Act, 1986. The UT administration has further informed that the proposal
of laying pipeline for discharging of effluent into deep sea needs further examination by the UT
Administration considering all the aspects of existing Rules and Regulations.
2.4.23 The Committee notes that though a mechanism is functional to carry out regular
monitoring of the effluents released by the industries, but the Committee gets a feeling
that much more needs to be done to contain water pollution in the UT, specially the
Damanganga river, which is the lifeline of the area. The Sub-Committee desires that the
proposal of laying pipeline for discharging of effluents into deep sea should be examined
carefully in the larger interest of the environment. Early action may be taken in this
regard.

23
Shortage of man power in Police Department.
2.4.24 On the issue of increasing Police manpower in the UT, the Sub-Committee was informed
that as against the sanctioned strength of 439, Daman and Diu Police Department presently has 392
police personnel.
2.4.25 On the issue of the shortage of staff, the UT Administration informed that recently the
recruitment process for the post of Police Constables was held and 113 candidates have recently
been appointed. Apart from this, the shortage occurring at different level i.e. from Head Constables
to police Sub Inspectors is being made by promotion and recruitment, as the case may be. Besides,
process for filling up the post of 1 SI, 9 ASI and 5 Head Constables by promotion has already
been initiated. The UT Administration further submitted that proposal for sanctioning additional
strength of 306 personnel of different rank under Coastal Security Scheme Phase II has been
referred to Department of Expenditure for concurrence.
2.4.26 The Committee recommends that all vacant posts in Police Department of the UT of
Daman and Diu should be filled up at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that
the Ministry of Home Affairs should impress upon Department of Expenditure for
sanctioning additional strength of 306 personnel of different rank under Coastal Security
Scheme Phase II for the UT.
Recruitment of the vacant posts in the U.T of Daman and Diu.
2.4.27 On the issue of filling up the vacant posts in the UT, the UT Administration has informed
that recruitment of the vacant posts is already under process and the posts which are under the
purview of the Administration are being filled up and for others, UPSC/concerned Ministry has been
requested to do the needful.
2.4.28 The Committee recommends that the vacant posts of the UT Administration should
be filled up at the earliest and for others categories of posts UPSC and other agencies
should be requested to fast track the filling up of the vacancies.
Passport Service Centre
2.4.29 There is a widespread demand for Passport Seva Kendra in the UTs of Daman & Diu and
Dadra & Nagar Haveli. According to the UT Administration, it has already sent the proposal to
Ministry of External Affairs on 28th February 2013 and the Ministry of External Affairs vide letter
dated 3rd July, 2013 informed that the Ministry has received various recommendations from
representatives of public and dignitaries for opening more PSKs at several locations in the country
and the Ministry has requested the National Institute for Smart Government (NISG) to undertake
a fresh feasibility study. After the study, the matter will be placed before the Union Cabinet to take
the decision in holistic manner on setting up more PSKs in the country.
2.4.30 The Committee feels that the Ministry of External Affairs should positively consider
the demand of the people of both the UTs of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu and
expedite the feasibility study for opening of a Passport Seva Kendras either at Silvassa or
Daman to cater to the needs of people of both the UTs.
Repairing of Canals
2.4.31 On the issue of repairing of canals, the UT Administration has informed that the work of
repairing of irrigation canal in Moti Daman area is already in progress and for Nani Daman area
an estimate of R6 crores has been prepared by the UT Administration.

24
2.4.32 The Committee recommends that the repairing of irrigation canal in Moti Daman
area should be completed in a time bound manner. The Committee also recommends that
the repair work of irrigation canal in Nani Daman area should also take off at the earliest.
Connectivity of Gas Pipeline from Gujarat State
2.4.33 On the issue of gas pipeline connection from Gujarat State to receive gas from GSPC, the
Administration has informed that it has taken up the matter with the Petroleum & Natural Gas
Regulatory Board.
2.4.34 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take it up
with Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board
regarding gas pipeline connection as it will help industrial development in the UT.
Regularization of Daily wage Employees
2.4.35 Regarding regularization of daily wage persons working in the UT, the Administration has
informed that regularization will be carried out as per rules and guidelines.
2.4.36 The Committee recommends that the issue of regularization of daily wage persons
working in the UT should be sympathetically addressed while filling up permanent vacancies.
The Committee feels that the youths, who are engaged in the jobs for years together in the
Government sector as daily wage workers/casual workers in the prime time of their life,
feel cheated when the matter of regularization of their job crops up. By that time, neither
they are regularized nor are they taken in private sector as other more young aspirants are
eyeing jobs in private sector. In view of the Committee this is a peculiar and embarrassing
paradox faced by a daily wage worker after spending a substantial part of his life in job.
The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the issue of regularization of daily
wage persons working in the UT must be sympathetically considered with humanitarian
approach while filling up permanent vacancies. While they are daily wage workers, they
should be given the minimum daily wages as approved.
2.4.37 There were various issues such as difference of FSI rate for Rural and Urban areas in the
UT, reduction of passing mark for CTET and GTET examination for applicants belonging to the
UT, division of Panchayats and declaration of Dabhel Panchayat as Municipal Council, Patient Care
Allowance to the Health workers, the survey of land in the UT and increase of incentive upto
R1 lakh from R40 Thousand under Dikari Development Scheme, which were raised before the Sub-
Committee for consideration. The UT Administration in its written reply has stated that all these
issues are being examined by the UT Administration.
2.4.38 The Committee taking serious note of token reply of the UT Administration,
recommends that these issues should be taken up at appropriate level for redressal at the
earliest.

25
CHAPTER-III
CHANDIGARH
3.1 INTRODUCTION
3.1.1 Chandigarh city recognized as the well planned, maintained, cleanest and greenest city of
the country is one of the best experiments in urban planning and modern architecture in the
twentieth century in India. Chandigarh derives its name from the temple of “Chandi Mandir” located
in the vicinity of the site selected for the city.
3.1.2 Since the medieval period through modern era of Indian history, the area was part of the
large Punjab Province which was divided into East and West Punjab during partition of the country
in 1947. The city was conceived to be made the capital of East Punjab and to resettle West Punjab
refugees coming from Pakistan. In 1948, Punjab Government, in consultation with the Government
of India, approved the area of the foothills of the Shivaliks as the site for the new capital. The
location of the city site was a part of the erstwhile Ambala district. The foundation stone of the
city was laid in 1952. Subsequently, at the time of reorganization of the State in 1966 into Punjab,
Haryana and Himachal Pradesh, this city was made the capital of both, Punjab and Haryana and
was declared as a Union Territory in the direct control of the Central Government.
3.1.3 After reorganization of Punjab in 1966, the Administration of the UT was under the Chief
Commissioner. From 1
st June, 1984, the Governor of Punjab took over the direct Administration of
the UT and the post of Chief Commissioner was re-designed as Adviser to the Administrator. The
Union Territory Administration is headed by the Administrator who is appointed by the President
of India under Article 239(2) of the Constitution of India. The Administrator is assisted by the
Adviser to the Administrator who usually happens to be an IAS officer of the AGMU cadre. The
Administration of Chandigarh follows the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to
Chandigarh) Act, 1976 following which the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh came into
existence in May, 1994.
3.1.4 The master plan of Chandigarh was prepared by the French architect Le Corbusier as
analogous to human body, with a clearly defined head (the Capitol Complex, Sector 1), heart (the
City Centre Sector-17), lungs (the leisure valley, innumerable open spaces and sector greens), the
intellect (the cultural and educational institutions), the circulatory system (the network of roads, the
7Vs) and the viscera (the Industrial Area). The concept of the city is based on four major
functions: living, working, care of the body and spirit and circulation. Residential sectors constitute
the living part whereas the Capitol Complex, City Centre, Educational Zone (Post Graduate Institute,
Punjab Engineering College, Punjab University) and the Industrial Area constitute the working part.
The Leisure Valley, Gardens, Sector Greens and Open Courtyards etc. are for the care of body and
spirit. The circulation system comprises of 7 different types of roads known as 7Vs. Later on, a
pathway for cyclists called V8 was added to this circulation system. Tree plantation and
landscaping has been an integral part of the city master plan. Different types of flowering and
various species of evergreen have been planted along the roads, in parking areas, shopping
complexes, residential areas and in the city parks.
3.1.5 According to UT Administration, Chandigarh was planned for a population of half-a-million.
In Phase I, 36 sq. km. of land was acquired by the city administration for construction of
25

26
30 sectors. Land for seventeen additional sectors (Sector 31 to 47) was acquired and developed
during the second phase to cater for a population of 350,000. The predominance of multistoried
apartments in the second phase provide for higher population dimension. However, Chandigarh has
now grown beyond its planned capacity. Hence, development in the third phase has started in
Sectors 48 and beyond. By 2021 the population of Chandigarh is projected to be around 19.5 lacs
(at current rate of growth) almost four times for which it was originally built.
3.1.6 The Sub-Committee visited the UT of Chandigarh from 26
th to 28 th July, 2012 to have a
firsthand assessment of some projects/schemes.
3.2 PROJECT/SCHEMES
Chandigarh Small Flat Scheme-2006
3.2.1 The Sub-Committee visited the site of newly constructed multistory flats allotted to slum
dwellers in Sector 49 of Chandigarh. The Sub-Committee was briefed that for providing one time
solution to the problem of settlement of slum dwellers, ‘Chandigarh Small Flat Scheme-2006’ was
introduced by Chandigarh Administration. Under this scheme, the process of slum rehabilitation of
23841 slum families scattered over 18 colonies in the city was started and accordingly two
proposals for construction of 25728 (6368 Ph.I and 19360 Ph.II) Small Flats for an amount of
R564.93 crores were approved by the Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation in
year 2006 under JNNURM. The 23841 beneficiaries under the scheme have been identified through
bio-metric survey conducted in 2006. According to UT Administration, revised Project cost for
construction of 25728 flats for an amount of R1021.48 crore has been approved in the Government
in October, 2012 and December, 2012.
3.2.2 According to UT Administration, the present status of the ongoing construction of dwelling
units under Slum Rehabilitation at 8 identified locations in the City is as under:–
(I) Construction of 6368 Small Flats :
1. 1024 Small Flats at Sector-49 C Completed and being handed over to beneficiaries.
2. 1120 Small Flats at Sector-38 (W) 512 Small Flats completed and allotted to Slum
Dwellers. Balance 608 Flats yet to be allotted to
beneficiaries.
3. 576 Small Flats at Ram Darbar Completed and being handed over to beneficiaries.
4. 3648 Small Flats at Maloya-II. Project has been shelved for non-availability of
funds.
(II) Construction of 19360 Small Flats:
5. 8448 Small Flats at Dhanas Completed and 6675 Flats have been handed over
to beneficiaries on 16.12.13.
6. 8896 Small Flats at Maloya-I Tendering for 4960 Small flat are being finalized.
7. 448 Small Flats at Mauli Jagran-I Yet to be started as no funds available.
8. 1568 Small flats at Mauli Jagran-II Likely date of completion is March, 2014.
3.2.3 The Committee understands that everyone has right to an adequate standard of
living, including adequate housing which is even recognized by International Human Rights

27
Law. In our country, Lakhs of people live in overcrowded slums and informal settlements
and the main objective of providing permanent dwellings with all basic facilities to slum
dwellers is to alleviate them from their poor living standards.
3.2.4 Appreciating the initiatives undertaken by the Chandigarh Administration to
rehabilitate slum dwellers while implementing JNNURM scheme. The Committee
recommends that the UT of Chandigarh should complete construction of all flats under its
Small Flat Scheme without time and cost overruns and rehabilitate all 23841 beneficiary
families. The Committee also recommends that the shelved project of construction of 3648
Small Flats at Maloya-II and construction of 448 Small Flats at Mauli Jagran-I, which is yet
to be started for want of funds, should be started with sufficient fund allocation.
Smart School
3.2.5 The Sub-Committee visited a Smart school of UT of Chandigarh. This smart school in the
UT of Chandigarh has led to the classroom teaching going beyond the confines of text-books. The
Chandigarh Administration has conceptualized such schools with the objective of making learning
an enjoyable experience, integrating students with society and preparing them for future challenges,
developed a visionary plan for the roll out of ‘smart school concept.
3.2.6 According to the UT Administration, the educational content in smart school solution is
strictly mapped to NCERT books and can be easily customized to any State boards. In these
schools, emphasis has been given on the use of information and communication technology. The
class rooms in such schools are proposed to be equipped with Plasma Screens and other
peripherals. All educational services of the school will be interconnected and centralized with the
Principal, who will act as Nodal Officer for all the activities.
3.2.7 The Committee understands that in this electronic age, integrated e-teaching and
learning methodologies in our schools have become imperative and through establishing
smart schools, UT Government can fulfill goals of bridging digital divide and empowering the
future generation of the country. The Committee appreciates the modernization process of
schooling system with emphasis on interactive boards, multimedia and maximum use of
e-contents. The Committee hopes that these smart schools will go a long way in terms of
achieving excellence in academics, co-curricular area and the educational management. The
Committee recommends that more and more schools with such facilities should be set up
in the UT and existing schools should be converted into smart ones. This project should also
be implemented in other UTs and States should also be advised to embrace technology in
class rooms by setting up of smart schools.
Project e-Sampark
3.2.8 The Sub-Committee visited one Project e-Sampark Centre in the city of Chandigarh. Project
e-Sampark is a Department of Electronics and Information Technology initiative for the
development, integration and maintenance of web-portal for various Departments of the
Administration. The Sampark Project provides 23 G2C services like payment of utility bills, issue
of bus passes, senior citizen card, disability identity card, birth and death certificates, disbursement
of pension for old age person, widows and disable persons, submission of RTI application, public
grievances etc. and 5 B2C services like payment of telephone bills of various telecom operators
via 12 e-Sampark centres spread across the city and 13 Gram Sampark centres in the villages of
UT of Chandigarh. On an average, around 200,000 transactions are made annually at the Sampark
Centres.

28
3.2.9 Accor ding to the UT Administration, it is now making efforts to extend these services to
the citizens of Chandigarh by providing the facility of making payments for the services being
provided at Sampark Centres through internet and mobile phones as well.
3.2.10 The Committee understands that e-governance is two-way communication process
where benefits/services are delivered to people without procedural delays. In any citizen-
centric democratic system, cutting down on unwanted processes of too many layers while
delivering governmental services helps fast and targeted delivery while checking leakage.
The Committee recommends that the UT Administration should open up more e-sampark
centres in the city and bring more Departments and services under its ambit.
Rajiv Gandhi Chandigarh Technology Park (RGCTP)
3.2.11 The Sub-Committee visited RGCTP in the city of Chandigarh. The Sub-Committee was
informed that Rajiv Gandhi Chandigarh Technology Park (RGCTP) is an extremely important
project for the Union Territory of Chandigarh as it provides world class integrated infrastructure
necessary for the setting up of facilities/campuses by leading technology companies and other IT/
ITES/BPO companies for the first time in this region. Chandigarh has traditionally been a city
where not many multi-national companies had earlier set up their facilities and therefore a large
number of professionals had left Chandigarh in the past for other cities, in search of high level
employment. The level of educational facilities here had been much higher than the level of
employment opportunities available, especially in the knowledge sector and RGCTP is a major step
in the direction of plugging this gap.
3.2.12 According to UT Administration, the vision was to establish a world class IT Park with
state of the art infrastructure including the provision of 100% availability of power and broadband
connectivity. As the Tier I cities like Bangalore, Hyderabad, NCR of Delhi were getting choked
because of the IT boom in India, meticulous planning and aggressive marketing of Chandigarh as
an IT destination placed Chandigarh on the national map as an excellent Tier II destination which
started attracting the attention of a lot of IT multinational companies. As such, huge demand of
IT space started pouring in and the area of 123 acres started looking small.
3.2.13 According to UT Administration, the development of RGCTP has been anchored by
Infosys, which has completed its state of the art campus. DLF is also offering ready to use built
up space and is already housing 37 IT Companies. These state of the art buildings are already
providing directly employment to more than 6000 professionals. IT majors like Wipro, Bharti Airtel,
Tech Mahindra, alongwith 21 other companies are in the process of developing their respective
sites allotted to them.
3.2.14 Apart from a Hotel cum Convention Centre, a T ech Habitat Centre is also under
development on a 123 acre plot under PPP model. This project has been planned taking into
consideration the logistic needs relating to the residential accommodation for the IT professionals
who would be working in RGCTP.
3.2.15 Keeping in view the pending applications for various sizes of plots in RGCTP and the huge
demand pouring in from various quarters across the globe, another 272 acres of land have been
planned for expansion of RGCTP. The land for this Phase is under acquisition, which is likely to
be completed shortly, after which further allotments will be undertaken as per the Policy.
3.2.16 The Committee hopes that world class integrated infrastructure for the setting up
of facilities/campuses by leading Technology Companies and other IT/ITES/BPO companies
for the first time in this region will help increasing employment generation for IT
professionals as well as development of information technology infrastructure in the UT. The
Committee recommends that acquisition of another 272 acres of land for further expansion

29
should be completed and allotments made. The Committee would however like to suggest
that development of infrastructure like roads, sewerage, drainage, connectivity etc. should
also be done with the development of housing and office space and every step and caution
should be taken to see that Chandigarh is not converted into a smoke emitting concrete
jungle.
Entrepreneur Development Centre
3.2.17 The Sub-Committee visited the Entrepreneur Development Centre being established in the
premises of Rajiv Gandhi Chandigarh Technology Park (RGCTP). The Sub-Committee was
informed that State of the art Entrepreneurs Development Centre was being established by the
Administration for providing incubation space to young entrepreneurs. This project is funded partly
by Government of India through the Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure and
Allied Activities (ASIDE) Scheme, which is meant for export related projects.
3.2.18 The Entrepreneur Development Centre (EDC) has been conceived to enhance the export of
the software products from Chandigarh and to assist young professionals in setting up their
entrepreneurship by providing shell space or space with plug and play facilities in a state of the
art environment friendly and an intelligent building. The project serves as a transit point for the IT
software export companies who do not have a fully developed building of their own. The Centre
will also have the administrative offices of the IT department that will be more accessible and
approachable for the IT companies in the vicinity.
3.2.19 The Sub-Committee was informed that the EDC project would also become a big software
export centre, apart from providing readymade space to young entrepreneurs who have bright
ideas, but don’t have the capital to create the infrastructure and the city would benefit from the
cumulative impact of the improved infrastructure for exports and the impact of the increased
exports in the economy on employment and over all prosperity.
3.2.20 The UT Administration in its written reply which was furnished to the Committee later, has
informed that EDC has been established and it will provide space to Young IT professionals/small
and medium enterprises. The Ministry has further informed that modalities for allocation of 20,000
square feet space (19 office bays) in the EDC has been finalized and space will be allocated to
eligible IT professionals/organizations shortly. The operationalization of the EDC will further
enhance exports from the city.
3.2.21 The Committee is pleased to note that the Entrepreneur Development Centre has
been built. The Committee hopes that this Centre will help enhance export of the software
products from the UT and assist young professionals in setting up their entrepreneurship.
The Committee is of the view that EDC should help budding skilled entrepreneurs in setting
up export oriented units in the EDC.
3.3 GOVERNMENT MEDICAL COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL, CHANDIGARH
3.3.1 The Sub-Committee during its study tour visited the Government Medical College and
Hospital (GMCH) situated in Chandigarh which was started during the year 1991. The
Sub-Committee was told that the defacto GMCH was started in the Prayaas Building, Sector 38,
Chandigarh after the foundation stone laying ceremony was performed by the then Prime Minister
of India in Sector 32 on the quilt of 36.09 acres of land allotted by the Chandigarh Administration.
3.3.2 According to the UT Administration, Objective behind establishment of this Medical College
and Hospital was to meet the medico-social needs of various communities by providing
comprehensive health care, encompassing preventive, curative and rehabilitative health care, round

30
the clock with state of the art diagnostic services/facilities to provide specialized services in
clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic fields.
3.3.3 The Committee understands that this hospital is visited by a large number of people
from other neighbouring States daily and is always overcrowded and there is need of its
expansion. The Committee recommends that the UT Administration in tandem with Ministry
of Home Affairs will make available required funds for further expansion and modernization
of this Medical College and Hospital so that it would cater to the needs of more and more
people.
3.4 MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF CHANDIGARH
3.4.1 During the visit of the Sub-Committee, the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of
Chandigarh also made a presentation before the Sub-Committee on 27
th July, 2012. According to
the Commissioner out of total area of 114 sq. km. of Chandigarh, the total area coming under the
jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh is 79.34 sq. km. The Municipal area has
population of 9.44 lakh out of total population of 10.54 lakh. The entire area of Municipal
Corporation has been divided into 26 wards and each ward is represented by an elected councilor.
Besides, 9 members from amongst the persons, who are eminent/distinguished in public affairs, are
nominated by the Administrator, U.T. Chandigarh. The Member of Parliament from Chandigarh is
an ex-officio member. One third of total number of seats to be filled up by direct election is
reserved for women. Similarly, out of seats reserved for scheduled castes, one third seats are
reserved for women belonging to Scheduled Castes. Mayor is the Head of Elected Body assisted
by Sr. Deputy Mayor and Deputy Mayor. Obligatory and discretionary functions of the Corporation
are enshrined in Section 44 and 45 of the Municipal Act. Water supply and sewerage, storm water
drainage, street lighting, sanitation, community centres, roads and bridges, horticulture, fire
services, registration of births and deaths, primary health and primary education are major
functions entrusted to Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh.
3.4.2 The working of Municipal Corporation is based on the committee system under which
various Sub-Committees dealing with specified subjects, such as Finance and Contract, Water
supply and Sewerage disposal, Road, House Tax Assessment, Electricity, Environment and City
Beautification, Sanitation, Day Market and Apni Mandi, Fire and Emergency Services, Enforcement,
Arts Culture and Sports, Slum Colonies and Village Development exist. They are headed by a
Chairman whereas the Finance and Contract Committee is headed by Mayor. The financial power
of Finance and Contract Committee is upto R35 lakh. The tenure of these Committees is one year.
Different Committees have been delegated financial and other powers to carry on the functions
relating to Municipal Corporation. The matter involving financial implication beyond
R35 lakh and policy decisions are placed before the General body (House) meeting of the
Corporation.
3.4.3 The UT Administration was asked about steps required to further strengthen the working
of Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh. The UT Administration submitted that since its inception
various functions/departments have been transferred to Municipal Corporation in a phased manner,
as a result of which the responsibilities of the Corporation have been increased considerably.
Therefore, it requires strengthening of the Corporation by taking following steps:–
● Strengthening of manpower
● Strengthening of infrastructure/machinery
● Strengthening of MCC using Information Technology
● Increase in Annual Budget.

31
3.4.4 The UT Administration was asked whether allocated budgetary provisions are sufficient for
carrying out the development projects. In its response, it was stated that the allocated budgetary
provision is insufficient for carrying out the development projects. About 10.83% of the budget
(Plan and Non Plan) of Chandigarh is allocated to MCC. 17.5% of the Tax Revenue of
Administration is paid on Grant-in-Aid to the MCC as per the recommendations of 3rd Delhi
Finance Commission.
3.4.5 On the question of criteria for devolution of funds to the Local Bodies keeping in view the
increasing functions and jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh, the UT Administration
stated that no criteria for devolution of funds to the Local Bodies has been conveyed to the
Chandigarh Administration by the Government of India. However, Chandigarh Administration is
providing financial aid to Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh on account of developmental works
from the Plan budget in addition to Government of India Grant being paid as per the
recommendations of 3rd Delhi Finance Commission.
3.4.6 The UT Administration was asked whether it is being contemplated to increase the revenue
of Municipal Corporation as the Corporation has more responsibility with limited authority and
financial resources. The UT Administration in its response has admitted that it is being
contemplated to increase the revenue of MC, U.T. Chandigarh. Recently, Municipal Corporation has
imposed tax on residential property @ R1/- per square yard. This will increase the revenue of the
Municipal Corporation, U.T., Chandigarh and the revision of proposed rates of Tax is under
examination of the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh.
3.4.7 According to the UT Administration, the fourth Delhi Finance Commission has been
constituted to find out the shortcomings in the budgetary provisions. The detailed report has been
given to the Delhi Finance Commission to consider and suggest ways and means to increase the
revenue share of the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh. The measures so suggested by the Fourth
Delhi Finance Commission shall be further examined for adoption.
3.4.8 The Committee recommends that increasing financial power of Finance and Contract
Committee of Chandigarh Municipal Corporation which is headed by Mayor upto one crore
rupees should be considered as keeping in view the municipal area of Chandigarh, 35 lakh
is meager amount.
3.4.9 The Committee also recommends that strengthening of manpower and infrastructure
of MCC is the handicap in its efficient discharge of mandate. Strengthening of MCC in
terms of using Information Technology is also required. The Committee therefore
recommends that the UT Administration should take all corrective actions proactively to
remove hurdles in the way of MCC. Besides, there should be maximum use of information
technology in the offices of Municipal body so that residents could get their work done
hassle free.
3.4.10 After going through details of budgetary provisions and expenditure during the last
five years of Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh, the Committee disapprovingly notes that
the Municipal Corporation has not been able to spend the allocated amount in any financial
year. The Committee views that the demand of the UT Administration for more money to
MCC as the allocated budgetary provision is insufficient for carrying out the development
projects is misplaced. The Committee recommends that the MCC should strive to increase
its fund absorption capacity for carrying out the development projects in the municipal area
of the UT with alacrity.
3.5 ISSUES PERTAINING TO INDUSTRIES OF CHANDIGARH
3.5.1 The Committee received representations from Industries Association of Chandigarh on the

32
issues pertaining to the industries in Chandigarh which was forwarded to the Ministry for replies/
comments. The issues are being discussed below:–
Proper implementation of the Act MSMED Act, 2006
3.5.2 The MSMED Act, 2006 should be implemented in the UT properly and more activities
should be allowed in the industrial area by proper implementation of. By virtue of this Act,
Parliament in its wisdom had decided to redefine Small Scale Industry by renaming it as Enterprise
to include manufacturing and services.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.3 Allowing of more activities has no relevance with MSMED Act as it is governed by the
local Building Bye-laws/Urban Planning Rules and Master Plan because of change of land use and
is subject-matter under State list of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Activities of IT and
ITES in Industrial Area were earlier not being permitted because the city has an SEZ in the name
of Rajiv Gandhi Chandigarh Technology Park and allowing of these activities in the old Industrial
Estates could impact the development of the IT Park. Now, this issue has been discussed at the
highest level of the Administration and it has been felt that no notification is needed as IT (software
and hardware development) being of the manufacturing nature and is permissible in the Industrial
area. As regards the notices already issued for misuse because of such activities being carried out
in the Industrial Area in place of other manufacturing activities, it was decided that such notices
issued shall be dropped by the Estate Office and thus, the issue has been resolved.
3.5.4 The Committee understands that in MSMED Act, the word ‘industry’ has expressly
been replaced by ‘enterprises’, due to which services along with manufacturing are allowed.
The UT administration should implement the said Act in letter and spirit. Early action may
be taken to drop the notices.
Industrial Policy
3.5.5 There was also an issue of Industrial Policy which is to be implemented soon.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.6 The city of Chandigarh has a special Heritage Status and in order to maintain its pristine
glory, a major policy-decision was taken in the year 2006 vide notification on 04.07.2006, which
postulates the broad parameters of the Industrial policy. Its implementation is regulated by Urban
Planning laws, Master plan (Land-use plans) and enforced through Estate Office. The relevant
portion of the Notification is reproduced below:–
“the plots/sheds shall hence-forth be allotted to Industrial houses for promotion of
Information Technology, precision-equipment manufacturing, Electronic Industry-related
projects without any discharge of effluent nor any source of emission by keeping the reserve
price close to the market rates or by way of auction etc. for which detailed modalities
would be worked-out separately” .
3.5.7 According to the UT Administration, that draft-policy is under process and is likely to be
notified shortly.
3.5.8 The Committee notes that the draft Industrial Policy is under process and is likely to
be notified. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) should
impress upon the UT administration for redrafting new industrial policy of UT in consonance
with the MSMED Act, 2006 which the Centre had formulated for the overall industrial growth

33
and accommodate the grievances of local industrialists. The UT Administration should also
invite objections/suggestions from stakeholders of the industry before finalising the policy.
3.5.9 The Committee understands that promotion of pollution free, energy-efficient, hi-
tech, low-volume and high value-added industries is needed for the UT. However, interests
of other less polluting manufacturing industries in small and micro segment also needed to
be protected. The Committee desires that the Ministry should look into the matter.
Misuse charges at R500/- per sq.ft. per month
3.5.10 The Estate Office has been issuing notices to the landlords and occupants of Commercial
Buildings from time to time for the alleged violations which have been usually carried out by the
tenants and this leads to disputes between the landlords and tenants pending before the Courts. The
rates of penalties for alleged violations are on very higher side which is R500 per square per
month. This has led to shifting of business to satellite towns.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.11 The rates were revised by way of a notification way back in 2007 and thus carry sanctity
of law as on date to serve as a deterrent so that misuse or unauthorized conversion of activities
is discouraged by making it unviable with the penal charges. However, the Ministry has informed
that there is a move to review these charges for downward revision.
3.5.12 The Committee understands that the revised rates carry the sanctity of law as on
date to serve as a deterrent to unauthorized conversion of activities. The Committee
recommends that the UT Administration should undertake downward revision of the charges
on priority basis and notify the same at the earliest.
Conversion of Industrial Plots from lease holds tenure to free hold tenure
3.5.13 There was a demand of conversion of Industrial Plots from lease holds tenure to free hold
tenure as it is prevalent thorough out the country.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.14 The matter has been considered in detail and it has been observed by the competent
authority that since the properties have been allotted on lease basis for 99 years and there is no
reason for conversion of properties other than residential allotted on lease hold basis to be
converted into free hold, there is no move to allow the conversion of Industrial plots from lease
hold land tenure to free hold tenure.
3.5.15 The Committee desires that demand for conversion of Industrial plots from lease
hold land tenure to free hold tenure may be considered appropriately.
Simplification of Procedures
3.5.16 There are a number of returns that a company needs to file with the Chandigarh
Administration. Some of these could be avoided and some could be made online.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.17 Excise and Taxation Department of the Chandigarh Administration is under-going
computerization under Commercial Taxes Mission Mode Project whereby all the services, forms
and returns of the dealers/industry would be made online .

34
3.5.18 The Committee recommends that Excise and Taxation Department of the Chandigarh
Administration should complete its ongoing computerization work at the earliest to facilitate
all transactions online. The Committee desires that the same should be implemented in all
the Departments of UT particularly in service based Departments so that people could get
their work done hassle free and with transparency and eradicating the role of middlemen
and corruption could be eradicated.
Single Window System
3.5.19 Online single window system for addressing grievances of the industry should be set-up.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.20 A Single Window Committee has already been constituted under the Chairmanship of
Director, Industries with representatives of line departments such as Municipal Corporation,
Engineering Department, Excise and Taxation Department, Department of Environment, Police
Department and Estate Office. Agenda items are invited from various industrial associations from
time to time and are discussed in the meeting of Single Window Committee and grievances of the
entrepreneurs are solved. However, a centralized online grievance monitoring system is available for
redressal of the grievances pertaining to all the Departments of Chandigarh Administration.
3.5.21 The Committee while taking note of the reply of the UT Administration,
recommends that the Single Window Committee should be functional in the UT at the earliest
and it should further be strengthened by including all the Departments with a separate
grievance redressal mechanism to address the problems/grievances of the people at large.
Air connectivity
3.5.22 Construction of airport should be completed on priority basis for better connectivity of the
city with all major cities. As per the requirements of the growing city, new flights to major
business centres like Bangalore, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Chennai, Lucknow, Jaipur etc. are sought. The
flights timings for the existing flights also need to be rescheduled so that a person is able to reach
Delhi early in the morning and can come back by evening. This would be of much help to the
business fraternity working out of Chandigarh and surrounding areas.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.23 The issues raised in the representation would be taken up with the concerned Ministry.
3.5.24 The Committee agrees that the city of Chandigarh should be connected with all
major cities of the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should take up the issue with the Ministry of Civil Aviation for running more flights and
rescheduling of existing flights for Chandigarh as it would help fast movement of
goods/services/people.
Railways
3.5.25 Chandigarh Railway Station was included to be upgraded to be world class station in the
2010-11 budget. However, work is still pending. As this railway Station would soon be a world
class facility, there is a need to have more trains to ply from Chandigarh to other parts of the
country. Express/super fast trains are also required to cities like Mumbai, Jaipur, Chennai,
Bangalore, Hyderabad etc. Shatabdi Express is an important train for Chandigarh and adjoining
areas, as it connects Chandigarh to the business fraternity globally through Delhi. Over the years,

35
the quality of service in Shatabdi Express has deteriorated adversely. Better quality and service are
the need of the hour. It is also requested that Shatabdi should be made nonstop till New Delhi.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.26 The issues raised in the representation would be taken up with the concerned Ministry.
3.5.27 The Committee feels that the Chandigarh should be connected with major cities of
the country by trains. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should take up the issue of more trains for Chandigarh as it would help fast movement of
goods/services/people with the Ministry of Railways. Other issues may also be taken up.
Basic infrastructure
3.5.28 Development of necessary infrastructure like roads, garbage disposal, beautification etc. in
Industrial Area should be taken up.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.29 Roads have been re-carpeted and paver blocks have already been provided in the Industrial
Area. Beautification has been done as per approved Master Plan. Adequate garbage bins and
vehicles have been deployed for disposal of garbage in a time bound manner.
3.5.30 The Committee views that industrial areas of the city deserve proper attention. The
Committee recommends that the status of roads, garbage disposal, sanitation, drainage etc.
should be checked time to time, particularly after monsoon. The Committee also
recommends that the Master Plan of the City should be reviewed from time to time so that
necessary changes could be made according to changing needs of the citizenry. The
Committee recommends that while preparing Draft Master Plan 2031, RWAs and other
citizen based groups should be involved at every level.
Allowing need based changes in the industrial plot
3.5.31 In the industrial plot there is a need to cover the open spaces with corrugated sheets to
prevent the raw material from bad weather, theft and rains. The Industrial Area was built about
60 years ago. There have been lots of changes in business requirements and even the building
needs have also changed. Therefore, need based internal changes in the buildings and temporary
coverage in the court yard to protect material from being damaged by weather should be permitted.
3.5.32 While the Chandigarh Administration has constituted a committee under the chairmanship
of Chief Architect, the enforcement staff of Estate Office started issuing the violation notices. It
was requested that these notices may be kept in abeyance till the final decision is taken and the
Chandigarh Estate Rules should be made effective retrospectively. An option of adopting the new
or old rules may be given to plot holders as in the Estate Management Procedures of 2011 of
HSIIDC.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.33 In the industrial plots, there is a need to cover the open spaces with corrugated sheets
to prevent the raw material from bad weather, theft and rains. The Master Plan Committee after
visiting the industrial area to gauge the ground realities/problems has recommended the following
in the Draft Master Plan 2031 for addressing the same “Review of Marla Industrial Plots
governed by the Architectural Controls to better utilize the area and to address modern day
requirements”.

36
3.5.34 The Committee understands the need of covering the open spaces with corrugated
sheets to prevent losses due to unseen reasons. The Committee recommends that The
Master Plan Committee should pay attention to this issue and address the grievance of the
industries appropriately.
Automobile Service Stations
3.5.35 Automobile service stations should be treated as industrial related activity and should be
allowed to operate from Industrial Area.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.36 The proposal for introducing automobile repair in Industrial Area has not been found
feasible by the UT Administration.
3.5.37 The Committee is not convinced with the stand taken by the UT administration. The
Committee understands that there are many industrial areas in and around Delhi, where
one can find automobile service stations already functional. The Committee feels that
vehicles of the city need to be serviced or repaired in the city itself. The Committee
therefore recommends that the UT Administration should reconsider its decision and allow
the automobile service stations in the industrial area.
Allowing warehousing units
3.5.38 W arehousing units should be allowed in the Industrial Area.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.39 The proposal for introducing warehousing in Industrial Area has not been found feasible by
the UT Administration. According to the UT Administration, the area for warehousing has been
proposed on approx. 97.06 acres in the close vicinity of the Railway Station in the Chandigarh
Draft Master Plan Report–2031. In addition to this, an area has also been proposed for
warehousing in Pocket No.8 situated in West of Sec.56.
3.5.40 The Committee feels that the core issue is legal provisions involved and terms and
conditions prescribed while making allotment of the plots rather than the feasibility felt by
the UT Administration. If the warehousing units are complying with the fire and safety
norms, then there should not be any problem in allowing them to function. The suggestion
may be re-considered.
ITES and IT
3.5.41 Both ITES and IT should be treated as same and these should be allowed in the Industrial
Area.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.42 Allowing of ITES and IT activities has been considered and the proposal has been sent for
legal examination and approval of the Administrator, UT of Chandigarh.
3.5.43 The Committee desires that early decision on allowing ITES and IT activities in
industrial area may be taken and the Committee may be apprised of the decision taken in
this regard.

37
Lack of Public Responsive System in Chandigarh Administration
3.5.44 The administrative set up of Chandigarh is functioning by taking senior officers of All India
Services and State Services on deputation from Centre and adjoining States. This system is lacking
public interest because there is induction of political system in the overall administrative set up of
Chandigarh Administration through which public representatives (elected from amongst the
Chandigarh citizen) can take part and contribute in policy decision making process. There is a need
to create Public Responsive System with public representation/participation in all major decision
making processes.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.45 The UT of Chandigarh is represented by an MP elected by the people of UT. In addition,
for tendering advice in developmental activities there exists the Administrator’s Advisory Council,
represented by people from all walks of life. The present administrative system/set up is
functioning smoothly. Also there is local level of Government in Chandigarh. Councilors for the
Municipal Corporation are elected by the residents. The elected Councilors work at the ward level
and also through ward development committees.
3.5.46 The UT of Chandigarh Administration should involve citizens groups, public
representatives in all major decision making processes so that grievances and problems of
people could come to the fore and hence their redressal.
Allowing Display and Sale on upper floor of SCFs /SCOs
3.5.47 Notices are being served to the traders for sale and display at upper floor of SCOs and
SCFs as commercial activates are not allowed at upper floors. Therefore provision for display and
sale on upper floor of SCFs/SCOs should be allowed.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.48 The sale and display of goods and restaurants are the only two activities which are now
prohibited in the SCOs because the upper floors are meant for low intensity activities like offices.
All other activities are now permitted. As regards SCFs, the upper floors are meant for residence.
Some practical problems like non-provision of toilets on upper floors had been pointed out. The
matter of all such cases is already under consideration of the UT Administration.
3.5.49 The Committee desires that the issue may be solved by the UT Administration at the
earliest by holding discussion with them.
Pending Sales Tax Assessment Cases
3.5.50 There should be one time solution for disposing of the pending Sales Tax Assessment
Cases prior to implementation of V AT. All the long pending sales tax assessment cases must be
deemed to be assessed which are pending prior to implementation of V AT without the necessity to
produce C forms.
Response of the Ministry
3.5.51 The UT Administration submitted that as per Punjab General and Sales Tax, 1948,
V AT, 2005 and Central Sales Tax, 1956 Act, no assessment can be framed in the absence of ‘C’
form and no State/UT has power to waive off ‘C’ forms.

38
3.5.52 The Committee notes the reply and feels that there should be some mechanism for
disposing of the pending Sale Tax Assessment Cases prior to implementations of V AT. The
Ministry of Home Affairs may take up this issue with the Finance Ministry.
3.6 ISSUES PERTAINING TO RESIDENTS OF CHB AND TENEMENT COLONIES
3.6.1 The sub-Committee received a representation from Chandigarh Housing Board Residents
Federation and Tenement Colonies regarding the problems being faced by residents of CHB and
Tenement Colonies on the issue of ownership of the houses which was forwarded to the Ministry
for replies/comments. The Ministry furnished its reply which is given below.
Ownership rights to the residents of the tenement colonies
3.6.2 Ownership rights should be given to the residents of the tenement colonies who over the
last decades bought their houses on power of attorney.
Response of the Ministry
3.6.3 The proposal has already been examined in detail and it has been recommended for
consideration at the senior level for transfer of ownership rights on lease-hold basis to those who
are having the documents like GPA and other evidence of transaction and transfer of possession
as per CHB/Estate Office policy and if approved, the move will benefit 3500 persons of transferees
out of total 11670 persons subject to their possessing the requisite documents.
3.6.4 The Committee desires that the UT Administration should sympathetically consider
the plight of residents of the tenement colonies who over the last decades bought their
houses on power of attorney and give them ownership rights. The Ministry of Home Affairs
should consider this and take an early decision.
Additions made on land by one-room owners
3.6.5 The need-based small additions made on small unused patches of land by one-room owners
to accommodate their growing families should be compounded.
Response of the Ministry
3.6.6 The UT Administration informed that this basically is a request to regularize the
encroachments on Government land which cannot be regularized without proper allotment and
examination of the implications. It is also informed that at present, there is no such regularization
possible.
3.6.7 The Committee understands that small additions made on small unused patches of
land by one-room owners to accommodate their growing families is not sanctioned by law.
However, the Committee recommends that the UT Administration should look into this issue
and take an early decision.
Delinking of the inspection for building violations with/from the process of transfer of ownership
3.6.8 There was a demand of delinking of the inspection for building violations with/from the
process of transfer of ownership by Chandigarh Housing Board Residents Federation.
Response of the Ministry
3.6.9 In response, the UT Administration has stated that there have been a lot of violations of
the existing bye laws of the Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act, 1952. According

39
to the UT Administration, a survey was conducted in 2000 wherein it was found that 75-80% of
building violations exist in the Dwelling Units of Chandigarh Housing Board. It has mentioned that
as per procedure, the Dwelling Units are being converted from lease hold to free hold basis under
the Chandigarh Conversion of Residential Lease-hold Land Tenure into Free hold Land Tenure
Rules, 1996. The conversion charges are fixed by the Estate Officer, UT, Chandigarh and collected
on behalf of the Estate Office. According to the UT Administration, the CHB only issues the
conversion letter to the applicants for executing Conveyance Deed with the Registrar, UT,
Chandigarh. When the applicant applies for transfer of ownership on the basis of GPA and Sale
Deed, the CHB as per procedure takes the building violation/misuse report. In case, there is building
violation, the case is not approved and the applicant is informed that his request cannot be
considered until and unless the violations are removed. The UT Administration has mentioned that
now the proposal is being submitted to the Board for consideration and approval for allowing
transfer on the basis of affidavit of the applicant stating therein that there is no building violation/
misuse in the dwelling unit.
3.6.10 The UT Administration has further mentioned that the CHB is transferring the dwelling unit
on the basis of GPA/Sub-GPA, where the transaction has taken place after a lock-in period of
5 years from the date of physical possession as per provisions of the approved GPA transfer policy
under Regulation-16 of Chandigarh Housing Board (Allotment, Management and Sale of Tenements)
Regulations, 1979. In such cases, a no-violation report is presently being taken. It has also
informed that the proposal is being submitted to the Board for consideration and approval on the
basis of affidavit submitted by the applicant.
3.6.11 On the issue of delinking of the inspection for building violations from the process
of transfer of ownership by Chandigarh Housing Board Residents Federation, the Committee
is of the opinion that the issue has merit and the UT administration should reconsider its
decision in this regard.
Allowing transfer on GPA basis
3.6.12 There was a request for allowing transfer on GPA basis to the transactions within the
lock-in period of five years.
Response of the Ministry
3.6.13 The UT Administration has stated that the Dwelling Units (DUs) had been allotted by the
CHB with a condition imposed in the allotment letter that the allottee shall not alienate in the said
property or part with possession of the whole or any part of the said property till he becomes the
owner on the expiry of the Hire Purchase period or for a period of ten years from the date of
actual possession whichever is later. Further, he shall not transfer the DU through Power of
Attorney etc. except to surrender it to the Board during the Hire Purchase period or for a period
of 5/10 years from the date of actual possession whichever is later. It has also been mentioned
in the allotment-letter that during the Hire Purchase period the status of the allottee will be that of
a tenant and he shall have no other right except those of tenancy.
3.6.14 The Regulation 16 of Chandigarh Housing Board (Allotment, Management and Sale of
Tenements) Regulations, 1979 is reproduced as under:–
“16 Transfer of Registration/property: - Notwithstanding anything contained in these
regulations, the Board may transfer the registration number or any property after a period
of 5 years from the date of physical possession by imposing such terms and conditions as
it may deem fit ”.

40
3.6.15 The UT Administration has informed that there were many dwelling units sold out by the
original allottees on the basis of GPA along with Agreement to Sell and will, etc., which was treated
equivalent to sale deed at that time by the General public knowingly/unknowingly. Besides this CHB
vide office order No.HB-AOI,SOVII/2012/2684 dated 29.2.2012, has now recommended that all
pending cases of GPA transfer where GPA/SPA/Agreement to Sell/Will executed on or before
11.10.2011, on the basis of which the application for transfer of dwelling units has been made and
which are covered under the original GPA Transfer Policy framed by the Board as per terms and
conditions as laid down in the original policy. The UT Administration while further clarifying has
stated that as per original policy only those GPA transfer cases could be processed in which
transfer of dwelling units has taken place after the initial lock-in-period of 5 years as specified in
Regulation 16 of the CHB (Allotment, Management and Sale of Tenements) Regulation, 1979.
3.6.16 According to the UT Administration, the plea of the applicants is not valid as it was the
duty of the buyer to verify/ascertain the title of the seller i.e. whether he is the absolute owner
of the dwelling units or merely having a limited title to the property (hire-purchase/lease). The
allotment letter is an essential document of transaction, so each and every term and condition of
the allotment letter, is legally presumed to be in the knowledge of the allottee. However, UT
Administration has submitted that one-time relaxation is under consideration of the Administration.
3.6.17 The Committee notes that the UT Administration is considering a onetime relaxation
for transfer on GPA basis to the transactions within the lock-in period of 5 years and
desires that early decision may be taken in the matter.
Extra coverage in Residential Houses
3.6.18 It was brought to the notice that there is 500% proposed increase in charges for permitted
extra coverage in Residential Houses.
Response of the Ministry
3.6.19 The rates are still under consideration of UT Administration. The rates were last fixed in the
year 2002. The rates now proposed are  R 200/- per sq.ft. for the extra coverage i.e. creation of extra
space within the house which has a direct relevance with the market rate of land in the city. The
rate proposed comes to R16,666/- per sq.yd. whereas the present price of the land is not below
R50,000/- per sq.yd. The rate appears to be justified as compared to the existing land prices.
3.6.20 The Committee notes the submission of the administration that the rates are under
consideration of UT Administration. The Committee recommends that the UT administration
should increase/fix rate by taking into account the problems of the people. The Committee
is of the view that market rate of land should not be applied for permitted extra coverage
in Residential Houses.
3.7 ISSUES CONCERNING COMMON CITIZENS
Participatory Democracy
3.7.1 There is a need for greater participation, involvement and consultation of the people through
Resident Welfare Associations on the pattern of Bhagidari scheme of Delhi Government.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.2 Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh being an elected body works under the Punjab Municipal
Act, 1976, as Extended to the Union Territory, Chandigarh and the functioning of the Municipal

41
Corporation, Chandigarh is governed by the above Act. Therefore within the frame work it is not
possible to co-opt individual Citizens. The elected body works at the ward level also through ward
development committee.
3.7.3 The Committee observes that the recent years have witnessed a keen interest of
people in participation in decision making process of Governments. The Committee is of the
view that the UT Government should involve NGOs, Civil Society Groups, citizen groups in
shaping decisions and deliberating over policies that affect their lives and also put draft
policies for public scrutiny. Involving citizens in the decision making process will lead to
transparency and good governance.
Preserving original character of the city
3.7.4 There is an urgent need to implement an effective legislation alongwith formation of a
comprehensive Master Plan and setting up of an independent regional planning and development
authority on the pattern of NCR for the coordinated development of the city and its peripheral areas
and to stop unplanned growth.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.5 The Master Plan of Chandigarh has already been drafted and is available in public domain
for inviting suggestions from the public. The Master Plan has addressed issues pertaining to
preserving original character of the city.
3.7.6 The Committee is of the view that UT Administration should endeavour to preserve
the original character of the city. The Committee recommends that proposed Master Plan
of Chandigarh should incorporate this concern of the citizenry.
Traffic Congestion, Inadequate Parking space and Public transport system
3.7.7 There is an urgent need to prepare a comprehensive traffic plan to check the traffic
congestion alongwith widening of roads, improvement of intersections/roundabouts and automatic
traffic lights, construction of underpasses, multilevel parking in commercial areas and community
parking in residential areas.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.8 Chandigarh Administration has engaged M/s RITES to conduct study for improvement of
traffic and transportation. Integrated Multi Model Mass Transport consisting of Metro Rail, BRT,
Commuter Rail System and normal city bus system for Chandigarh Urban Complex and its linkages
to nearby towns to meet the anticipated commuter travel needs has been proposed. Apart from this,
certain improvements of the junction have also been proposed by M/s RITES. Further, the matter
was deliberated in the Master Plan in depth and various proposals with reference to strengthening
of the roads, underpasses, parking spaces, cycle tracks etc. alongwith Metro has been suggested.
3.7.9 The Committee recommends that Chandigarh Administration should expedite the
completion of the study for improvement of traffic and transportation and consider the
same while finalizing the proposed Master Plan.
Inadequate Health Care Facilities
3.7.10 There is an urgent need to establish some more Hospitals in the city, especially in Southern
Sectors, upgradation of medical facilities in the existing Government dispensaries/health centers and

42
setting up of super specialty Hospitals in private sectors on the pattern of adjoining town of Mohali
in order to provide quality health services to the people who can afford or the Government
employees who are entitled to reimbursement.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.11 The Health Department proposes 500 bedded General Hospital in the southern sector in
view of the ever increasing population. The tertiary level of health care is made available through
PGIMER, Chandigarh which is 1585 bedded and Government. Medical College and Hospital, Sector
32, Chandigarh which is 700 bedded. Secondary level of health care is provided through GMSH-
16, Chandigarh (500 bedded) and Primary level of health care is made available through 100 bedded
Civil Hospital, Manimajra and 50 bedded Maternity and Child Health Care, Sector 22 and OPD
services through 41 dispensaries including Ayush apart from private hospitals/clinical laboratories in
UT of Chandigarh. The Primary level of health Care have been transferred to Municipal
Corporation, Chandigarh and they are in the process of establishing new health facilities in Sector
48, 49 and 52. It is pertinent to mention that due to non availability of land in UT Chandigarh new
corporate hospitals are not feasible at present.
3.7.12 The Committee recommends that the UT Government should take early decision for
setting up of a 500 bedded General Hospital in the southern sector as proposed by the
Health Department without any delay.
Shortage of Power
3.7.13 No steps have been taken to set up power plant in Chandigarh. Major demand of electricity
is met through purchase of electricity from other sources at higher rates resulting in frequent hike
in power tariff and frequent power cuts. Thus there is a need to set up its own power generation
plant and to promote the use of solar energy.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.14 UT Chandigarh has the shortage of power to the tune of 50-60 MW presently but this
shortage is only seasonal i.e. limited to only summer season and that too during day time only
which is being purchased on competitive bidding as per the guidelines of MOP/GOI. The majority
of the power demand is fulfilled by the long term Purchase agreements with NTPC/NHPC/BBMB
etc. and the rates are very reasonable. Regarding setting up of power plants, it is mentioned
that:–
1. The setting up of Thermal and Hydro Power Plants are not viable in UT Chandigarh
due to site and environmental constraints.
2. Further, gas based power plant in UT Chandigarh is not feasible in view of the
following facts:–
(a) Setting up of gas based power plant requires land which is very difficult to be
allocated in the city like Chandigarh which is fast growing. It is worth to
mention here that land for already proposed new 220 kV Grid Station which is
urgently required, is yet to be allocated by the administration.
(b) To install, operate and maintain the gas based power plant, CED requires more
and skilled manpower, which is not available to CED at present. It is worth to
mention here that CED is already struggling with the problem of manpower
shortage in maintaining power distribution function alone.

43
(c) It may be very difficult in getting environmental and other necessary clearances
for such gas based power plant in UT Chandigarh. Further, on 19.3.2012, CEA
has advised power plant developers not to plan new gas based power plants as
no additional domestic gas is likely to be available till 2015-16. Moreover, as per
MoP GOI letter dated 13.9.2010, allocation of domestic gas for new power
projects would be considered to the extent of only 60 per cent of the total
requirement. Therefore, it is implied that for the balance volume, these gas based
plants have to depend on other sources including import, retail sources etc. Such
dependency shall ultimately increase the tariff burden on the consumers
(d) For setting up of SPV Solar Plant in UT Chandigarh, M/S CREST has been
designated as Nodal Agency who is installing Solar Plants on rooftops.
3.7.15 The Committee understands that UT of Chandigarh has no power generation of its
own and has to buy power from outside throughout the year. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that land required for proposed new 220 kV Grid Station may be allocated by
the Administration on priority basis without any procedural delay.
Lack of civic amenities in Southern Sectors
3.7.16 Southern sectors lack in civic amenities like roads, drainage systems, street lights, parks,
markets, bus shelters, primary health centres, post office, community centres etc.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.17 The Master Plan of Chandigarh has already been drafted and is available in public domain
for inviting suggestions from the public. The Master Plan has addressed issues of strengthening
civic amenities in Southern Sectors.
3.7.18 The Committee recommends that problems of civic amenities like roads, drainage
systems, street lights, parks, markets, bus shelters, primary health centres post office,
community centres etc. in southern sectors of the city should be addressed by the
administration to the extent possible now as these basic amenities cannot wait for
finalization of the Master Plan. However, all these amenities should be included in the
Master Plan.
Deteriorating condition of law and order
3.7.19 The increasing incidents of murders, rapes, kidnappings, robberies, burglaries, stabbings,
snatchings, thefts, violence, brawl and even repeated assaults on police personnel on duty has
caused a lot of insecurity and safety concerns among the common people. Such incidents raise a
question mark on the police and give an impression that the police is losing its hold on the anti-
social elements, habitual perpetrators and criminals. There is need to make the key posts of DSPs,
Inspectors as UT Cadre posts transferrable from one station to another to break their vested
interest and nexus due to long stay at Chandigarh.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.20 The law and order situation during the year remained well under control in UT, Chandigarh.
From 1.1.2013 to 31.8.2013, total number of 2878 events have taken place. Elaborate law and
order arrangements were maintained. All the events passed of peacefully and no untoward incident
took place. Similarly on crime front, heinous crime has taken place during the above period. With
regards to transfer of DSPs of Chandigarh Police to other UTs, the same is possible only after

44
amendment in DANIPS rules regarding amalgamation of DSP cadre of Chandigarh Police with
DANIPS. A specific provision in the amended DANIPS rule will be required to be made that after
coming into force of DANIPS Rules, the existing Punjab Police Service Rules, 1959 would not be
applicable to DSPs of UT Chandigarh. With regard to transferability of SI and Inspectors to other
UTs, at present the cadre controlling authority of these inspectors is the Police Department of the
respective UTs. In the UTs, different Police Acts and Rules are applicable and there would be legal
and practical difficulties in implementation of this suggestion.
3.7.21 The Committee desires that the UT Administration should make all out efforts to
make the city crime free. The Chandigarh Police should improve patrolling and intelligence
gathering mechanism.
Implementation of right to service Act
3.7.22 Right to Service Act should be implemented in the UT.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.23 The notification of Right to Service Act has been drafted in consultation with the Law
Department. However, potential services to be covered under the Right to Service Act, 2013 are
in the process of being finalized.
3.7.24 The Committee understands that Right to Service Act if implemented effectively and
efficiently it would fast track grievance redressal and check corruption. The Committee
recommends that the UT Administration should finalise soon services to be covered under
the Right to Service Act, 2013 and the Act be notified at the earliest.
Procedural Complexity
3.7.25 The Administration should simplify the procedures and remove impediments and complexity
and delete unwanted affidavits, paper work and unnecessary, formalities in the matter of transfer
of properties, sanction of building plans, registration of vehicles and other allied matters to avoid
delay and make it hassle and corruption free.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.26 To begin with the simplification of procedure for attestation of documents, applicants for
government jobs/admission in educational institutions are not required to submit attested copies.
Also, applicants for the jobs are allowed to self attest their photographs.
3.7.27 The Committee desires that the UT Government should simplify the departmental
procedures particularly in public service departments by putting effective and user friendly
systems in place. This will help the citizens get their work done without any hassle and will
also help the Government in its functioning. The UT Administration should remove the
procedural complexity which causes delay.
Shortage of Drinking Water
3.7.28 The non-cooperative attitude of adjoining States of Punjab and Haryana in not allowing
water from Bhakra Canal for augmentation of water supply scheme of the city from Kaujoliwater
works has further exaggerated the problem. River water is a Natural National Resource and the
Union Government should include the water in the concurrent list to help the Centre to have a
greater say in settling such interstate disputes.

45
Response of the Ministry
3.7.29 The quantity of drinking water available to the City residents is 87 MGD which is made
available through two main sources viz. (i) from 210 deep tube wells (underground water)=20
MGD; (ii) from Bhakra Canal located 28 km. from the city (Surface water brought to city through
4 pipelines)=58 MGD; (iii) Share of Panchkula and Chandimandir of Bhakra water presently being
used by Chandigarh city=9 MGD. As per real time data available with the Municipal Corporation
through its billing, it is observed that city residents are being supplied 252 ltrs. per capita per day
(lpcd) which is much above the national norm of 135 lpcd. As such, there is no shortage of
drinking water supply in the city. To maintain adequate pressure in all the areas, 70 water boosting
stations scattered all over the city have been constructed and are in operation. These boosting
stations maintain adequate pressure in otherwise low pressure areas. During the current summer
season, the consumer satisfaction regarding supply of drinking water was found to be much higher
than the previous years due to continuous monitoring/management/ checking of leakages by the
Public Health wing of MCC. During peak summer season, the demand of drinking water rises and
estimated shortfall is 29 MGD. In order to meet this peak demand, a project to bring 40 MGD
additional water from Bhakra Main line at Kajauli got approved under JNNURM but it could not
be executed due to non availability of consent of the States of Punjab and Haryana due to their
interstate issues. However, GMADA is laying a bigger dia pipeline of capacity 80 MGD for bringing
water from Bhakra Main Line at Kajauli to Mohali and satellite towns. Efforts are being made to
persue the States of Punjab and Haryana for releasing 40 MGD for Chandigarh which can be
brought to the city through this bigger dia pipeline. Chandigarh has implemented an ambitious
project under JNNURM to supply tertiary water to all the green belts, gardens and houses having
area more than 1 kanal. The tertiary water plant along with rising main and network of pipes
supplying tertiary water to all areas of the city has since been commissioned and is in operation.
All big institutions, golf club, golf course, green belts, gardens and neighbourhood parks have been
covered with tertiary treated water. The tariff rates for supply of tertiary treated water have been
kept low by the MCC in order to promote its usages in big way so as to conserve fresh water
which otherwise is being used for irrigation by big households. Regarding recharging of water
through rain water harvesting, work has been entrusted to Centre for Science and Environment,
New Delhi for preparing a pilot project for one sector of the city. After studying the results of
this project, it can be replicated to other parts of the city.
3.7.30 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this
matter at the highest level for getting water from Bhakra Canal for augmentation of
Kajouli water works. The UT administration should also promote water conservation through
rain water harvesting and ground water recharge etc. in the UT to tackle water woes and
ensure long-term sustainability of water sources for the city. A comprehensive water use
audit should also be done in all the houses, residential and commercial buildings. The
Citizens of the UT may be encouraged to conserve water through rainwater harvesting,
recycling and reusing water and reducing water wastage. Pilot project for rain water
harvesting may be implemented at the earliest.
Poor Solid Waste Management system
3.7.31 There is an urgent need to frame the Sanitation bye-laws and adopt appropriate policy to
regulate the disposal of solid waste.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.32 The Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh has already framed Chandigarh Municipal
Corporation (Sanitation and Public Health) Bye Laws, 1999. The Municipal Corporation Chandigarh

46
manages Solid Waste in 56 Sectors, 41 urban slums/colonies and 9 villages apart from erstwhile
N.A.C. Manimajra. Approximately 350 – 400 tonnes of Municipal Solid waste is generated per day
by the city i.e. Sectors/urban slums/colonies/villages. The residential garbage is being collected door
to door which after segregation is put in the garbage bins. The safaikaramcharies collect the
garbage and transfer it in the garbage bins. The Garbage is transported by deploying fast moving
dumper placers for 4.5 Cubic M Capacity containers. Tractor Trolleys, Refuse Collector
Compactors etc. are also pressed into service for transportation of garbage. To maintain the city
sanitation, 25 new Dumper placers and 200 new garbage bins have been procured in order to
provide aesthetic look of ‘City Beautiful’ and quick mobility of the Solid Waste from the city limits
for dumping. 200 Garbage bins have also been got repaired. The seasonal wastes i.e. dry leaves
etc. generated during the year are removed from the various Sectors/urban slums/colonies/villages
by deploying additional tractor trolleys with manpower so as to make the city free from the dry
leaves etc. The final disposal of the Municipal Solid Waste is done by processing the same through
Garbage Processing Plant which has been established on BOOT basis wherein the city garbage is
processed to form Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF). The Chandigarh Administration and the Municipal
Corporation took the initiative for commissioning of Garbage Processing Plant in the West of
Sector 25, Dadu Majra Chandigarh on BOOT (Built Own Operate and Transfer) basis to M/s Jai
Prakash Associates Ltd. wherein the plant management has set up the required machinery. All the
expenditure for setting up the Plant has been borne by the Project Developer. In view of the new
technology the same is being monitored for making the venture successful to produce Refuse
Derived Fuel to achieve the ultimate goal as to disposal and Processing of Municipal Solid Waste
as per the Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000. The Garbage Processing
Plant is processing approximately 250-300 MT Municipal Solid Waste everyday. The Management
of Garbage Processing Plant has also installed Hot Air Generator to process the wet garbage. The
monitoring of Garbage Processing Plant and Dumping Site is being looked after by the Engineering
Wing of Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh.
3.7.33 Reclamation of existing Dumping Site: The dumping site is spread in an area of 45 acres.
Out of this, 25 acres have been reclaimed scientifically as per the Municipal Solid Waste
(Management and handling) Rules, 2000. The landfill has been made in an approximate area of 8
acres and closing, covering and capping has been completed for approximately 17 acres with the
funds contributed by Central Pollution Control Board New Delhi, Chandigarh Administration and
Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh. The remaining 20 acres area is being used for dumping the
rejects/inerts from the Garbage Processing Plant and the waste coming from Sabzi Mandies,
ApniMandies, Big hotels, villages including villages under the Chandigarh Administration. The
dumped waste is leveled by using chain dozers. Effective Micro organism and micro nutrient
solution is sprayed three times a day over the waste to sanitize and make the garbage odourless.
A layer of malba/soil is spread over the waste using JCB, Tippers and chain dozers. The Dumping
Ground is properly fenced and buffer zone has been created around the Dumping Ground.
3.7.34 Installation of Bio Gas Plants: The Municipal Corporation (Engineering Wing) Chandigarh is
considering to install two Bio Gas Plants to Process the Hotel Waste, Vegetable Waste, mixed Waste
i.e. Horticulture and mixed garbage etc.
3.7.35 W ith the strenuous efforts made by the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh to keep the City
Clean, Chandigarh has been adjudged as First by Ministry of Urban Development, on the basis of
National Rating Survey Data on City Sanitation in the recent past.
3.7.36 The Committee appreciates the solid waste management mechanism functional in
the UT. The Committee understands that solid waste management will be a key challenge
for any rapidly growing city. The Committee understands that for a viable solid waste
service delivery, the UT Administration should explore cost-effective environmental friendly

47
options to conserve natural resources and preserve landfill space, seek continuous
improvements to reduce the cost of operations, evolve strategic partnerships with public,
private and civil society groups in the UT.
Affordable Housing Scheme
3.7.37 The CHB should plan the housing scheme for the economically weaker sections, low and
middle income group people at affordable cost as the price of property has gone sky high in the
city.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.38 The primary objective of the Chandigarh Housing Board (CHB) is to provide good quality
housing for the persons residing in the Union Territory of Chandigarh. Over the time, the Board
has maintained a reputation for providing well-designed houses with good quality of construction
at affordable prices. The land for construction of houses/flats is allotted to the Board by the
Chandigarh Administration at a fixed/notified price from time to time. Accordingly, housing schemes
are floated by the Board and applications are invited from the general public including various
reserved categories. After scrutiny of applications, draw of lots is held for registration of allottees
and allocation of floors. For allotting the House Numbers before possession, another draw is held
by the Board.
3.7.39 Since inception in 1976, the CHB has constructed 60337 dwelling units of different
categories as detailed below:–
EWS Low Income Under Dr. Ambedkar Middle Income High Income Total
Group Awas Yojna Group Group
(LIG) (LIG) (MIG) (HIG)
34228 8511 1326 10675 5597 60337
3.7.40 Perusal of the above reveals that Chandigarh Administration has already achieved the
Pro-poor approach. Presently, CHB is constructing 564 LIG dwelling units having a covered area
of 684 sq.ft. at a cost of R17.15 lakh per unit and 320 EWS dwelling units having a covered area
of 340 sq.ft. at a cost of R5.66 lakh per unit in Sector 63 under General Housing Scheme, which
are affordable.
3.7.41 The Committee understands that the mandate of Chandigarh Housing Board (CHB)
is to build affordable, reasonably priced dwelling units for different socio-economic
categories of the city’s residents and it has also been entrusted the work of implementing
the administration’s schemes for rehabilitating the residents of unauthorized settlements.
The Committee hopes that the CHB would work in this direction in future.
Allotment of flats to unsuccessful employees
3.7.42 Allotment of flats to unsuccessful 3882 employees in draw of lots held on 4
th November, 2010.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.43 Chandigarh Administration on 1.12.2005 communicated to CHB to introduce a Housing
Scheme for UT Government employees on 28 acres of land in Sector 52 and 17.5 acre in
Sector 56. The proposal for Self Financing Housing Scheme-2008 on Lease Hold Basis for 99
years for Employees of Chandigarh Administration was approved on 28.12.2007. For the said

48
Scheme, CHB had received 7812 applications and 3930 were declared successful by draw of
lots held on 4.11.2010 and 3882 were declared unsuccessful. The Chandigarh Administration
is in the process of identifying and allotment of land to CHB after sorting out the issue of land
rate to be charged. Regarding allotment of Flats to unsuccessful applicants of above referred
Housing Scheme, CHB can take up the Housing Scheme, once the land is arranged and allotted
to CHB for the same.
3.7.44 The Committee recommends that the issue of allotment of flats to the employees
may be resolved soon. If need be, they may be accommodated in any proposed scheme on
priority basis.
Slums in the city
3.7.45 There are various Slums in the city where people residing have pathetic living conditions.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.46 Chandigarh Administration is aggressively pursuing the scheme for slum rehabilitation
through its agency, Chandigarh Housing Board. About 25000 dwelling units are proposed to be
constructed under the scheme. Recently, more than 8000 units were allotted to dwellers. The new
dwelling units are equipped with basic amenities like health, education, sanitation etc.
3.7.47 The Committee understands that the focus of Chandigarh Housing Board should be
making Chandigarh a slum free city. Considering the gravity of the problem of housing for
poor in Chandigarh, it should take responsibility for providing affordable housing to the
urban poor. The Committee hopes that through providing affordable housing to slum
dwellers the Chandigarh city would attain the distinction of being the first slum-free city
in the country.
Flooding
3.7.48 There was also a complaint about flooding of roads and low lying areas.
Response of the Ministry
3.7.49 The roads under the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh never get
flooded during rains, due to reasons that there is well planned storm water drainage provided
along the roads. Moreover, adequate longitudinal slopes have also been provided in all the
roads, as such there is no flooding of water. In regard to low lying areas, these sites have
been identified and designated as Malba dumping sites. With the passage of time some of these
sites have been filled up and others are in the process, which will be developed later on with
good landscaping works.
3.7.50 The Committee came to know that some areas of the city experience floods during
heavy rains due to improper and inadequate drainage system. The UT Administration and
Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh should ensure checking of dumping of debris and
garbage into the open drainage, illegal encroachment of natural water courses etc. so that
the problem of flood could be solved. The proposed draft Master Plan 2031 should also
address this issue.
Drying up of Sukhnalake
3.7.51 There is likelihood of drying up of the Sukhnalake.

49
Response of the Ministry
3.7.52 Sukhna Lake is an artificial rain fed lake created in 1958. It has been observed that
whenever there is deficient rainfall in two successive years, the Sukhna Lake gets dried up for
about 1-2 months in the peak of summer months. This has happened 2-3 times in last 10 years.
However, the lake receives water as soon as monsoon arrives. There is no likelihood of Sukhna
Lake drying up permanently.
3.7.53 The Committee understands that Chandigarh is known for its famous Sukhna Lake
which is the most-visited tourist place in the area. With the lake not getting enough water
due to poor monsoon, it turns into a dried bed. As it is completely a rainfed lake
occasionally drying up due to periodic occurrence of deficit rainfall. The Committee
recommends that a think tank should be involved in this matter. Besides, There should be
a permanent body for its conservation and monitoring and its members should be drawn
from experts from the field of hydrology, soil, ecology, wildlife etc. A long term plan may
be prepared for conserving the lake.
3.8 ISSUES CONCERNING ELECTRICITY DEPARTMENT
Privatization
3.8.1 It was demanded that the contemplated move to privatize/corporatize the Electricity
Department should be stopped as the move is against the interest of general public as well as
employees. Ever since the reorganization of the States and creation of Chandigarh in November,
1966, this Department has been functioning quite efficiently and is profit making, except last 2
years due to inefficiency of the controlling officers, even though the rates are less than that are
being charged in Punjab and Haryana. Electricity, being one of the most basic necessities for
growth of economy, had been kept in the hands of the government, either as a department or as
a state controlled public sector undertaking.
Response of the Ministry
3.8.2 Chandigarh Electricity Department (CED) is implementing the provisions of Electricity
Act, 2003 passed by the Parliament and the National Electricity Policy, 2005. In the Electricity
Act, 2003, reorganization of the board is provided under part-13 of the Act. Further, following
provisions have been provided under Para 5.4.3 of the Electricity Policy, 2005:
“5.4.3: For achieving efficiency gains proper restructuring of distribution utilities is
essential. Adequate transition financing support would also be necessary for these utilities.
Such support should be arranged linked to attainment of predetermined efficiency
improvements and reduction in cash losses and putting in place appropriate governance
structure for insulating the service providers from extraneous interference while at the same
time ensuring transparency and accountability. For ensuring financial viability and
sustainability, State Governments would need to restructure the liabilities of the State
Electricity Boards to ensure that the successor companies are not burdened with past
liabilities. The Central Government would also assist the States, which develop a clear road
map for turn around, in arranging transition financing from various sources which shall be
linked to predetermined improvements and efficiency gains aimed at attaining financial
viability and also putting in place appropriate governance structures.”
3.8.3 Therefore, Chandigarh Electricity Department is only implementing the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003/National Electricity Policy.

50
3.8.4 The Committee is of the view that while implementing the provisions of Electricity
Act, 2003 efforts should be made to protect the interests of the public and employees.
Inadequacy of Staff
3.8.5 The U.T. Powermen Union drew attention to the inadequacy of staff and equipments. The posts
that fell vacant have not been filled up and sanctioned posts to meet the increasing workload have
remained unfilled and even S.I.U. report has also not been implemented as the Central Government has
placed an embargo without any reasonable ‘justification’. These result in delay in extending services to
the public, giving rise to avoidable complaints. Administration was requested to consider these
shortcomings objectively to equip the Department to enable it to meet the demands of service of the
consumers as well as implementation of JERC decision i.e. standard of performance.
Response of the Ministry
3.8.6 The Electricity Department is regulated by the Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission.
Though CED requested to allow filling up of vacant posts but the JERC is not allowing filling up
of the vacant posts. Last year also, JERC has allowed filling up of 209  vacant posts for the
financial year 2012-13. A review petition was filed on this account which was also rejected by
the JERC. Again, the Department requested to allow to fill up 129 posts for the financial year
2013-14 but the JERC did not approve the same. Following orders have been passed in the tariff
order dated 15.04.2013 by the JERC for the financial year 2013-14 :
“---it is stated that considering an All India average number of employee per thousand
consumers is 0.405 ( i.e.  one employee per 2500 number of consumers). It can be
construed that the Electricity Department of Chandigarh is not understaffed. Hence, the
Commission does not consider and does not approve the manpower recruitment of nearly
129 employees for FY 2013-14. However, a few IT, Commercial and Accounts Officers
may be considered for recruitments in equal number as employees to fill the vacancies
created due to superannuation of employees and who will continue to provide the service
in line with the Standard of Performance of Distribution Code Regulations.”
3.8.7 The Committee desires that the issue of inadequacy of staff and equipments in the
Electricity Department may be resolved at the earliest.
3.9 ISSUES CONCERNING CHANDIGARH TRANSPORT UNDERTAKING
Vacant Posts
3.9.1 Posts of all the categories i.e. Drivers, Conductors, Workshops, Management Staff and
Class-IV staff are lying vacant in Chandigarh Transport Undertaking and no action towards the
requirement has been done so far.
Response of the Ministry
3.9.2 UT Administration has already conducted written test for the post of Drivers and declared
the result. However, the same has been challenged in the CAT in the Chandigarh. An advertisement
has been given for the recruitment of Conductors and the exam is likely to be held by the end
of October. As regards the recruitment of workshop staff, management staff, and Class-IV staff,
the cases are under active consideration of UT Administration.
3.9.3 The Committee recommends that UT Administration should conduct examination for
the recruitment of Conductors at the earliest. Besides, recruitment notification for vacant

51
posts of workshop staff, management staff, and Class-IV staff should also be advertised
soon and filled up at the earliest.
Purchase of new buses
3.9.4 The Management of the Chandigarh Transport Undertaking has not taken any initiative to
purchase new buses against the quota of replacement of buses despite the fact that the provision
of budget under the head of accounts has been granted.
Response of the Ministry
3.9.5 The matter regarding purchase of buses is under process by the UT Administration. The
tender has been floated.
3.9.6 The Committee is of the view that the UT Administration should complete the
process for procuring new buses without any procedural delay. The Committee believes that
non-availability of buses against sanctioned fleet will add woes to commuters.
Discrepancy in pay fixation
3.9.7 The workers have intimated that they have discrepancy in their pay fixation due to which
many junior staff in each cadre are getting higher pay as compared to their seniors.
Response of the Ministry
3.9.8 The pay fixation cases of the employees are being looked into by the UT Administration and
the anomalies are being removed as per rules.
3.9.9 The Committee recommends that the UT Administration should resolve the issue of
pay fixation of the employees as per rules at the earliest. The Committee would like to be
apprised of action taken in this regard.

52
52
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMETTEE — AT A GLANCE
●●●●● The Ministry of External Affairs should consider for opening of a Passport Seva
Kendra either at Silvassa or Daman to cater to the needs of people of both the
UTs.
●●●●● The construction of ring road in Silvassa Town area is necessary as there has
been fast increase in population growth in recent period. The Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways should accord early clearance for proposed construction
of Ring Road. Besides, the UT Administration should also make endeavour to
improve existing road network as well as construction of new roads for
improving connectivity which will help fast flow of goods and services.
●●●●● The Committee is of the view that UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli in tandem with
Government of India should address the issue of water supply on priority basis.
This integrated water management plan with a cost of R255 crore should be
implemented as soon as possible as it would help solve the problem of drinking
water throughout the UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The Committee is of the
considered view that the Standing Finance Committee clearance for Integrated
Water Management Plan pending with Department of Drinking Water, Ministry
of Rural Development of Government of India should be prioritized.
●●●●● The Ministry of Power should give clearance for 220 KV Electric Sub Station at
Waghchhipa. The Committee also recommends that allocation of Power which
has been reduced by the Ministry of Power should be restored as the present
allocation is not adequate for the full requirement of the industries.
(Para 1.2.4)
The Committee desires that the construction of new circuit house building at Silvassa
will be completed soon without time and cost overrun. (Para 1.3.3)
The Committee recommends that Daman Ganga River Front Development Project on
river Daman Ganga at Silvassa may be completed as per schedule. The Committee also
recommends that the UT Administration should make all out efforts to project Daman
Ganga River Front as an important tourist destination and give due publicity to it so that
tourist flow to the UT could increase. (Para 1.3.5)
The Committee recommends that a comprehensive study should be done to address
the issue of drinking water for the population as well as for industrial units. The
Committee recommends that the UT Administration should expedite completion of long term
plans like Integrated Water Management Plan, Urban Water Augmentation Plan and water
harvesting structures, the piped water supply schemes in interior area of Mandoni and
Dudhani without any procedural delays. (Para 1.3.9)
The Committee was impressed with the modern medical facilities available in
Vinoba Bhave Civil Hospital using new technologies. However, the Committee recommends
that the existing infrastructure in the said hospital should be upgraded for treatment of
chronic diseases. Sufficient fund may be provided for this purpose. The Committee

53
recommends that the administration should further improve health infrastructure in the
UT of Dadar and Nagar Haveli so that people residing in the UT could avail best health
facilities. (Para 1.3.12)
The Committee understands that Dairy Development is an important source to
enhance the level of income of small/marginal farmers and landless agricultural labourers
on a sustainable basis besides increasing milk supplies in the areas by increasing milk
production. The Committee recommends that Village Dairy Cooperatives should be opened
in every village of the UT which would help not only improve self sufficiency to the village
families but also enhance milk production and improve soil fertility and crop yields from
the manure obtained from animals. The Committee desires that more and more women
should be involved in the scheme as it would lead to their economic empowerment as well
as their participation in economic process. (Para 1.3.13)
The Committee notes the progress in the construction of 100 bedded Sub-District
Hospital to cater to the needs of people of Khanvel. The Committee desires that the
construction should be completed within stipulated time. (Para 1.3.17)
The Committee understands that Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) can play an
important role in the socio-economic development of rural people. The vast majority of our
country’s poorest people live in villages and these villages are in a state of neglect and
underdevelopment. The problems of hunger, ignorance, ill health, high mortality and
illiteracy are most acute in rural areas. In this context, the business houses can supplement
the efforts of Governments. (Para 1.3.21)
The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the UT Administration in
involving the industries through the Corporate Social Responsibility of adopting the
villages cautions that corporate should not be allowed to tamper with local culture, way
of life, etc. The Committee during the visit to the village noticed that most of the
villagers are accustomed to their way of life and in particular design of their houses which
is proposed to be changed. The UT Administration should remain vigilant to check if CSR
initiatives are according to local needs and sensitivity. The Corporate houses involved in
development should also respect local sensitivity in terms of their culture, way of life etc.
(Para 1.3.22)
The Committee takes note of the submission of the UT Administration that they
have requested the Ministry for further extension of tax benefits. The Committee
understands that due to the exemption of V AT, many big industries have set up plants in
this Union Territory leading to development in the Union Territory. The Committee
recommends that the proposal made by the UT Administration may be approved so that
industrial development may continue to grow in the UT. (Para 1.4.7)
The Committee is aware of the fact that despite India being an attractive investment
destination, entire exercise of the procedure and legal formalities make it tedious and
confusing. The Committee is of the view that long legal formalities and procedural delays
make frustrating impact on the investors. The Committee recommends that UT
administration should introduce single window composite application form for all the
procedural clearances such as acquiring land, granting of construction permission, pollution
control procedures, issuing occupancy certificates, power allocation, environment and forest
clearances and other licences/registrations which would make this region investment
friendly and boost industrial growth in the UT. The Committee also recommends that
suggestions/views of representatives of industry and trade associations should also be taken
into account while framing policies and laws pertaining to industries as they are the people

54
who know what are the bottlenecks coming in their way. The Committee also recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should positively consider the demands of representatives
of trade and industry as subsidies given would provide stimuli for further industrialization.
(Para 1.4.9)
The Committee appreciates that the 50 MW power, reduced earlier has been
restored. The Committee also recommends that the 25 MW with drawn may also be
restored. (Para 1.4.10)
The Committee notes that the MHA has taken up the issue with Ministry of
Environment and Forest for sparing 100 mtrs. as a sensitive zone. The Committee is of the
opinion that this territory is very small and for the development of this territory it will be
virtually impossible to have industries or any other development activities in view of having
eco-sensitive zones of 10 kms around. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should remind the Ministry of Environment and Forest for early clearance
of the issue. Otherwise this policy will lead to driving out the industries and developmental
works of the UT will come to a stall. (Para 1.4.14)
The Committee recommends that the UT Administration should grant Licences as per
Rules and Regulations and there should not be any discrimination in the process. An early
decision may be taken in the matter. (Para 1.4.17)
The Committee takes note of the concerns of the villagers of Naroli village and
recommends that the UT Administration in tandem with Ministry of Home Affairs should
look into the matter. The Authorities involved should adopt a balancing approach and try
their best to minimize negative impart. The issues relating to displacement and
compensation may be looked into. (Para 1.5.3)
The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that The UT Administration
while sanctioning posts, the interests of the Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
Administration Services should be kept in view. (Para 1.5.6)
The Committee takes note of the submission made by the UT Administration. The
Committee notes that for the last five years the allocation to the district panchayat of UT
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli is on the increase and hopes that this trend will continue in
future. The Committee hopes that increase will help financing of the important projects of
district panchayat. (Para 1.5.9)
The Sub-Committee notes the reply that besides creation of posts, the matter of
filing up of vacancies is also simultaneously under examination. The Committee
recommends that the matter of filling up of vacant post should be decided on priority and
filled up at the earliest. The matter of creation of posts also needs to be expedited. An early
decision may be taken in the matter. (Para 1.5.12)
The Committee recommends that the procedural bottlenecks should be cleared soon
for expediting of opening medical College in Silvassa. The Committee desires that the
medical college should start working from the next academic session. (Para 1.5.14)
The Committee is of the view that just as the Lt. Governor is the head of a UT, in
the same way the Administrator is also the Head of a UT. The Committee recommends that
the financial powers of the Administrator should be enhanced appropriately so that various
important decisions could be taken at the Administrator level. In view of the Committee
this will result in fast approval and implementation of all major projects for the UTs and
avoid cost escalation due to time overruns. (Para 1.5.16)

55
The Committee notes with appreciation that T&D power loss in Daman and Diu UT
is among the lowest in the country and tariffs are among the lowest in the western region
with all villages electrified. The Committee also notes that 93% electricity consumption is
in industry sector. The Committee was also given to understand that 37 km. underground
cabling has been completed. Besides, setting up of different electricity sub stations, 4 MW
solar plants (3MW in Diu and 1 MW in Daman) are proposed to be set up. The Committee
recommends that need of the industries for power should be met so as to maintain the
tempo of economic development. Project of clean energy in the field of solar  energy should
be completed without time and cost overruns. Other sources of clean energy like wind
energy should also be explored. (Para 2.3.5)
The Committee while noting the reply of the UT Administration feels that the rate
of electricity charges should be decided in a very balanced manner so that while on one
hand it should not cause disincentive for industries in view of the special position of the
UT where various measures such as tax benefits, etc. are given to industries for setting up
their units in the UT, on the other hand, it should not make the power supplying entity a
loss making one. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should
look into the matter very cautiously. (Para 2.3.8)
The Committee notes that the UT Administration is striving to enhance the
connectivity of various parts/areas of Daman and its adjoining areas by constructing new
bridges. The Committee desires that proposed bridges should be constructed without time
and cost overrun. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs in
tandem with UT Administration of Daman and Diu should impress upon Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways according early administrative approval and expenditure sanction
for the bridges. (Para 2.3.12)
The Committee notes that the UT Administration is making efforts to further
strengthen coastal policing in the UT. After the Mumbai terror attack, coastal security has
emerged as one of the important areas of internal security. The Committee recommends
that the UT Government should complete construction of the proposed coastal police station
and police jetty in a time bound manner. (Para 2.3.14)
The Committee notes that funds under plan allocation to this UT had been quite
low in reference to demand of the UT. The Committee recommends that Gov ernment of
India should increase plan funds to enable the UT to take up important proposed projects
and most importantly, the allocation for major sectors such as Roads and Bridges,
Education, Health, Water Supply and Irrigation etc should be increased. The Committee
is of the opinion that since the UT is contributing immensely in the Government of India
coffer, the Government of India should enhance allocation taking into account its revenue
contribution. (Para 2.4.3)
The Committee finds merit in the popular demand for creation of an assembly for
both the UTs and desires that the Government of India may look into this issue on the lines
of Puducherry. (Para 2.4.5)
The Committee is of the opinion that demand for creation of a separate bench of
Mumbai High Court for the UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli may be
examined. (Para 2.4.7)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may consider the
demand for a national stadium in the UT. (Para 2.4.10)

56
The Committee is not convinced with the logic put forward by the Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways. The Committee feels that going beyond the target by few
steps for welfare purpose is not a bad thing. The matter of declaring certain stretches
of roads running in few kilometers in an industrial area is minor one but involves good
stake for industrial and economic activities. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs in tandem with UT Administration of
Daman and Diu should impress upon Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to
reconsider the matter. (Para 2.4.12)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the
matter with the Ministry of Railways as the UT of Daman and Diu has no railway
connectivity and the proposed rail link may help in decongestion of heavy road traffic
leading to Mumbai. (Para 2.4.14)
The Committee notes that ceiling of Diesel quota has been raised from 24,000 liters
to 28,000 litres. The Committee is of the opinion that fishing community is largely a
disadvantaged community whose livelihood depends upon fishing and enhanced diesel quota
will help them economically. The Committee also notes that the UT Administration is
implementing a new plan scheme namely “Replacement of kerosene driven OBM engine by
LPG driven OBM engine (8-10 HP) of small fishing traditional boat owners of Daman and
Diu”. The Committee hopes that this scheme will go a long way in terms of conserving
coastal ecological environment as well as livelihood of fishermen. Assistance may be given
for replacement of the kerosene engine by the LPG engine. (Para 2.4.16)
The Committee understands that the matter now stands referred to the Ministry of
Home Affairs and the Ministry of Home Affairs should examine the demand of exempting
V AT on Petrol and Diesel in the larger public interest of UT. (Para 2.4.18)
The Committee notes that the UT Administration has included the project of Ferry
Boat Service from Daman to Diu in the Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee recommends
that feasibility study of the said project may be completed at the earliest. If the study finds
it feasible, the project may be implemented at the earliest. (Para 2.4.20)
The Committee notes that though a mechanism is functional to carry out regular
monitoring of the effluents released by the industries, but the Committee gets a feeling that
much more needs to be done to contain water pollution in the UT, specially the Damanganga
river, which is the lifeline of the area. The Sub-Committee desir es that the proposal of laying
pipeline for discharging of effluents into deep sea should be examined carefully in the larger
interest of the environment. Early action may be taken in this regard. (Para 2.4.23)
The Committee recommends that all vacant posts in Police Department of the UT of
Daman and Diu should be filled up at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that
the Ministry of Home Affairs should impress upon Department of Expenditure for
sanctioning additional strength of 306 personnel of different rank under Coastal Security
Scheme Phase II for the UT. (Para 2.4.26)
The Committee recommends that the vacant posts of the UT Administration should
be filled up at the earliest and for others categories of posts UPSC and other agencies
should be requested to fast track the filling up of the vacancies. (Para 2.4.28)
The Committee feels that the Ministry of External Affairs should positively consider
the demand of the people of both the UTs of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu and
expedite the feasibility study for opening of a Passport Seva Kendras either at Silvassa or
Daman to cater to the needs of people of both the UTs. (Para 2.4.30)

57
The Committee recommends that the repairing of irrigation canal in Moti Daman
area should be completed in a time bound manner. The Committee also recommends that
the repair work of irrigation canal in Nani Daman area should also take off at the earliest.
(Para 2.4.32)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take it up
with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory
Board regarding gas pipeline connection as it will help industrial development in the UT.
(Para 2.4.34)
The Committee recommends that the issue of regularization of daily wage persons
working in the UT should be sympathetically addressed while filling up permanent vacancies.
The Committee feels that the youths, who are engaged in the jobs for years together in the
Government sector as daily wage workers/casual workers in the prime time of their life,
feel cheated when the matter of regularization of their job crops up. By that time, neither
they are regularized nor are they taken in private sector as other more young aspirants are
eyeing jobs in private sector. In view of the Committee this is a peculiar and embarrassing
paradox faced by a daily wage worker after spending a substantial part of his life in job.
The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the issue of regularization of daily
wage persons working in the UT must be sympathetically considered with humanitarian
approach while filling up permanent vacancies. While they are daily wage workers, they
should be given the minimum daily wages as approved. (Para 2.4.36)
The Committee taking serious note of token reply of the UT Administration,
recommends that these issues should be taken up at appropriate level for redressal at the
earliest. (Para 2.4.38)
The Committee understands that everyone has right to an adequate standard of
living, including adequate housing which is even recognized by International Human Rights
Law. In our country, Lakhs of people live in overcrowded slums and informal settlements
and the main objective of providing permanent dwellings with all basic facilities to slum
dwellers is to alleviate them from their poor living standards. (Para 3.2.3)
Appreciating the initiatives undertaken by the Chandigarh Administration to
rehabilitate slum dwellers while implementing JNNURM scheme, the Committee
recommends that the UT of Chandigarh should complete construction of all flats under its
Small Flat Scheme without time and cost overruns and rehabilitate all 23841 beneficiary
families. The Committee also recommends that the shelved project of construction of 3648
Small Flats at Maloya-II and construction of 448 Small Flats at Mauli Jagran-I, which is yet
to be started for want of funds, should be started with sufficient fund allocation.
(Para 3.2.4)
The Committee understands that in this electronic age, integrated e-teaching and
learning methodologies in our schools have become imperative and through establishing
smart schools, UT Government can fulfill goals of bridging digital divide and empowering the
future generation of the country. The Committee appreciates the modernization process of
schooling system with emphasis on interactive boards, multimedia and maximum use of
e-contents. The Committee hopes that these smart schools will go a long way in terms of
achieving excellence in academics, co-curricular area and the educational management. The
Committee recommends that more and more schools with such facilities should be set up
in the UT and existing schools should be converted into smart ones. This project should also
be implemented in other UTs and States should also be advised to embrace technology in
class rooms by setting up of smart schools. (Para 3.2.7)

58
The Committee understands that e-governance is two-way communication process
where benefits/services are delivered to people without procedural delays. In any citizen-
centric democratic system, cutting down on unwanted processes of too many layers while
delivering governmental services helps fast and targeted delivery while checking leakage.
The Committee recommends that the UT Administration should open up more e-sampark
centres in the city and bring more Departments and services under its ambit.
(Para 3.2.10)
The Committee hopes that world class integrated infrastructure for the setting up of
facilities/campuses by leading Technology Companies and other IT/ITES/BPO companies for
the first time in this region will help increasing employment generation for IT professionals
as well as development of information technology infrastructure in the UT. The Committee
recommends that acquisition of another 272 acres of land for further expansion should be
completed and allotments made. The Committee would however like to suggest that
development of infrastructure like roads, sewerage, drainage, connectivity etc. should also
be done with the development of housing and office space and every step and caution should
be taken to see that Chandigarh is not converted into a smoke emitting concrete jungle.
(Para 3.2.16)
The Committee is pleased to note that the Entrepreneur Development Centre has
been built. The Committee hopes that this Centre will help enhance export of the software
products from the UT and assist young professionals in setting up their entrepreneurship.
The Committee is of the view that EDC should help budding skilled entrepreneurs in setting
up export oriented units in the EDC. (Para 3.2.21)
The Committee understands that this hospital is visited by a large number of people
from other neighbouring States daily and is always overcrowded and there is need of its
expansion. The Committee recommends that the UT Administration in tandem with Ministry
of Home Affairs will make available required funds for further expansion and modernization
of this Medical College and Hospital so that it would cater to the needs of more and more
people. (Para 3.3.3)
The Committee recommends that increasing financial power of Finance and Contract
Committee of Chandigarh Municipal Corporation which is headed by Mayor upto one crore
rupees should be considered as keeping in view the municipal area of Chandigarh, 35 lakh
is meager amount. (Para 3.4.8)
The Committee also recommends that strengthening of manpower and infrastructure
of MCC is the handicap in its efficient discharge of mandate. Strengthening of MCC in
terms of using Information Technology is also required. The Committee therefore
recommends that the UT Administration should take all corrective actions proactively to
remove hurdles in the way of MCC. Besides, there should be maximum use of information
technology in the offices of Municipal body so that residents could get their work done
hassle free. (Para 3.4.9)
After going through details of budgetary provisions and expenditure during the last
five years of Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh, the Committee disapprovingly notes that
the Municipal Corporation has not been able to spend the allocated amount in any financial
year. The Committee views that the demand of the UT Administration for more money to
MCC as the allocated budgetary provision is insufficient for carrying out the development
projects is misplaced. The Committee recommends that the MCC should strive to increase
its fund absorption capacity for carrying out the development projects in the municipal area
of the UT with alacrity. (Para 3.4.10)

59
The Committee understands that in MSMED Act, the word ‘industry’ has expressly
been replaced by ‘enterprises’, due to which services along with manufacturing are allowed.
The UT administration should implement the said Act in letter and spirit. Early action may
be taken to drop the notices. (Para 3.5.4)
The Committee notes that the draft Industrial Policy is under process and is likely
to be notified. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) should
impress upon the UT Administration for redrafting new industrial policy of UT in consonance
with the MSMED Act, 2006 which the Centre had formulated for the overall industrial
growth and accommodate the grievances of local industrialists. The UT Administration
should also invite objections/suggestions from stakeholders of the industry before finalising
the policy. (Para 3.5.8)
The Committee understands that promotion of pollution free, energy-efficient,
hi-tech, low-volume and high value-added industries is needed for the UT. However, interests
of other less polluting manufacturing industries in small and micro segment also needed to
be protected. The Committee desires that the Ministry should look into the matter.
(Para 3.5.9)
The Committee understands that the revised rates carry the sanctity of law as on
date to serve as a deterrent to unauthorized conversion of activities. The Committee
recommends that the UT Administration should undertake downward revision of the charges
on priority basis and notify the same at the earliest. (Para 3.5.12)
The Committee desires that demand for conversion of Industrial plots from lease
hold land tenure to free hold tenure may be considered appropriately. (Para 3.5.15)
The Committee recommends that Excise and Taxation Department of the Chandigarh
Administration should complete its ongoing computerization work at the earliest to facilitate
all transactions online. The Committee desires that the same should be implemented in all
the Departments of UT particularly in service based Departments so that people could get
their work done hassle free and with transparency and eradicating the role of middlemen
and corruption could be eradicated. (Para 3.5.18)
The Committee while taking note of the reply of the UT Administration,
recommends that the Single Window Committee should be functional in the UT at the
earliest and it should further be strengthened by including all the Departments with a
separate grievance redressal mechanism to address the problems/grievances of the people
at large. (Para 3.5.21)
The Committee agrees that the city of Chandigarh should be connected with all
major cities of the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should take up the issue with the Ministry of Civil Aviation forrunning more flights and
rescheduling of existing flights for Chandigarh as it would help fast movement of goods/
services/people. (Para 3.5.24)
The Committee feels that the Chandigarh should be connected with major cities of
the country by trains. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should take up the issue of more trains for Chandigarh as it would help fast movement of
goods/services/people with the Ministry of Railways. Other issues may also be taken up.
(Para 3.5.27)
The Committee views that industrial areas of the city deserve proper attention. The
Committee recommends that the status of roads, garbage disposal, sanitation, drainage etc.
should be checked time to time, particularly after monsoon. The Committee also

60
recommends that the Master Plan of the City should be reviewed from time to time so that
necessary changes could be made according to changing needs of the citizenry. The
Committee recommends that while preparing Draft Master Plan 2031, RWAs and other
citizen based groups should be involved at every level. (Para 3.5.30)
The Committee understands the need of covering the open spaces with corrugated
sheets to prevent losses due to unseen reasons. The Committee recommends that The
Master Plan Committee should pay attention to this issue and address the grievance of the
industries appropriately. (Para 3.5.34)
The Committee is not convinced with the stand taken by the UT Administration. The
Committee understands that there are many industrial areas in and around Delhi, where
one can find automobile service stations already functional. The Committee feels that
vehicles of the city need to be serviced or repaired in the city itself. The Committee
therefore recommends that the UT Administration should reconsider its decision and allow
the automobile service stations in the industrial area. (Para 3.5.37)
The Committee feels that the core issue is legal provisions involved and terms and
conditions prescribed while making allotment of the plots rather than the feasibility felt by
the UT Administration. If the warehousing units are complying with the fire and safety
norms, then there should not be any problem in allowing them to function. The suggestion
may be re-considered. (Para 3.5.40)
The Committee desires that early decision on allowing ITES and IT activities in
industrial area may be taken and the Committee may be apprised of the decision taken in
this regard. (Para 3.5.43)
The UT of Chandigarh Administration should involve citizens groups, public
representatives in all major decision making processes so that grievances and problems of
people could come to the fore and hence their redressal. (Para 3.5.46)
The Committee desires that the issue may be solved by the UT Administration at the
earliest by holding discussion with them. (Para 3.5.49)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that there should be some mechanism for
disposing of the pending Sale Tax Assessment Cases prior to implementations of V AT. The
Ministry of Home Affairs may take up this issue with the Finance Ministry. (Para 3.5.52)
The Committee desires that the UT Administration should sympathetically consider
the plight of residents of the tenement colonies who over the last decades bought their
houses on power of attorney and give them ownership rights. The Ministry of Home Affairs
should consider this and take an early decision. (Para 3.6.4)
The Committee understands that small additions made on small unused patches of
land by one-room owners to accommodate their growing families is not sanctioned by law.
However, the Committee recommends that the UT Administration should look into this issue
and take an early decision. (Para 3.6.7)
On the issue of delinking of the inspection for building violations from the process
of transfer of ownership by Chandigarh Housing Board Residents Federation, the Committee
is of the opinion that the issue has merit and the UT Administration should reconsider its
decision in this regard. (Para 3.6.11)
The Committee notes that the UT Administration is considering a onetime relaxation
for transfer on GPA basis to the transactions within the lock-in period of five years. The
Committee desires that early decision may be taken in the matter. (Para 3.6.17)

61
The Committee notes the submission of the administration that the rates are under
consideration of UT Administration. The Committee recommends that the UT administration
should increase/fix rate by taking into account the problems of the people. The Committee
is of the view that market rate of land should not be applied for permitted extra coverage
in Residential Houses . (Para 3.6.20)
The Committee observes that the recent years have witnessed a keen interest of
people in participation in decision making process of Governments. The Committee is of the
view that the UT Government should involve NGOs, Civil Society Groups, citizen groups in
shaping decisions and deliberating over policies that affect their lives and also put draft
policies for public scrutiny. Involving citizens in the decision making process will lead to
transparency and good governance. (Para 3.7.3)
The Committee is of the view that UT Administration should endeavour to preserve
the original character of the city. The Committee recommends that proposed Master Plan
of Chandigarh should incorporate this concern of the citizenry. (Para 3.7.6)
The Committee recommends that Chandigarh Administration should expedite the
completion of the study for improvement of traffic and transportation and consider the
same while finalizing the proposed Master Plan. (Para 3.7.9)
The Committee recommends that the UT Government should take early decision for
setting up of a 500 bedded General Hospital in the southern sector as proposed by the
Health Department without any delay. (Para 3.7.12)
The Committee understands that UT of Chandigarh has no power generation of its
own and has to buy power from outside throughout the year. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that land required for proposed new 220 kV Grid Station may be allocated by
the Administration on priority basis without any procedural delay. (Para 3.7.15)
The Committee recommends that problems of civic amenities like roads, drainage
systems, street lights, parks, markets, bus shelters, primary health centres post office,
community centers etc. in southern sectors of the city should be addressed by the
administration to the extent possible now as these basic amenities cannot wait for
finalization of the Master Plan. However, all these amenities should be included in the
Master Plan. (Para 3.7.18)
The Committee desires that the UT Administration should make all out efforts to
make the city crime free. The Chandigarh Police should improve patrolling and intelligence
gathering mechanism. (Para 3.7.21)
The Committee understands that Right to Service Act if implemented effectively and
efficiently it would fast track grievance redressal and check corruption. The Committee
recommends that the UT Administration should finalise soon services to be covered under
the Right to Service Act, 2013 and the Act be notified at the earliest. (Para 3.7.24)
The Committee desires that the UT Government should simplify the departmental
procedures particularly in public service departments by putting effective and user friendly
systems in place. This will help the citizens get their work done without any hassle and will
also help the Government in its functioning. The UT Administration should remove the
procedural complexity which causes delay. (Para 3.7.27)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this
matter at the highest level for getting water from Bhakra Canal for augmentation of
Kajouli water works. The UT Administration should also promote water conservation

62
through rain water harvesting and ground water recharge etc. in the UT to tackle water
woesand ensure long-term sustainability of water sources for the city.A comprehensive water
use audit should also be done in all the houses, residential and commercial buildings. The
Citizens of the UT may be encouraged to conserve water through rainwater harvesting,
recycling and reusing water and reducing water wastage. Pilot project for rain water
harvesting may be implemented at the earliest. (Para 3.7.30)
The Committee appreciates the solid waste management mechanism functional in the
UT. The Committee understands that solid waste management will be a key challenge for
any rapidly growing city. The Committee understands that for a viable solid waste service
delivery, the UT Administration should explore cost-effective environmental friendly options
to conserve natural resources and preserve landfill space, seek continuous improvements to
reduce the cost of operations, evolve strategic partnerships with public, private and civil
society groups in the UT. (Para 3.7.36)
The Committee understands that the mandate of Chandigarh Housing Board (CHB)
is to build affordable, reasonably priced dwelling units for different socio-economic
categories of the city’s residents and it has also been entrusted the work of implementing
the administration’s schemes for rehabilitating the residents of unauthorized settlements.
The Committee hopes that the CHB would work in this direction in future. (Para 3.7.41)
The Committee recommends that the issue of allotment of flats to the employees
may be resolved soon. If need be, they may be accommodated in any proposed scheme on
priority basis. (Para 3.7.44)
The Committee understands that the focus of Chandigarh Housing Board should be
making Chandigarh a slum free city. Considering the gravity of the problem of housing for
poor in Chandigarh, it should take responsibility for providing affordable housing to the
urban poor. The Committee hopes that through providing affordable housing to slum
dwellers the Chandigarh city would attain the distinction of being the first slum-free city
in the country. (Para 3.7.47)
The Committee came to know that some areas of the city experience floods during
heavy rains due to improper and inadequate drainage system. The UT Administration and
Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh should ensure checking of dumping of debris and
garbage into the open drainage, illegal encroachment of natural water courses etc. so that
the problem of flood could be solved. The proposed draft Master Plan 2031 should also
address this issue.
(Para 3.7.50)
The Committee understands that Chandigarh is known for its famous Sukhna Lake
which is the most-visited tourist place in the area. With the lake not getting enough water
due to poor monsoon, it turns into a dried bed. As it is completely a rainfed lake
occasionally drying up due to periodic occurrence of deficit rainfall. The Committee
recommends that a think tank should be involved in this matter. Besides, There should be
a permanent body for its conservation and monitoring and its members should be drawn
from experts from the field of hydrology, soil, ecology, wildlife etc. A long term plan may
be prepared for conserving the lake. (Para 3.7.53)
The Committee is of the view that while implementing the provisions of Electricity
Act, 2003 efforts should be made to protect the interests of the public and employees.
(Para 3.8.4)
The Committee desires that the issue of inadequacy of staff and equipments in the

63
Electricity Department may be resolved at the earliest. (Para 3.8.7)
The Committee recommends that UT Administration should conduct examination for
the recruitment of Conductors at the earliest. Besides, recruitment notification for vacant
posts of workshop staff, management staff, and Class-IV staff should also be advertised
soon and filled up at the earliest. (Para 3.9.3)
The Committee is of the view that the UT Administration should complete the
process for procuring new buses without any procedural delay. The Committee believes that
non-availability of buses against sanctioned fleet will add woes to commuters. (Para 3.9.6)
The Committee recommends that the UT Administration should resolve the issue of
pay fixation of the employees as per rules at the earliest. The Committee would like to be
apprised of action taken in this regard. (Para 3.9.9)

MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21 st May, 2012 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Tariq Anwar — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
4. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
5. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
SPECIAL INVITEE
Shri Bishnu Pada Ray,
2.0 At the outset, the convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them the agenda of the day i.e. to decide future programme of the Sub-Committee. He recapitulated
that Chairman, DRSC on Home Affairs had constituted the Sub-Committee on the Administration
of Union Territories with the purpose to assist the Committee in studying the subjects undertaken
by it. He expressed his pleasure that the Sub-Committee consisted of seven members (two
members from the Rajya Sabha and five members from Lok Sabha) and that the Chairman of the
Committee has nominated three Members belonging to UTs and the Sub-Committee would certainly
be benefited from their valuable views.
2.1 The convenor, thereafter, recapitulated that while the Chairman was constituting the
Sub-Committee on Administration of Union Territories in Committee’s last sitting held on
15
th May, 2012, he had pointed out that the Sub-Committee could study various aspects of
administration in different Union Territories. He added that although, the main Committee heard the
presentation of the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs in connection with the examination of
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Home Affairs and Committee made its
recommendations in connection with the Union Territories but the Sub-Committee may undertake
detailed study of the various dimensions of Union Territories, viz. Agriculture, Industries, Projects
on Infrastructure, Fishing, connectivity with mainland and Tourism in various UTs.
67

68
2.2 The Members of the Sub-Committee expressed their view on the functioning of
administration of UTs. Members representing UTs in the Lok Sabha were of the opinion that the
concerned administration of UTs is not listening to the suggestions of the people’s representatives
and their suggestions were not being given due importance. According to them, the same situation
prevails in the Union Ministry of Home Affairs and the concerned Joint Secretary was behaving
in an autocratic manner. At this stage, Shri Bishnu Pada Ray, Member representing Andaman and
Nicobar Islands in the Lok Sabha sought permission to express his views, which was acceded to
by the Sub-Committee. According to him, various projects beneficial to the people, were not being
implemented and meetings with people’s representative were not being held for the last many years.
The Sub-Committee took note of his views.
3.0 The Sub-Committee, thereafter, discussed the places to be visited by it. The convenor
informed the members that the main Committee in 2006 had undertaken visits to Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Puducherry and Chandigarh and submitted its 121
st Report on the subject i.e.
Administration of Union Territories with special emphasis on the UTs to which it visited. He
thereafter, proposed that the Sub-Committee could visit the remaining UTs i.e. Dadar and Nagar
Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep to have in-depth understanding of the Administration and
other dimensions of the UTs. However, after a brief discussion, the Sub-Committee decided to visit
all the UTs including the UTs visited by the Main Committee earlier.
3.1 The Sub-Committee, then, decided that it could undertake visit to UTs keeping in view the
dates for meetings and tour programme of the Main Committee. The Sub-Committee also decided
that in its next sitting the S ub-Committee would hear the concerned joint Secretary on any of
the UTs.
4.0 The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again at 7
th June, 2012.

69
II
SECOND MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9 th July, 2012 in Committee Room ‘E’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Tariq Anwar — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
4. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri K.K. Pathak, Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Saxena, Director (Delhi)
3. Shri M.L. Varma, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of Administrative of UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli
1. Shri Narendra Kumar, Administrator
2. Shri Mohanjeet Singh, Development Commissioner
3. Shri Gyanesh Bharti, Finance Secretary
4. Dr. S.D. Bhardwaj, Deputy Director (Planning), UT Admn. of Daman and Diu
5. Shri U.R. Vyas, Assistant Director (Planing), UT Admn. of Dadra and Nagar Haveli
2.0 At the outset, the convenor welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Sub-Committee and
apprised them of the agenda of the day. He recalled that in the last sitting of the Sub-Committee
held on 21
st May, 2012, following future course of action was chalked out:
● To undertake detailed study of the administration of Union Territories, viz. Agriculture,
Industries, Projects on Infrastructure, Fishing, connectivity and Tourism in various
UTs; and
● To undertake study visits to all UTs to have in-depth understanding of the
Administration and other dimensions of the UTs.
69

70
I. Visit to Chandigarh
2.1 In pursuance of this, after a brief discussion, the Sub-Committee decided to visit
Chandigarh to make on-the-spot study of working of the Administration of Union Territory of
Chandigarh from 26 th July to 28 th July, 2012 subject to approval by Hon’ble Chairman. The
Members then authorised its Convenor to solicit the permission of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
through the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
II. Presentation on UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
2.2 The convenor then informed the Members that the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home
Affairs, along with Administrator, UT of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli have arrived for
making a presentation on various aspects of administration of both the UTs of Daman & Diu and
Dadra & Nagar Haveli such as the status of various sectors of economy of the UTs – viz. tourism,
agriculture, fishing, small-scale, medium and tiny industries, projects on connectivity with mainland
etc. in that day sitting.
[At this stage the witnesses were called in]
3.0 The Convenor welcomed the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, along with
Administrator, UT of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli and other officials of the Ministry
of Home Affairs. He asked the Joint Secretary to make presentation on various aspects of
administration of both the UTs and the status of various sectors of their economy, such as,
tourism, agriculture, fishing, small-scale, medium and tiny industries, projects on connectivity, etc.
3.1 The Joint Secretary after introduction sought permission to allow the Administrator to make
a presentation. Thereafter, the Administrator, UT of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli made
presentation on the Administration of UT of Daman and Diu. He elaborated on the geographical
locations; historical aspects; administrative structure; Socio-Economic development, demographic
and health indices; connectivity; and financial situation of the UT. The main highlights of the
presentation were as follows:
❷ UT of Daman and Diu came into existence on 30 th May, 1987. Earlier it was a part
of Goa.
❷ Daman is on main land on sea-shore near southern portion of Gujarat State. Diu is an
island near Una Taluka of Junagarh District in Gujarat State.
❷ There are two Districts namely, Daman and Diu, two tehsils, two blocks, two towns,
fourteen Village Panchayats and twenty six villages in the UT. Daman is the Head
Quarter of this UT.
❷ There is one parliamentary constituency and one District Panchayat in the UT.
❷ Daman and Diu has the oldest history of urbanization as it has oldest Urban Local
Bodies viz. Municipal Councils.
❷ The total population of the UT is 2,42,911. Literacy rate is 91.48 per cent.
❷ The UT has total urban area of 24.26 sq. kms. with 36.25% of the total population.
There are two Municipal Councils one at Daman and the other at Diu.
❷ There are two Government Hospitals, two Community Health Centres, three Primary
Health Centres, Twenty six sub-Centres, four Evening Clinics, one Trauma Centre,
four ICTC and one Blood Bank in the UT.

71
❷ There has been no Polio case reported since last ten years in the UT. Besides, not a
single case of Neo-natal Tetanus since last fifteen years.
❷ UT of Daman and Diu does not have its own power Generation. 93% of the Electricity
is consumed by Industries. JERC determines the tariff for all classes of consumers.
❷ There are 88 Primary/Middle Schools, 31 Secondary/Higher Secondary Schools and
1 Government College. Drop out rate is 0.47% at Secondary and 0.21% at elementary
stage, which is among the lowest rate in the country.
3.2 Thereafter, the Convenor and Members of the Committee sought clarifications on the
following issues:
❷ There is good industrial environment in the UT due to concessions in power tariff;
however, there is no power generating unit in the UT.
❷ Reduction in power tariff for house hold consumers.
❷ The water of Daman Ganga is highly contaminated due to presence of Chemical
residue. It has affected fishing activities and consequently livelihood of fishing
community in the UT.
❷ Non-availability of Helicopters for Administrator and other officials to reach Daman in
less time.
❷ Vacancies of Doctors.
❷ Provision of MRI, CT scan and dialysis machine in the hospital. One more hospital
should be provided in the UT.
❷ Tax holiday regime industrial units should be extended for 10 years more in the UT.
❷ Early enactment to regulate Daman & Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli panchayats.
❷ Deteriorating conditions of forts in Daman and Diu.
❷ The quota of Kerosene and diesel to the fishing community should be increased.
Fishermen should be compensated by the UT administration for the loss of boats
captured by Pakistan. The administration should be given the power to waive off loans
for fisheries.
❷ Passenger planes should be started from coast guard air port situated in the UT.
❷ The farmers of the UT should be given agricultural implements on subsidized rates.
❷ V AT rate should be reduced on petroleum and diesel in the UT.
❷ A highway should be constructed from Daman to Nasik-shiridi.
❷ The quota for Haj pilgrims from the UT should be increased.
❷ The UT Administration should create a fund for free treatment of patients suffering
from chronic diseases.
❷ The seats for medical and engineering courses should be increased in the UT.
❷ A separate staff selection board should be created in the Daman & Diu and Dadra &
Nagar Haveli.
❷ The Administration should give free houses to the families having income of less than
1 lakh.

72
❷ Alongwith the children of SCs & STs, the Children of OBCs and minorities should also
be given free education, cycle and computer.
❷ There should be two district Panchayats in the UT instead of one.
❷ The employees working on daily wages should be regularized.
4.0 The Administrator and other officials replied to some of the queries. The Convenor directed
them to furnish written replies to the queries raised in the meeting. The Sub-Committee then
decided to hear presentation on the UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli in its next sitting.
5.0 The Convenor informed the Administrator that the sub-Committee would make a study visit
to Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli later which will be intimated to him as and when
decided.
6.0 Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.

73
III
THIRD MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 26 th July, 2012 in Committee Room
‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Tariq Anwar — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Baijayant Panda
4. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
5. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri K.K. Pathak, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Administrative of UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
1. Shri Narendra Kumar, Administrator
2. Shri Gyanesh Bharti, Finance Secretary
3. Shri U.R. Vyas, Assistant Director (Planing), UT Admn. of Dadra and Nagar Haveli
4. Shri Mohanjeet Singh, Development Commissioner, Dadra and Nagar Haveli
2.0 At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Sub-Committee.
He informed the Members that Shri Ravneet Singh, MP, Lok Sabha and a member of the DRSC
on Home Affairs has been nominated to this sub-Committee. He reminded the Members about visit
of the Sub-Committee to the UT of Chandigarh from 26
th to 28 th July, 2011.  He requested the
Members who had still not given their journey details to give it to the Secretariat so that necessary
arrangements are made to receive them at Chandigarh.
2.1 He recalled that in the previous sitting held on 9 th July, 2012, the Sub-Committee was
supposed to hear the Administrator, UT of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli on various
aspects of administration of both the UTs. However, due to constrain of time, it could hear him
only on UT of Daman and Diu.
73

74
2.2 The Convenor then informed the Members that the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home
Affairs, along with Administrator, UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli have arrived for making a
presentation on various aspects of administration of UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli such as the
status of various sectors of economy of the UTs viz. tourism, agriculture, fishing, small-scale,
medium and tiny industries, projects on connectivity with mainland etc. that day
[At this stage the witnesses were called in]
3.0 The Convenor welcomed the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, along with
Administrator, UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and other officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
He asked them to make presentation on various aspects of administration of the UT of Dadra and
Nagar Haveli and the status of various sectors of their economy, such as, tourism, agriculture,
fishing, small-scale, medium and tiny industries, projects on connectivity, etc.
3.2 The Administrator, UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli made presentation on the Administration
of UT administration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. He elaborated on the geographical locations;
historical aspects; administrative structure; Socio-Economic development, demographic and health
indices; connectivity; and financial situation of the UT. The main highlights of the presentation are
as follows:
❷ UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli came into existence on 17 th December, 1779 as a result
of a treaty between Portuguese and Marathas. The Marathas assigned 72 villages to
Portuguese in return of their friendship and this group of 72 villages was known as
Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
❷ The Portuguese ruled this territory until its liberation on 2 nd August, 1954. After its
liberation, the Administration was carried on by local body known as free Dadra and
Nagar Haveli Administration. It was merged in the Indian Union on 11 th August, 1961.
❷ The UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli comprises 70 villages and 2 towns with an area
of  491 sq. km.
❷ Dadra & Nagar Haveli (DNH) is a Tribal Territory with 40% forest coverage.
❷ There is one district, one tehsil, one block, one Municipal Council, fifteen Urban
wards, eleven Village Panchayats, two towns, and seventy villages in the UT.
❷ There is one parliamentary constituency and one District Panchayat in the UT.
❷ As per census 2011 total population of the UT is 3,42,853. Out of it, 1,93,178 are
Male and 1,49,675 are female. The total Literacy rate of UT is 77.65 percent which
was 57.63% in 2001. The Male Literacy rate is 86.46% and female Literacy rate 65.93
percent. The Literacy rate among SCs and STs is 78.25% and 41.24% respectively.
❷ For annual Plan 2012-13, the UT has been allocated R 607.68 crore. In BE 2012-13, R
171 crore has been allocated to local bodies of the UT.
❷ There is one District Hospital, one Community Health Centre, six Primary Health
Centres, fifty sub-Centres, three Rural dispensaries and one Mobile Medical Unit in the
UT. The UT has got first paperless OPD in the country.
❷ The UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli is the first UT in the country which has started
108 Emergency Ambulance services started from 10 th April, 2012.
❷ There has been no case of Neonatal Tetanus, Polio, Diphtheria for the last 15 years.

75
❷ UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli does not have its own power Generation. 97% of the
Electricity is consumed by Industries. Transmission and Distribution (T&D) losses in
2011-12 was less then 6%, which is the lowest in the country.
❷ Total allocattion under Education is R 92.26 crore in 2011-12 in the UT. The enrolment
in 2011-12 was 10001 in secondary, 5486 in Higher secondary and 48318 in Primary.
Drop out rate is less than 1.74% at the primary level and 4.05% at all stages in 2011-
12 in the UT.
❷ A Government Degree college has been opened from the year 2011-12 in the UT.
❷ English subjects have been introduced in fifty existing schools in the UT.
❷ All SC/ST and LIG students are provided free uniforms and shoes, socks and text- books
etc.
3.3 Thereafter, the Convenor and Members of the Committee sought clarifications on the
following issues:
❷ The budget allocation to local bodies in the UT has been falling for the last two three
years.
❷ Status of the proposal for increasing the financial powers of the Administrator from
R.20 crore to R 50 crore for Plan scheme.
❷ Status of industrial pollution into Ganga River of Daman and chemical units in Vapi.
❷ A reputed NGO ‘Public Affairs Foundation’ which has been awarded by the Central
Government, has done a review of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. According to it, public
officials are non responsive to public problems in the UT. It has also alleged that
ANMs don’t make regular visit.
❷ The Houses proposed to be constructed under Government Housing scheme should be
increased from 800 to 1500.
❷ There should be infrastructural development in the UT which would boost tourism and
employment in the UT.
❷ The salaries of officials working in the Government Departments on temporary basis
should atleast be increased to 10,000-12,000.
❷ Fund should be allocated to district Panchyat to open an English Medium School in the
UT.
❷ The Government of India should provide funds meant for MGNREGA on time.
❷ The district of Khanwale should be given same status as the district of Silvassa. The
UT Administration should construct a 150-200 bed hospital in the district of Khanval.
The drinking water facility should be strengthened in the UT.
❷ UT Administration did not send any official during the visit of the local MP to villages.
❷ BPL families in the UT.
❷ The Government should remove taxation hurdles in the way of industrialization in the
UT.
❷ Initiatives taken by the Ministry to check horse trading in the local bodies of the UT.

76
4.0 The Administrator and other officials replied to some of the queries. The convenor directed
them to furnish written replies to the queries raised in the meeting.
5.0 The convenor informed the Administrator that the sub-Committee would make a study visit
to Daman Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli in the Month of October in 2012 tentatively and the
final details will be intimated to them as and when decided.
6.0 Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 12.35 
P.M.

77
I
FIRST MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 1.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 9 th October, 2013 in Committee
Room- ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja — Co-Convenor
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Anandrao Adsul
4. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
5. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
2.0 At the outset, the convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them the agenda of the day i.e. to decide future programme of the Sub-Committee. He recapitulated
that Chairman, DRSC on Home Affairs had constituted the Sub-Committee on the Administration
of Union Territories with the purpose to assist the Committee in studying the subjects undertaken
by it. He expressed his pleasure that the Sub-Committee consisted of twelve members (five
members from the Rajya Sabha and seven members from Lok Sabha) and that the Chairman of
the Committee has nominated two Members belonging to UTs and the Sub-Committee would
certainly be benefited from their valuable views.
3.0 The Sub-Committee, thereafter, discussed the places to be visited by it. He informed the
Members that erstwhile Sub-Committee on Administration of Union Territories in July, 2012 had
undertaken visit to Chandigarh. He added that response of Chandigarh Administration to issues raised
by Convenor and Members of the Sub-Committee and replies of UT Administration on the questionnaire
prepared by Secretariat had been forwarded to Ministry of Home Affairs for their comments.
4.0 The Convenor thereafter, proposed that the Sub-Committee could visit the UTs of Dadar
and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep to have in-depth understanding of the
Administration and other dimensions of the UTs. After a brief discussion, the Sub-Committee
decided to visit UTs of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshdweep. The Sub-
Committee authorized the Convenor to finalise the details and dates for the visit.
5.1 The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.
77

78
II
SECOND MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 21 st October, 2013 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja — Co-Convenor
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shrimati Kanimozhi
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri I.S. Chahal, Joint Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Neeta Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of UTs of Daman and Diu
1. Shri B.S. Bhalla, Administrator
2. Dr. S.D. Bhardwaj, Deputy Director
3. Shri U.R. Vyas, Deputy Director
4. Shri Sandeep Kumar, Development Commissioner
Representatives of UTs of Dadar and Nagar Haveli
1. Shri S.L. Sharma, Deputy Resident Commissioner
2. Shri Harish Chander, Liaison Officer
Representatives of UTs of Lakshadweep
1. Shri H. Rajesh Prasad, Administrator
2. Shri Asar Pal Singh, Deputy Resident Commissioner
78

79
2.0 At the outset, the Convenor of the Sub-Committee welcomed the officials of the Ministry
of Home Affairs and the representatives of the Union Territories of Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli in the sitting of the Sub-Committee and asked them to make
presentation on various aspects of Administration and implementation of schemes, projects and
programmes pertaining to their respective Union Territories.
2.1 The Convenor informed the Members that the Sub-Committee would be visiting some Union
Territories tentatively from 5
th November to 9 th November, subject to the formal approval by the
hon. Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
3.0 The Joint Secretary, MHA stated that there were three presentations for this Committee
pertaining to UTs of Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and Lakshadweep and respective
administrators would make presentation.
4.0 The Administrator holding charge of two UTs of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu
made power point presentations on the both UTs. First of all, he made presentation on UT of
Daman and Diu. The highlights of the presentations was as follows:
Daman and Diu
● The UT of Daman and Diu was liberated on 19 th December, 1961 and became a part
of UT of Goa, Daman and Diu.
● After Statehood of Goa on 30 th May, 1987, Daman and Diu became a separate UT.
● The population of UT is about 2.43 lakh consisting of about 1.5 and .93 lakh male and
female populations with 2.52% and 6.31% SC and ST populations. The sex ratio is 618
against the national average of 940. However the sex ratio in the 0-6 years age group
is 909 against national average of 914.
● The literacy rate is 87.10% against 74.04% having 91.54% and 79.55% male and
female literacy. The SC and ST literacy rates are 85.13% and 63.42% against 54.32%
and 47.08% national averages.
● Budget allocations to the local bodies and municipalities have been on increasing trend,
it has been increased from 
R 22.10 crore and R 5.01 crore in 2008-09 to
R 108.98 crore and R 59.23 crore in 2013-14.
● Total revenue receipts in 2012-13 has been at R 3889 crore and it is estimated to be
R 4054 crore in 2013-14. The total allocation in 2012-13 and 2013-14 has been R
425.00 crore and R 630.05 crore respectively. The allocation in 2012-13 was fully
utilised and about 52.29% has been utilised upto September, 2013.
● T&D power loss is among the lowest in the country and tariffs are among the lowest
in the western region. All villages have been electrified and 37 kIn underground cabling
has been completed. Besides, setting up of different electricity sub stations, 4 MW
solar plants (3MW in Diu and 1 MW in Daman) are proposed to be set up.
● New OPD block and CT scan facility has been started at Government Hospital. As
Health infrastructure, two Government Hospitals, two Community Health Centres, three
Primary Health Centres, 2, 4 evening clinics, one trauma centre, 4 ICTC for HIV , one
blood Bank are functioning in the UT. Financial incentives are provided to mother and
girl child for institutional delivery at birth is provided under Matru Samruddhi and Dikri
Development Yojana. Addition of additional 30 bed facility and dialysis facility at
Government Hospital at Daman, construction of Ayush Hospital at Kachigam, Daman
and modular OT at Government hospital are new schemes to be undertaken.

80
● Laptops are proposed to be provided to the students of 11 th std. and 1 st semester of
diploma courses in polytechnic. First ever degree college and education hub at Kevdi,
Diu including College, Polytechnic and Food and Craft Institute is also proposed to be
setup, besides upgradation of infrastructure in all schools. 100% and 50% scholarship
to girl students of BPL and others category, pursuing professional courses, is provided
for higher professional courses. Free text book, writing materials and uniform besides
are provided to all SC/ST  students besides cash awards to meritorious SC/ST  students.
All girl students studying upto class VIII numbering 1120 have been provided bicycles
under Saraswati Sadhna Yojna.
● With regard to construction of bridges, construction of Pataliya Bridge on Kolak River
will be completed during the year and construction of bridge over Kalai River at
Bamanpuja to Pali has started. With regard to new bridges, some projects were under
submission for SFC while DPRs in respect of some bridges were received/under
preparation and in some cases, tender were under evaluation.
● With regard to roads, development of industrial roads, major district roads was being
undertaken. Coastal Highways from Ambawadi to Bamanpuja was also being
constructed. National Highway connectivity from NH-8 for Daman and from NH-8E
for Diu was proposed as new work.
● Present water requirement in the UT stands at 30 MLD while the existing water
treatment capacity stands at 21 MLD, which is proposed to be increased to 42 MLD
for future requirements. Construction of water treatment plants at Dabhel, Magarwada,
Dunethan, Daman was underway alongwith laying of pipelines from Madhuban Dam to
these treatment plants. Water supply scheme from Sardar Sarovar pipeline in Diu
District was also underway.
● The UT Administration proposes to construct a new building for Circuit House and a
multi-story building at Nani Daman. It also proposes to construct PWD Office Building
and Lekha Building at Moti Daman.
● Both Daman and Diu contribute quite substantially to the fisheries and pomfret fish of
Daman and Diu is very famous. Construction of fisheries harbour at Vanakbara and
Ghoghela in Diu was underway. Police jetty at Nani Daman and several jetties at Diu
were being constructed.
● For development of tourism, development/upgradation, beautification, maintenance of
gardens, ponds, beaches and other tourist spots is being done. Development of new
garden adjacent to Fort wall and near Light House, Moti Daman is proposed. For Diu,
construction of Floating Jetti for Panikotha, Diu and cycle track in Diu is proposed.
Promotion of tourism by a professional agency is under consideration.
● Several new initiatives like underground sewerage system, solid waste management
project, conservation of heritage structure through INTACH, public transport facility
named Sarthi Bus Seva, starting of polytechnic college in Diu and engineering college
in Daman, barrier free access in Government buildings, improvement in quality of
education under the project Sarvottam, upgradation of computer labs and provision of
smart class rooms in all secondary/higher secondary schools are proposed to be taken.
First ever Daman Heritage Festival was organized on 15-16 October, 2013. Treasury
Computerization is proposed to be done through Mission Mode Project and Sanjeevini
Health Insurance Scheme for health cover of 
R 2 lakh and accidental death/disability
coverage of R l lakh for BPL families and families with income less than 1 lakh per
annum is also proposed.

81
● A new building for the hospital is being constructed and the old building of the hospital
is proposed to be converted into a State Museum in coordination with INTACH. The
hospital is in a heritage building.
● There are a large number of industries in Daman and there is some problem of water
pollution rather than air pollution.
● The administration proposes to enlarge the health insurance scheme by requesting other
families, pensioners, industries to join by paying their premium. The scheme is better
than Rashtriya Suraksha Bima Yojana. Under the Health Insurance Scheme, it is
proposed to empanel the private hospitals in Mumbai and Ahmedabad also so that
people can walk in there for a cashless service by producing a given card. However
there are not many private hospitals in both the UTs.
● Connectivity of both UTs is only with Gujarat district roads depending on the
maintenance made by them. The roads are presently in a terrible shape and may lie in
that shape. Therefore connectivity with a National Highway is the utmost requirement.
● With regard to the number of students aspiring for medical and engineering colleges,
about 200 or 300 students are graduating from Silvassa every year in Science.
Similarly, in Daman and Diu together, there are 200 or 250 such students. Against the
all-India quota of seven seats for the Union Territories from the Government of India,
hardly three or four people are able to get the admissions because the standard of
education is little low; competitive spirit is a little low. The only way is to improve the
education standard to enable students to compete nationally. A medical college is being
set up while a nursing college has already been started.
● On the issues of acknowledging contribution of industries under CSR, the administrator
submitted that according to the plan every industry will be felicitated and
acknowledged formally at a function. Industries, which do outstanding jobs, will be
felicitated in a different way. The industry people can write that this particular hamlet
is adopted by such and such industry. However it not binding on them to spend 2%
of profit under CSR as their plants are located at these places but their head offices
are in Mumbai, Kolkata, Bengaluru, etc. Preferably, it has to be spent in the local area
only but under the Companies Law, there is a provision that they can deposit in a fund
to spend somewhere else.
4.1 In between, the Convenor and Members of the Committee asked questions regarding
industrial development, fisheries production, health facility, connectivity, drinking water availability,
problem of industrial pollution, insurance coverage for labour forces etc. The Joint Secretary, MHA
and administrator replied to the issues raised.
5.0 The Administrator, then, made presentation on UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The
Highlights of this presentation are as follows:
Dadra and Nagar Haveli
● The population of UT is about 3.44 lakh consisting of about 1.94 and 1.5 lakh male
and female with 1.8% and 52% SC and ST populations. The sex ratio is 774 against
the national average of 940. However the sex ratio in the 0-6 years age group is 926
against national average of 914.
● The literacy rate is 76.20% against 74.04% having 85.20% and 64.30% male and
female literacy. The SC literacy rate is 78.25% against 54.32% national average;
however ST literacy rate is lower at 41.24% against 47.08% national average.

82
● Budget allocations to the local bodies and municipalities have been on increasing trend,
it has been increased from R 41.00 crore and Rs. 13.03 crore in 2008-09 to
R. 156.35 crore and 36.90 crore in 2013-14. However Committee notes that the
allocations in percentage terms have been dwindled down from 48.66 in 2008-09 to
28.74 in 2013-14.
● Total revenue receipts in 2012-13 has been at R 6163 crore and it is estimated to be
R 6907 in 2013-14. The total allocation in 2012-13 and 2013-14 has been
R 564.70 crore and 672.38 crore respectively. The allocation in 2012-13 was fully
utilised and about 62% has been utilised upto September, 2013.
● In Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 98 per cent power is utilized by the industries and 100
per cent recovery of charges is made. Silvassa is basically the marble capital of the
country as all the Italian marble imported in raw form is cut and polished for being
supplied to the rest of the country. For rest of the two per cent there is a little bit
of problem. Since T&D losses are lower than Daman and Diu, tariffs in Dadra and
Nagar Haveli are lower.
● Major achievements of lowest T&D loss in the country at 5.23% and electrification of
all villages with continuous supply was done. Other achievements like starting of
construction of six high level bridges, computerisation of V AT, study of science
subjects in Government College, dialysis facility in hospital was also done.
● Cost of construction of six high level bridges has been estimated at R 54.17 crore and
cost of construction of nine new bridges has been pegged at 49.67 crore. A ring road
is also proposed with an estimated cost of 47.99 crore.
● New projects include construction of Transport Bhavan, New Circuit House,
International Sports Complex, New Collectorate, State Library and Kala Kendra, etc.
● New energy projects include Strengthening of Transmission and Distribution Network,
Generation of Solar Power at various locations as well as setting up of 3 MW Solar
Plant, implementation of Integrated Solution for electrical network and Smart Grid in
Silvassa Town.
● Water Supply/irrigation projects comprise Integrated Management Plan with Estimated
cost of 
R. 255 crore and construction of several Check Dams at several locations in
Forest and non-Forest Areas.
● The area receives enough rain falls and rain-water harvesting has been made
compulsory in all buildings. Apart from that, in villages the administration is making
ponds for irrigation source for the rest of the year besides check dams on different
rivers to increase water availability.
● As Health infrastructure, one 241 bedded District Hospital, one 50 bedded Community
Health Centre, 7 Primary Health Centres, 3 Rural Dispensaries, 50 Sub Centres and one
Mobile Medical unit are functional. Upgradation of CHC into Sub-District Hospital and
Expansion of District Hospital to 480 bed at the cost of 
R 225 crore is in progress.
Starting of MRI services and setting up of Medical College and Nursing College is
proposed. The Administrator further explained that specialists have been stationed only
in Silvassa. Doctors posted in PHCs visit sub-centers under a rotation policy and for
that purpose they have been provided vehicle and people don’t have to come all the
way to Silvassa.
● Laptops are provided to the students of 11 st std. and 1 st semester of diploma courses
in polytechnic. Silvassa College of Engineering will start from 2014-15. 100% and 50%

83
scholarship to girl students of BPL and others category is provided for higher
professional courses.
● For tourism, several projects like Lake Front Development at Dudhani, River Front
Development on Daman Ganga River at Silvassa, development of Silvassa Haat,
construction of State Museum at Silvassa, Development of Butterfly Park and Prakruti
Parichay Kendra have been completed.
● About 9000 old age, disabled and widow beneficiaries are getting Pension. Bicycles
have been given to 3500 girl students. 14000 students are covered under
Supplementary Nutrition Programme and free text books, stationery and uniforms are
provided to all SC and ST students.
● New initiatives such as Sankalp  development of model village, other rural
infrastructure under CSR, Sanjeevani- Health Insurance scheme for free medical
cashless treatment upto 
R 2.00 lakh with accidental death/disability coverage upto
R 1.00 lakh to BPL families and families having income less than R1.00 lakh per annum
have been taken.
● Common Effluent Treatment Plant, Sewerage Treatment Plant for Urban Towns,
Integrated Solid Waste Management Project, and Barrier free access for all Government
Buildings are also other new initiatives taken by the UT Administration.
5.1 The UT Administration also raised the following issues for attentions of the Sub-Committee:
● Opening of Passport Seva Kendra at Silvassa/Daman was required
● Clearance of the proposal of construction of Ring Road pending with MoRTH was
required.
● SFC clearance for Integrated Water Management Plan was pending with Department of
Drinking Water.
● SFC clearance for 220 kV Electric Sub Station was pending with Ministry of Power;
and
● Allocation of Power has been reduced by the Ministry of Power, which need to the
restored.
5.2 The convenor and Members of the Committee in between raised queries regarding T&D
losses in electric supply rain water harvesting, health centres, seats in Medical and Engineering
Colleges for students belonging to UT, corporate social responsibility etc. The Administrator replied
to the queries raised
6.0 The Administrator, Lakshadweep Islands thereafter made a presentation on the UT of
Lakshadweep. The Main features of the presentation are as below:
● The islands with an area of 32 sq. km. have a total coastline of 132 km. in the Arabian
Sea. It has a group of 11 islands, Kalpeni and Bitra being the nearest and the farthest
islands at distances of 287 and 483 kms. respectively. 10 islands are inhabitated with
a population of 0.64 lakh. Majority population is Muslim and only one per cent belong
to other community. The population density as per 2011 Census is 2013 per sq. km.
against national average of 382 with sex ratio at 946 and zero maternal mortality rate,
100% immunisation and 6.51 infant mortality rate against 3.01 and 47.57 national rates
respectively. The birth rate and death rate also stand at 11.81 and 3.61 against national
average of 20.97 and 7.48 respectively. There are 10 village panchayats and one
district panchayat.

84
● The total literacy rate is 92.28% with male and female literacy rates standing at
96.55% and 88.25% respectively. The gross enrolment ratio of children aged 6-12
years is 99.01% with zero dropouts and the pupil-teacher ratio at 18.
● For ferrying passengers and goods, 25 vessels are operated by Lakshadweep Development
Corporation Limited, which include 7 Passenger Ships, 10 High Speed Vessels, 6 Cargo
Barges (including LPG carrier) and 2 Bollard Pull Tugs. 6 Monthly schedule for ships and
weekly schedule finalized by the Transport Committee with public representatives is
published. 2 x 400 Pax ships, One 2000 LPG carrier, 150T oil barge, 2 Nos. 800 MT
Multipurpose Cargo V essels, 1000T oil barge are also planned to be acquired.
● The work of dedicated Berth at Kochi has already been completed by the Cochin Port
Trust and is ready for operation. The construction of dedicated berth at Beypore will
be done by CPWD and MOU has been entered with Kerala Government for waterfront
area lease. DPR and EIA studies are being done and proposal will be submitted to the
Ministry for SFC approval. In principal approval of Karnataka Government has been
obtained for dedicated berth at Mangalore and MOU will be signed shortly.
● In order to embark the passengers directly to the islands, it was planned to construct
eastern side jetties in 4 islands viz. Kavaratti, Minicoy, Agatti and Amini. The Jetties
at Minicoy and Agatti has been made operational and the other 2 will be completed by
May 2013.
● There are 69 educational institutions, consisting 19 Pre-Primary Schools, 23 Primary
Schools, 10 Upper Primary Schools, 11 Senior Secondary Schools, 1 Kendriya
Vidyalaya, 1 Navodaya Vidyalaya, 3 University Centers and 1 DIET. A total of 14560
students were enrolled for 2013-14 academic session. Different Programmes viz.
strengthening of ICT education, Mid-Day Meal, allotment of seats for higher education,
scholarship to students, creation of infrastructure in schools, etc. are being undertaken
by the UT Administration. School students studying in Lakshadweep are provided free
text book, writing materials and uniform besides retention scholarship of R150/- and
R375/- per month for class VIII to X standard and XI to XII standard respectively.
Meritorious ST students are given scholarships ranging between R 400 to 
R1000
depending on the class and percentage of marks obtained in the Examinations.
● A total number of 134 seat are received from Central pool which include 12 seats for
MBBS, 2 seats for BDS, 3 for BAMS, 2 for BHMS, 3 BSc. Agriculture, 2 BVSc, 60
Engineering Degree, 50 Diploma Engineering. Besides, 2485 seats are received from
State Government of Kerala and other universities. However about one third of the
allotment of seats is being availed of during the last few years.
● Students of UT of Lakshadweep staying in college hostel whether in the mainland or
islands are paid full reimbursement of hostel expenses on the basis of the bills
presented by the hostel authorities. Students perusing study staying outside the hostel
in mainland/island their own arrangement are paid reimbursement at the prescribed
applicable rates of the UT Administration. Proposal for enhancement of scholarship for
students who are staying outside hostel at their own arrangements has been submitted
to the Ministry of HRD.
● Regarding health facilities, there are 2 hospitals, 3 CHCs, 4 PHCs, 2 F ACs and 14
sub centres, Ayush care is provided in all Islands and to provide specialty care, Rajiv
Gandhi Specialty Hospital has been set up in Agatti under PPP mode.
● R1000 per month is being given to 2155 old aged, destitute, widow, abandoned ladies,
invalid and disabled persons. 313 persons were given assistance for Haj pilgrimage.

85
● 100% population is dependent on PDS, which is functioning fairly well with the help
of 38 Fair Price Shops with adequate supplies of rice, sugar, kerosene. Regular LPG
supply has been ensured due to procurement of new vessel and FCI godown in
Andrott has stated recently to maintain stock during monsoon.
● Apart from the normal functions given to PRIs, 5 departments namely, health,
education, agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries have been completely devolved to
them from April 2012 onwards. Island level 5 year plan and annual plan done through
gram sabha for the first time and total funds of Rs.196.304 (
R82.64 crores under Plan
and R113.670 crores under Non Plan) spent through PRIs.
● The project of extension of runway at Agatti has been approved by the MoEF and
environmental clearance has been obtained. AAI has prepared the DPR. UT
administration will complete the land acquisition at the earliest. The project is
specialized one, first-of-its-kind in India, because it will take the runway into the
lagoon through a specialized method.
● Bandwidth required for strategic as well as for disaster management communication.
BSNL is ready to provide now but with very high cost. BSNL has asked for 40 crore
Capex and 30 crore recurring for providing 100 Mbps additional bandwidth. Increasing
the Bandwidth in the islands still remains unresolved. UTL has requested Ministry of
Information Technology to provide it in their budget. Increasing the Bandwidth in the
islands still remains unresolved.
● Though there is no open defecation in the islands, contamination of groundwater is very
high due to intrusion of human excreta. Piped sewerage system is not possible as there
is no slope. To tackle this, the administration has tendered and approved the DRE
technology bio-toilets, 12000 numbers to be placed in all the islands. On completion,
UTL will be the first territory to have complete sewage management system.
● Groundwater (sub soil water) is the only natural resource of drinking water in the
Island of Lakshadweep. Providing quality drinking water is a major challenge. To
overcome the issue, the UT Administration proposed to install Low Temperature
Thermal Desalination (LTTD) Plants of 1 Lakh litre capacity in all the Islands. With
the help of NIOT, LTTD plants have been completed in three islands namely Kavaratti,
Agatti and Minicoy. Approval of Central Government to set up 6 more LTTD Plants
in other islands of Lakshadweep is expected shortly.
● There is a Water sports Club and a Diving Academy in Lakshadweep and facilities are
available for Snorkeling, Scuba diving, Jet-Skiing, Glass-bottom boats etc. Creation of
more infrastructures for tourism like Government Guest Houses, Eco-friendly Resorts
and Island resorts are required. Opening of un-inhabitated Islands for Toilrist purpose,
Promotion of Cruise Tourism, foreign yachts is being considered. Notifying additional
custom ports for foreign tourists is required. Upgradation of Water sport Institute into
a national level institute is also required.
6.1 The Convenor and Members then asked the Administrator about minority community
residing in the UT, Mid day meal scheme, ICDS, seats available for UT students in engineering
colleges, extension of runway at Agatti etc. The Administrator replied to the issues raised.
7.0 The Convenor then thanked the officials for coming to the sitting and informed them about
proposed visit of the Sub-Committee.
8.0 Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.
9.0 The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.

86
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Monday, the 17 th February, 2014 in Room No. 67,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri Santiuse Kujur
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anandrao Adsul
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Shri Rathod Ramesh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the sitting of the
Committee and apprised them agenda of the day which was to consider and adopt the following
three draft Reports of the Committee::–
(i) 178
th Report on Disaster Management in the Country;
(ii) 179 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 137 th Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants; and
(iii) 180 th Report on Administration of Union Territories (Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman &
Diu, and Chandigarh).
2.1 The Chairman informed the Members that the respective Sub-Committees had adopted the
draft 179 th Report and draft l80 th Report on 13 th February, 2014.
86

87
3. * * *
3.1 * * *
3.2 The Committee then took up the draft 180 th Report on Administration of Union Territories
(Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Chandigarh) for consideration. After a brief discussion
the report was also adopted with some minor changes.
3.3 The Chairman and Committee Members then appreciated the work done by Committee
Secretariat in terms of drafting comprehensive and quality reports within stipulated time-frame.
4.0 The Chairman also informed the Members that two Reports, namely, 176
th Report on
Functioning of Delhi Police and 177 th Report on Coastal Security Management were considered and
adopted by the Committee in its sitting held on 7 th January, 2014. He stated that these two Reports
alongwith the above three adopted Reports would be presented/laid in the current session on
19
th February, 2014.
5.0 The Committee then nominated its Chairman and in his absence Shri D. Raja, M.P., Rajya
Sabha and Shri Santiuse Kujur, M.P., Rajya Sabha to present the 176 th 177 th, 178 th, 179 th and 180 th
Reports to the Rajya Sabha on 19 th February, 2014. The Committee also nominated Shri Naveen
Jindal, M.P., Lok Sabha and in his absence Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq, M.P., Lok Sabha to lay five
Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha the same day.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

88
ANNEXURE
List of Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs
Report Title of the Report
No.
12
1
st On Demand Nos. 42 and 44 of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs
for the year 1993-94
2nd The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privilege) Amendment Bill, 1992
3rd The Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1991
4th The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1992
5th The Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992
6th The Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993
7th The Working of the Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission
8th The Specified Areas (Issue of Identity Cards to Residents) Bill, 1993
9th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
10th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
11th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
12th The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994
13th The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 1992
14th The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1994
15th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
16th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
17th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
18th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1995
19th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 1995
20th The Working of Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)
21st The Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989
22nd The Pondicherry (Administration) Amendment Bill, 1995
23rd The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995
24th The Election Commission (Charging of Expenses on the Consolidated Fund of India)
Bill, 1994

12
25th The Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Bill, 1995
26th The Situation in Jammu and Kashmir
27th The Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994
28th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994
29th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs
30
th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
31
st The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventeenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
32
nd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
33rd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
34th Demands for Grants (1996-97) Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
35th The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996
36th Insurgency situation in the North Eastern Region
37th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
38th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
39th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
40th The Lokpal Bill, 1996
41st The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Services) Amendment Bill, 1998
42nd The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998
43rd The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
44th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
45th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company Affairs
46th The Indian Majority (Amendment) Bill, 1997
47th The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997
48th The Administrators-General (Amendment) Bill, 1998
49th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997
50th The Lokpal Bill, 1998
51st The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998

90
12
52nd The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997
53rd Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Bill, 1998
54th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
55th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions
56th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company Affairs
57th Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998
58th Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999
59th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
60th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
61st The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
62nd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Supreme
Court Bill, 1994
63rd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Delhi
High Court Bill, 1994
64th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999
65th The Companies Bill, 1997
66th The Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Bill, 1999
67th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
68
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixtieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
69
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixty-first Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
70
th The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1999
71st The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
72nd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
73rd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
74th The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000
75th Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir
76th The Repealing and Amending Bill, 1999
77th The Indian Divorce (Amendment) Bill, 1999

91
12
78th The Freedom of Information Bill, 2000
79th The Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000
80th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2000
81st Lotteries (Prohibition) Bill, 1999
82nd North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998
83rd Personnel Policies of Central Industrial Security Force and Central Secretariat Service
84th The Lokpal Bill, 2000
85th Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts
86th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
87th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
88th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
89th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2001
90th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2001
91st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Seventy-fifth Report on Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu
and Kashmir
92
nd The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001
93rd The Competition Bill, 2001
94th The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2002
95th The Repatriation of Prisoners Bill, 2002
96th The Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme
97th The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002
98th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Home Affairs
99th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
100th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Development of North Eastern Region
101st Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Law and Justice
102nd The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution
(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003
103rd Salaries and allowances of the Judicial officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003
104th Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003
105th Constitution (One hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003
106th Constitution (One Hundredth Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi Bill, 2003
107th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003
108th The Assam Rifles Bill, 2003

92
12
109th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Home Affairs
110th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
111th Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
112th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Home Affairs
113th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
114th The Displaced Persons Claims and Other Laws Repeal Bill, 2004
115th The Disaster Management Bill, 2005
116th The State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004
117th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighty-third
Report of the Committee pertaining to the Personnel Policy of CISF
118th The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Bill, 2005
119th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
120th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Development of NER
121st Examination of ‘Administration’ of Union Territories
122nd The Communal Violence (Prevention, Control and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005
123rd Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
124th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
125th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
126
th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Home Affairs
127th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of DoNER
128th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006
129th The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One
Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
130th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in One
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
131st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report on DFG (2007-08) of the Ministry of DoNER
132nd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Home Affairs
133rd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
134th The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006
135th Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of Indo-Pak Border
136th Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence in the Country
137th Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants

93
12
138th The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008
139th The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007
140th Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in One
Hundred Thirty-second Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
141st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-third Report on DFGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of DoNER
142nd Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration
143rd The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
144th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of Home Affairs
145th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
146th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010
147th The Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010
148th The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
149th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o DoNER
150th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o Home Affairs
151st The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010
152nd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-sixth Report on Revamping and Revitalisation of Civil Defence in the
country
153rd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-fifth Report on Border Fencing and Flood Lighting Projects along Indo-
Pak Borders
154th The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
155th The Enemy Property (Amendment) Second Bill, 2010
156th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-second Report on Implementations of Central Scheme of Modernisation of
Prison Administration
157th Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
158th North-eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011
159th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011
160th The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011
161st Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Home Affairs
162nd Demands for Grants (2012-13) of M/o  DoNER
163rd Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police academy, Hyderabad
164th The Constitution (One Hundred Eighteenth Amendment) Bill, 2012

94
12
165th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Sixty-first Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Home Affairs
166
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its One
Hundred and Sixty-second Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
167
th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
168th The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
169th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Home Affairs
170th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
171st The North Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
172nd Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Sixty-third Report on Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police
Academy, Hyderabads
173
rd Strengthening of the working of Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of
Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects meant for North Eastern Region
174th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs
175
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
176
th Report on the Functioning of Delhi Police
l77th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme
178th Report on the Disaster Management in the Country
179th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in its One Hundred Thirty-seventh Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
180th Report on the Administration of Union Territories (Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Chandigarh)

95
C.S.(H.A.)-352
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT
Administration of Union Territories
(Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i )-(iv)
2. C OMPOSITION  OF THE S UB-COMMITTEE ............................................................................ (v)-(vi)
3. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (vii)-(viii)
4. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (ix)-(x)
5. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—51
Chapter-I Dadra and Nagar Haveli ........................................................................... 1—13
Chapter-II Daman and Diu .......................................................................................... 14—24
Chapter-III Chandigarh .................................................................................................. 25—51
6. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND R ECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE 52—63
7. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 65—87
8. A NNEXURE
List of the Reports of the Committee on Home Affairs .......................................... 88—94

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.