PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 140
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH  REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED 
AND THIRTY SECOND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2008-09) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26  FEBRUARY, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERV ATIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY SECOND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS (2008-09) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-271

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—17
CHAPTER-I Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .............................................................. 2—5
CHAPTER-II Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ............................................................................ 6
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ................................................................................. 7—13
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Final Replies of the Government are still awaited ......................... 14—17
4. O
BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS  O F T HE C OMMITTEE  —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 18—19
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. 21—24

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2008)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sanjay Raut
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri T.K. Hamza
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
21. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
22. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
23. Shri Sachin Pilot
24. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
26. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
27. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
*28. Ms. Agatha K. Sangma
@29. V acant
#30. V acant
31. Vacant
* Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  1st December, 2008.
@ Consequent upon change in nomination as Member and appointment as the Chairman of DRPSC on Agriculture, Shri Mohan
Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  5th December, 2008.
# Consequent upon vacation of his seat in Lok Sabha as a result of his election to Legislative Assembly of Chhattisgarh,
Shri Ajit Jogi ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 26th December, 2008.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Fortieth Report on the Action Taken by Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty-second Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2008.
3. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the Action Taken Notes on the One Hundred and
Thirty-second Report of the Committee on 30 September, 2008. The Minister of Home Affairs laid
on the Table of the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha a statement on the status of implementation of
the recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee on 16 December, 2008 and
10 December, 2008, respectively, pursuant to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s Direction dated
24th September, 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
24th February, 2009.
5. Observations/Recommendations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
24th February, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty-second Report of
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on Demands for Grants
(2008-09). The Report was presented to/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the
16 April, 2008.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in
respect of the observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty-second
Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I: The observations/recommendations, which have been accepted by the
Government: Para: 11.7, 12.4, 13.3, 16.2, 17.2
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted five of its
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter II: The observations/recommendations which the Committee does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: - Para: 14.2 (of the One Hundred and
Thirty Second Report).
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendation further.
Chapter III: The observations/recommendations in respect of which the Committee
is not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para: 9.4, 10.5, 11.8, 12.2, 15.4 (ibid).
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of five of its
recommendations contained in Chapter–III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing
explanation in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter-IV: The observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government have not been received: Para: 10.6, 10.12, 12.7, 16.8 (ibid).
In respect of the three recommendations placed in Chapter–IV , the Ministry has either
furnished interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires
that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the
recommendations categorized in Chapter–IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit
of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the ATR have been discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 Disaster Management
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee is dissatisfied over the delay in providing the full complement of personnel
to man the Secretariat of the Disaster Management Authority which is long overdue. The Committee
is of the considered view that the time-frame for any project relating to disaster management is
the key for its success. The Committee, therefore, recommends for early action for completing the
process of posting the required personnel to the National Disaster Management Authority without
further delay.
(Para 11.7 of 132nd Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The proposal for strengthening the organizational structure of National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA) and creation of 36 additional posts over and above the existing 88 posts of
NDMA has been approved. Necessary steps have been initiated to fill up these sanctioned posts
expeditiously, and a number of them have already been filled up.
Further recommendation
1.1.3 The Committee is happy to note that 36 additional posts have been approved and some
posts have already been filled. The Committee desires that all the sanctioned posts be filled up at
the earliest.
1.2 Delhi Police
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee however expresses its concern over the instances of corruption cases in Delhi
Police as reported in the media. The Committee feels that the system needs to be overhauled. The
Committee hopes that the series of proactive measures undertaken to check corruption in Delhi Police
would ultimately yield results in improving the image of the Delhi Police in the general public.
(Para 12.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 The concern of the Committee is duly noted. A Vigilance Branch headed by a Special C.P./
Vigilance, is functioning to check corrupt practices of police personnel. Besides, Public Grievances
Cells have also been set up in each District/Unit under the supervision of an ACP for similar
purpose. To improve the image of the Delhi Police in the minds of the general public, deterrent
action is taken by the department in cases where policemen are found involved in malpractices etc.
which includes suspension, transfer to non-sensitive posts, initiating disciplinary action for major/
minor penalty and registering of criminal cases against them. The telephone numbers and e-mail
2

3
addresses of senior officers are prominently displayed on notice boards in all the Police Stations.
The public has been given the facility to ring up senior officers, PCR and Flying Squad of Vigilance
Branch in the case of any harassment by police officials. In order to encourage the general public
to be more vigilant about corrupt activities of police, there is a facility of PO Box No. through
which public can send the complaints against corrupt policemen which are attended to promptly
and deterrent action is taken against defaulters. A Single Window System is in place at PHQ for
monitoring and tracking of complaints. Action against corrupt police officers is also taken by the
Anti Corruption Branch of Delhi Government as well as by the CBI.
Further Recommendation
1.2.3 The Committee noted the response of the Government.
1.3 Bureau of Immigration (BoI)
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee notes the progress made in the modernization of BoIs but feels that latest
equipments are required for upgradation of system like equipments which could be lesser compatible
so that it could identify counterfeit currencies, foreign countries passports, etc. The Committee feels
that these days the equipments are becoming more advanced and the credentials of the individuals
could be checked with thumb impression, color of eye, blood report etc. The modernization should
be aimed at keeping in view the requirement for next ten years. The Committee also recommends
that all ICPs should be covered under modernization in a phased manner.
(Para 13.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 The hardware being installed under the modernization programme at the Immigration Check
Posts (ICPs), which, inter alia, includes upgradation of computer systems, Immigration Control
System Software, Passport Reading Machines (PRMs) and Questionable Documents Examiner
(QDX) Machines, is state-of-the-art and compatible with similar systems which are being deployed
internationally. The modernization programme of ICPs has improved the security screening and
contributed towards expeditious immigration clearance of the passengers. There is an overall
improvement of the immigration services in the country. All the ICPs would be covered under the
modernization programme in a phased manner.
1.3.3 M odernization and upgradation of Immigration Services is also one of the Mission Mode
Projects (MMPs) of the Government under the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP). National
Institute for Smart Government (NISG) has been commissioned for outlining the scope of the
project for further development of an e-Governance model for Immigration, Visa and Foreigners
Registration and Tracking. The model envisages a comprehensive process re-engineering and
convergence of these processes with a view to streamlining and simplifying them as also
establishing of an efficient and transparent integrated system for the delivery of these services by
using advanced techniques, including biometrics, etc.
1.4 Border Area Development Programme (BADP)
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee in its One Hundred Thirteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
pertaining to the Ministry of DONER had recommended that it should specify the developmental
work under the Border Area Development Scheme which should be undertaken around 60-75 Km

4
of the actual border. But the ground realities in this context are different as the Committee came
to know about the fact that these funds are spent on civilian gardens and parks depriving the
people in the border areas where ther e is hardly any communication. The Committee recommends
that a proper monitoring mechanism should be put in place to monitor the utilization of these funds
as the people living in the border areas are suffering due to lack of infrastructure viz. schools and
other medical facilities.
(Para 16.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 The Department of Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs has been implementing
a Border Area Development Programme (BADP) through the State Governments with the aim to
provide balanced development of border areas through growth and improvement of infrastructure
and promotion of a sense of security and well being among the border population. The programme
covers 362 border blocks of 94 border districts of 17 States located along the international land
border. The programme is a 100% centrally sponsored scheme.
1.4.3 A T ask Force was constituted under the chairmanship of Shri B.N. Yugandhar, Member,
Planning Commission, for revamping the Border Area Development Programme. In accordance with
the recommendations of the Task Force, guidelines of BADP have been revised. The new guidelines
emphasize the need for participatory planning, convergence of all Centrally Sponsored Schemes
with BADP funds, filling up critical gaps in infrastructure, providing livelihood opportunities. The
revised guidelines also give importance to building administrative capacity and monitoring and
inspection.
1.4.4 In the new guidelines, emphasis has also been given on the need for organized work
selection, besides effective monitoring and review of the programme. The following provisions have
been made in this regard:
(i) In the revised guidelines emphasis is on specific socio-economic and infrastructure
development of villages falling between 0 to 15 kms from the border, with a view
to enabling the planned development of infrastructure facilities like road connectivity,
electricity, safe drinking water, telephone facilities, primary school building, PDS
shop and community centre, etc. The State Governments have been asked that adhoc
projects should not be taken at all, and the village plans should be integrated with
district plan for the proper and sustainable development of the remote villages. The
selection of the projects are, therefore, expected to be more organized and responsive
to area needs.
(ii) Besides BADP, all other flagship schemes of the Government of India and Centrally
Sponsored Schemes (CSS) are to be dovetailed suitably to saturate these border
villages with necessary infrastructure. Thus emphasis is being given on convergence
of different schemes to ensure maximum impact.
(iii) The review and monitoring of BADP is to be done at the district level, State level and
in the Ministry of Home Affairs. Periodical visits of the officers from the State level
and Government of India are also being undertaken.
1.5 Insurgency in North-Eastern States
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee feels that for the last four or five decades, this region is facing the problem
of insurgency and people are frustrated with the prevailing situation. The Government has to take

5
on the responsibility of resolving the problem. The Committee is of the considered view that in spite
of decrease in number of casualties reported instances of extortion activities and collection of
levies by the outlawed groups are increasing. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to keep a close
watch on the developments in this regard and all efforts be made to foil the nefarious design of
the secessionists.
(Para 17.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 Efforts of the State Governments, who are primarily responsible for ensuring public order
and security in their areas, are being supplemented by the Central Government through various
measures such as deployment of additional Central Security Forces to aid the State Authorities with
the objective of carrying out intensive counter insurgency operations and providing security for
vulnerable institutions and installations based on threat assessment; vigilance and surveillance on the
border, including construction of border fencing; sharing of intelligence; financial assistance for
strengthening of the local Police Forces and Intelligence agencies under the Police Modernization
Schemes; provision of assistance for strengthening various aspects of security apparatus and other
aspects of anti-militancy operations by way of reimbursement of Security Related Expenditures;
assistance to the States for raising of additional Forces in the form of India Reserve Battalions,
etc. The Central Government is maintaining close and continuous coordination with the State
Governments in the region with a view to periodically review the situation and taking further steps
as may be necessary on a continuing basis. The State Governments have been apprised of the
views of the Committee regarding instances of extortion related activities by various groups.
Discussions have also been held at the Central Government level with the Planning Commission and
the main Programme Ministries with a view to devising measures in relation to the processes of
release and utilization of Central funds and better monitoring of utilization, which would also help
to contain extortion related activities of the insurgent groups.

6
6
CHAPTER-II
THE OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
2.1 Shifting of Boundaries to the Zero Level
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee is of the view that the shifting of the fencing to the zero line is the only
solution left for the convenience of the people residing in the nearby villages to carry out their
agricultural activities. The Committee therefore, recommends that suitable action should be initiated
at the earliest for shifting of the fence to zero line. The Committee also desires that recruitment
of female constables be done at the earliest.
(Para 14.2 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.2 Border fencing has generally been done at about 150 yards away from the zero line with
the objective of checking smuggling, infiltration and other illegal activities across the border. This
distance helps in early detection of any illegal movement within the strip of land between the zero
line and the fence line for taking preventive measures. The strip of land between the zero line and
the fence line is also useful in helping the border guarding forces to distinguish between genuine
citizens and infiltrators. Apart from these security/tactical advantages, it has not been found feasible
to erect fencing on the zero line on account of the objections raised by Pakistan and Bangladesh
in terms of India-Pakistan Ground Rules, 1960-61 and joint India-Bangladesh guidelines for border
authorities which prohibit construction of defensive structure of permanent nature within 150 yards
from each side of the International Border (zero line). Although India does not consider fencing as
a defensive structure, any proposal to shift the fencing to the zero line can be considered after
resolution of the matter with neighbouring countries.
2.1.3 However, in certain stretches on Jammu International Border (38 km) and Punjab (22 km)
where fencing was erected at a far away distance from the zero line due to then prevailing security
conditions, Government proposes to shift fencing closer to the border i.e. at about 150 yards away
from the zero line.
2.1.4 In those areas where agriculture land lies between the zero line and the fencing on the
International Border along Pakistan and Bangladesh, gates have been provided at suitable distance
to facilitate the farmers to go across the fencing for cultivating their fields. Instructions have been
issued to BSF to open the fence gates from 0700 hours to 1730 hours in summer season and from
0800 hours to 1630 hours in the winter season on all days of the week for the benefit of the
farmers. In addition, identity cards are being issued to the regular farmers/labourers, who are
required to go beyond the fencing for work in the fields, by the Unit Commanders of BSF in
consultation with the Village Panchayats. BSF, is also providing security, as Kisan Guards, to the
farmers who cultivate their fields beyond the fence.
2.1.5 As regards recruitment of female constables for the purpose of frisking woman farmers
who go beyond the fence to cultivate their fields, BSF has initiated the process for recruitment of
745 Constables/Mahila (GD).

7
7
CHAPTER-III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE IS NOT SATISFIED WITH THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
3.1 Multipurpose National Identity Cards Scheme
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee expresses its strong displeasure on the adhocism adopted by the Government.
The MNIC scheme was launched on pilot basis prior to the announcement of the UID scheme. The
Planning Commission should have obtained status as well as feedback on the MNIC Scheme and
then taken a decision on any other scheme, let alone UID scheme. Running of two parallel schemes
appear to be overlapping in objectives and may be perceived to be wastage of time and resource.
Implementation of the pilot project for MNIC has taken unduly long time and yet it is not known
how long it would take to complete the Scheme in the entire country and on top of that another
scheme has been launched. The Committee recommends that the Group of Ministers may critically
review the MNIC and UID Schemes and examine the feasibility of merging the two into a single
integrated programme, so as to avoid overlapping of objectives and likely wastage of resource and
manpower. Whatever may be the recommendation of the Committee; Government must ensure that
such a programme should be made feasible for implementation within a reasonable and strictive
time-frame.
(Para 9.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.1.2 Subsequent to the amendments to the Citizenship Act, 1955 in 2003 making it compulsory
for registering every citizen and issue them identity cards, a pilot project has been completed on
31.03.2008 in selected areas of (12) States and (1) Union Territory viz., Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Tamil
Nadu, West Bengal and Puducherry to test check the processes and technology requirement. The
Pilot Project covered a population of 28.62 lakhs and under this more than 12 lakhs identity (smart)
cards have been delivered to those who are citizens and above 18 years of age in the pilot areas.
The 20 MNIC Centres, set up in each tehsil/block, will remain functional till 31.03.2009 for
maintenance and updating of database and will provide service to the identity card holders as well
as those who could not be verified in the first phase.
3.1.3 The UID scheme is being implemented by the Department of Information Technology (DIT)
by using the Election Commission data and two other data-bases, namely PDS and BPL with an
idea to have better targeting of the beneficiaries for delivery of services as well as benefits under
various schemes/programmes of the Government. The identification of individual under UID
scheme is general purpose identification using the existing databases which have gone through a
process of validation. It is, however, not an identity project as the case of MNIC/NPR which is
an identity centric scheme. There is then no conflict of objectives between UID and MNIC/NPR
schemes. Both of them will ultimately converge on the same objective of being an identity database
of residents of the country, even though they begin initially on a different premise.
3.1.4 Though the Pilot Project was initiated in November, 2003, its actual implementation has
taken longer due to difficulties encountered at almost every stage of its implementation. The revised

8
cost of the project was approved in August 2006 and the award of work of personalization and
delivery of identity cards through a consortium of Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) was
finalized in October, 2006. Though the timeline for personalisation and delivery of identity cards
was 7 months from the date of award of the contract, the actual implementation has taken longer
due to a variety of reasons. A project of this kind has been undertaken for the first time in the
country, and since no information of implementation was available either locally or globally, the
processes, methodology as well as the technology for the card including its operating system were
all developed indigenously. During implementation, there were issues in respect of data base
preparation, its integration with photographs and finger biometry, verification of citizenship against
the odds of non-availability of relevant documents, development of specifications and design of the
identity card, sourcing of raw materials from abroad for the cards, etc., which had to be addressed
as they came along. Despite these odds, the project has been completed successfully. The requisite
knowledge-base has been created in the Government for the first time for management of citizens’/
residents’ database as well as identity cards alongwith the requisite capacity building in Central
Public Sector Undertakings for production of smart cards in the country.
3.1.5 Keeping in view the enormous logistical and financial requirement for the national roll-out,
there is a proposal for creation of National Population Register (NPR) by collecting information on
specified items of each individual at the time of population enumeration during the next decennial
Census in 2011. This would save the cost of collection of information which will be incurred if
it is done de-novo. The photographs and finger biometrics of those above 18 years of age will be
integrated with data of each individual.
3.1.6 An Empowered Group of Ministers (E-GOM) has already reviewed the details of UID
Scheme and MNIC Project and has recommended the following strategy for collation of the two
schemes:
(i) UID to be in place by June, 2008.
(ii) NPR exercise would be undertaken to the extent needed excluding biometrics and
photo along with Census 2011.
(iii) Data collected under NPR would be handed over to UID Authority for maintenance
and updation.
(iv) NPR could thus become a partner database in the UID scheme.
3.1.7 The NPR so created in 2013-2014, would engulf the UID database and would become the
mother database. During 2008-2010, two pilots/proof of concept would be undertaken for the
following:—
➢ ORGI and DIT to undertake pilot/Proof of Concept (PoC) to test and work out
feasibility of incremental enumeration under NPR based on UID database.
➢ Utilization of Common Service Centres (CSCs) being set up under the Scheme of
DIT for:
a. collection of photographs and biometrics for NPR.
b. electronic data entry under NPR (from the filled schedules) to the extent
considered appropriate and feasible.
3.1.8 The Planning Commission has allocated Rs.300 crores to MHA for preparation of NPR
during the XI Plan period. The data collection for creating the NPR would be done alongwith
Census 2011 exercise for which preparatory works have been started. The NPR schedules will be
passed onto the UID Authority for conversion into electronic data base after which the finger

9
biometry and photography will be integrated in the field. The NPR is expected to be in place by
2013-14.
Further Recommendation
3.1.9 The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Government pertaining to the
need and objective of issuance of Multipurpose National Identity Cards Scheme and UID
Scheme. It appears that ultimately it is UID which is going to be the final outcome.
However, it is surprising to note that two pilot projects are again being implemented for
UID, even though results of MNIC pilot projects are already available with the Government.
It appears to be a case of sheer waste of money and manpower. The Committee now hopes
that the data to be created in 2011 census would be utilized successfully and NPR would be
in place as projected in 2013-14. There should not be any further pilot projects.
3.2 Modernisation pf Police Forces
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee observes that the role of the Ministry is not confined to merely allocating
funds to the States but it has the responsibility to ensure that each and every rupee is spent in the
furtherance of the objective of the scheme. The Committee reiterates its recommendations made in
the earlier reports that it should be insisted upon all the States to send utilization certificates at
the earliest in order to ensure that States spend the funds meant for modernization of their police
forces in an efficient manner.
(Para 10.5 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.2 The Ministry lays due emphasis on the full and timely utilization of funds released under
the Scheme for Modernization of State Police Forces (MPF). Release of funds during a financial
year is linked to the furnishing of Utilization Certificates by the State Governments in respect of
Central funds released upto the year preceding the previous financial year. If any unspent balance
Central funds is reported by any State Government, the Central funds to that extent are curtailed
from the allocation of  the respective State Government. Moreover, funds are released for
implementing the Annual Action Plans prepared by the State Governments after being duly
considered and approved by the High Powered Committee constituted in the Ministry.
3.2.3 MHA is also in the process of devising a Management Information System (MIS) for proper
monitoring and concurrent evaluation of the scheme in a comprehensive manner. The task of
developing MIS software has been entrusted to BPR&D. BPR&D in consultation with NIC is in
process of doing this.
Further Recommendation
3.2.4 While appreciating that the Ministry of Home Affairs is in the process of devising
a Management Information System (MIS) for proper monitoring and concurrent evaluation
of the scheme in a comprehensive manner, the Committee reiterates that the Central
Government must insist upon all the States to furnish at the earliest the utilization
certificate of funds allocated under modernization of Police Forces. This will ensure optional
utilization of funds in an efficient manner. Modernization of State Police in terms of
technological advancement through procurement of modern gadgets and weaponry is the
need of the hour in view of upsurge of naxal and terror activities particularly, the terrorist

10
attack that look place in Mumbai on 26.11.2008. The State Governments should take a
lesson from this and try to make use of the funds available under the Central scheme.
3.3 Disaster Management
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee also expresses its concern over the non-utilization of large amount of the
money sanctioned during 2007-08 for various projects. The reasoning given by the Ministry is not
acceptable to the Committee. In case, so much preparation was required for finishing the projects,
the Ministry should have anticipated the required time and the allocation should have accordingly
been sought. The Committee recommends that the Detailed Project Reports for all the projects may
be completed during the current year so that the projects may take off at the earliest.
(Para 11.8 ibid)
Action Taken
3.3.2 Provision for preparation of DPRs for the projects envisaged in 2007-08 have been provided
in 2008-09. The details of different projects, and the provisions made for the same in the financial
year 2008-09 are mentioned below:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. No. Name of Plan Scheme BE 2008-09
1. National Cyclone Mitigation Project (NCRMP) 15.00
2. National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project (NERMP) 2.00
3. National Landline Risk Mitigation Project (NLRMP) 1.50
4. National Disaster Management Communication 1.50
Network (NDMCN)
5. National Flood Disaster Management Project (NFDMP) 2.00
6. Other Disaster Management Projects (including 3.00
Microzonation, Vulnerability Assessment/Mapping etc.
T
OTAL: 25.00
Reasons for non-utilization of funds allocated to NDMA for the year 2007-08 for various
mitigation projects :—
3.3.3 The preparation of DPRs is a time consuming process. Prior to preparing DPRs, NDMA
had finalized the “Concept Notes” on each mitigation project and had forwarded the same to MHA
and Planning Commission for “in principle” approval. As the “in principle” approval from Planning
Commission was awaited for all the mitigation projects, the provision in the BE for 2007-08 was
surrendered keeping a token amount of Rs.1 lakh for each project in the revised estimate of
2007-08 as no expenditure was possible in the absence of approvals.
3.3.4 NDMA has since initiated process of engaging consultants for preparation of DPRs, and it
is expected that there will be significant progress in the current year.
Further Recommendation
3.3.5 The Committee is dissatisfied and unhappy with the perfumatory reply of the
Ministry. The Committee would like to observe that targets should have been kept for the

11
completion of the DRPs and then the implementation of the projects. The Committee hopes
that at least in 2009-10, the DRPs would be completed.
3.4 Delhi Police
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee is of the view that Delhi Police should re-assess the requirement of funds
keeping in view the forthcoming Commonwealth Games in 2010, with a view to improve its
functioning, for providing adequate protection to the people of NCR. The Committee is of the view
that the increase in the allocation for Delhi Police is insufficient, considering the security scenario
of Delhi and the forthcoming Games. The crowded places of Delhi are the prime targets for
terrorist activities due to their vulnerability. One of the major targets could be Metro Stations.
Security at Metro Stations needs to be tightened. The Committee is also of the view that overall
security measures should be strengthened in the NCR and additional allocation should be made for
this purpose.
(Para 12.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.2 It has been decided that a Special Task Force would be created from out of the existing
resources of Delhi Police for overall security and traffic management of Games Village and other
venues, under the supervisory control of a Joint Commissioner of Police. There would be proper
security coordination between “Special Task Force”, venue security and Delhi Police for intelligence
sharing, reinforcement of human and material sources or dealing with sudden contingency
situations, requiring assistance of other civic agencies, Central Police Forces or Crisis Management
Centres.
3.4.3 In respect of activities/plans of anti social elements, having bearing on the security of the
Games as well for protection of any threatened participants and athletes, action would be taken in
coordination with Central Intelligence agencies.
3.4.4 The Delhi Police have issued guidelines to all venue and site owning agencies for
“Construction-stage Security” to be arranged by them. The venue owning agencies have been
advised that for this purpose they could consider engaging the services of private security firms,
which could be a part of the contractual obligation of the contractor. The police will advise the
concerned agency and carry out security checks from time to time. Many of the requirements can
easily be fulfilled by the venue owning organization or contractor to ensure effective lighting,
fencing, basic searching and frisking, access control, photo identity cards to the workers, security
vetting and random checking of material etc. The role of the police at this stage will certainly be
advisory in nature. However, the police will be conducting security checks from time to time
regarding perimeter security, access control etc. To ensure this, necessary instructions have been
issued to the concerned officers.
3.4.5 The Government of India has already sanctioned creation of 5000 additional posts in Delhi
Police specifically in the context of the Commonwealth Games and an additional 7612 posts have
since been sanctioned in terms of a larger proposal of the Delhi Police. A proposal for providing
equipments etc. for Commonwealth Games, 2010 is also under consideration of the Government.
3.4.6 The security of Metro was reviewed in the Ministry of Home Affairs and it was decided
to hand over the security of Delhi Metro to CISF. Based on a preliminary assessment, 1633 posts
were sanctioned and CISF took over the security of Delhi Metro in April, 2007. In addition,
Ministry of Home Affairs constituted a Committee to assess the manpower and other security

12
related requirements of CISF including need for CCTVs, and other equipments. Based on
Committee report, the requirement of additional manpower in CISF and requirement of additional
security gadgets for Delhi Metro is under consideration of the Government.
3.4.7 Further, Rs.168 crore has been sanctioned for Intelligent Traffic Management System and
Rs.32 crore for communication in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Delhi Police is in the process of
appointing Consultants for developing the project details.
3.4.8 As far as the matter of protection of people outside Delhi i.e. NCR is concerned, it is
informed that Law and Order is a State Subject and it is the responsibility of the State Government
concerned to take effective steps for providing protection of people in the State. The Central
Government supplements the efforts of the State Governments by providing them financial
assistance to modernize their Police Forces.
Further Recommendation
3.4.9 The Committee notes the initiative taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs for
providing security cover for the forthcoming Commonwealth Games in 2010. However, the
Committee feels that the actual security cover to the people of Delhi and NCR appears to
be inadequate, particularly in the light of the recent serial bomb blasts and more recently
the Mumbai terror attacks. It needs hardly be emphasized that it is the formost duty of the
Government to ensure safety and security of its citizens. Towards that end, the Ministry of
Home Affairs must undertake a comprehensive review of the security capability of the Delhi
Police and provide the force with required personnel, weapons and training so that the life
and liberty of the residents of Delhi could be secured. The Committee also desires that the
Metro Stations in Delhi need to be provided full security and no stone should be left
unturned.
3.5 Illegal Bangladeshi Migrants
Recommendation
3.5.1 The Committee feels that a large presence of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants poses a grave
threat to the internal security and it should be viewed seriously. Reports have also appeared that
counterfeit notes are in large circulation along Indo-Bangladesh border. The Committee strongly
recommends that movement along the border may be strictly monitored.
(Para 15.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.5.2 Border Security Force (BSF) is manning 802 Border Out Posts (BOPs) on Indo-Bangladesh
border so as to check the cross border activities and infiltration from across the border. In order
to further strengthen the dominance of BSF on this border, it is proposed to establish additional
383 BOPs.
3.5.3 Further, the Government of India has approved 3406 Kms of fencing along Indo-Bangladesh
Border in two phases. Out of this, 2601 Kms of fencing has been completed so far. The
Government has also decided to provide floodlighting in 2840 Kms of this border to enhance the
observation of border guarding force to check cross border activities. The work is likely to
commence shortly.
3.5.4 In addition, following steps have been taken to enhance vigilance on the border:
(i) Round the clock surveillance of the border by carrying out patrolling;

13
(ii) Upgradation of intelligence network and co-ordination with other intelligence
agencies;
(iii) D eployment of hi-tech surveillance equipment such as Hand Held Thermal Imagers,
Mobile Surveillance Vehicles and Battle Field Surveillance Radars on the border to act
as force multiplier;
(iv) Reverine patrolling by watercrafts;
Further Recommendation
3.5.5 The Committee, while taking note of the measures undertaken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs for strict surveillance and patrolling on Indo-Bangladesh Border to prevent
illegal Bangladeshi immigration and other illegal activities, strongly reiterates that the
Ministry should leave no stone unturned in making Indo-Bangladesh-border intrusion-free.
The Committee desires that border surveillance must be strengthened by deployment of hi-
tech surveillance equipments, strict patrolling and establishing additional troops in adequate
number. V igilant surveillance along Indo-Bangladesh Border, is all the more necessary
keeping in view the alleged involvement of some Bangladesh terrorist groups in recent
blasts in the country and also recent terror attacks in Mumbai. The Committee is of the
view that any laxity on the Indo-Bangladesh Border would prove detrimental to India’s
security and economic progress.

14
CHAPTER-IV
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 Modernization of Police Forces
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee observed that the major component of the Scheme is construction of
residential and non-residential buildings for police forces. It is the view of the Committee that
though allocation of funds for construction of police housing and other building are equally
important and definitely enhance the morale of the police forces, yet it should not be done at the
cost of modernization of police forces. The Committee is constrained to note that after nearly eight
years of commencement of this Scheme, there are hardly any perceptible changes in the functioning
of police stations. The Committee feels that housing for police is the basic necessity and it should
not be clubbed with modernization. If necessary, Government may separate the component of
housing from modernization and provide separate grant for the former. The Committee recommends
that ‘modernization should appropriately include modern technological advancements, modern
gadgets and weaponry and such other facilities.
(Para 10.6 ibid)
Action taken
4.1.2 The Ministry has taken note of the observations of the Committee and this issue, is being
examined.
Further recommendation
4.1.3 The Committee desires to be informed of the action taken in the matter at the earliest.
4.2 Modernisation of Police Forces
Recommendation
4.2.1 The CIP A scheme is a path breaking initiative in networking the entire policing system of
the country. Now that the Scheme is being extended to the entire country and also to other higher
levels of hierarchy of the police system, completion thereof may bring a perceptible change in the
police public interface and the public perception of it. The Committee, however, recommends that
emphasis should be laid on the attitude and behavior of the police personnel. The Committee also
desires that the Scheme be implemented in its true spirit and the targets should be achieved. The
Committee also recommends that a monitoring mechanism should be put in place at the Centre to
ensure proper implementation of the Scheme.
(Para 10.12 ibid)
Action Taken
4.2.2 A d etailed project report has been prepared by National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) and
National Informatics Centre (NIC) on the new Scheme which gives a brief background,
14

15
conceptualization, scope of work, implementation strategy, programme schedule, financial
implications etc. The DPR was circulated to all the States for eliciting their comments / views. A
Conference of State Home Secretaries/DGPs was organized by the Ministry in New Delhi on 21st
May, 2008 under the chairmanship of Union Home Secretary to discuss the new Plan Scheme
‘Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and System (CCTNS)’, and based on the discussions
preparatory actions for developing the hardware/software parameters, guidelines for procurement,
implementation and management systems, training requirements and modalities, etc., have been
initiated.
4.2.3 An Empowered Committee has been constituted in the Ministry of Home Affairs to manage
the CCTNS Scheme at policy level, approve various components and functionalities to be covered
under the project and review progress of the project. A Mission Team has also been constituted
to support the Empowered Committee in the implementation of CCTNS and to look into operational
and coordination aspects of the Scheme. In addition a Project Management Unit (PMU) is proposed
to set up for continuous and concurrent monitoring of the Scheme, strengthening of the NCRB by
providing an IG level officer exclusively for the Project has also been approved by the competent
authority.
4.2.4 While all these actions are concurrently underway the proposal pertaining to the Scheme has
been considered by the EFC, and action for obtaining Cabinet approval is underway.
Further recommendation
4.2.5 The Committee would like to be informed of the final outcome in the matter
particularly in regard to action taken for obtaining Cabinet approval and thereafter.
4.3 Delhi Police
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee takes a serious view of the incidents of road rage. If this is allowed to
happen, it may lead to a chaotic situation where lawlessness becomes the order of the day. The
Committee recommends that severe punishments may be meted out to those involved in road rage
cases and wherever necessary laws may be amended.
(Para 12.7 ibid)
Action Taken
4.3.2 The road rage phenomenon emerges from the rapidly increasing volume of traffic, resultant
congestion, added pressures of time on drivers and other social/lifestyle factors. These, in turn,
reduce tolerance levels and traffic-related breach of peace, quarrels, sometimes culminating in
injuries, grievous hurt or even death. Delhi Police has adopted the following measures to control
road rage:
(i) Regulation and control of traffic particularly during peak hours to ensure hassle free
movement of traffic and reduction of journey time.
(ii) Education of motorists and other road users to observe road safety norms and to
give due regard and respect to other road users.
(iii) V igilance on the roads.
(iv) Strict legal action against the aggressors involved in road rage incidents.
4.3.3 The recommendations of 132nd Report are also under consideration and the views of the

16
State Governments are being obtained to enable examination as to whether the concerned sections
of the Indian Penal Code need to be amended/strengthened to cope with the increasing incidents
of road rage. Inter alia , this will include consideration of changes in the sections 323 (hurt) and
352 (assault or criminal force) of IPC. Besides, the punishment delivery system would need to be
considerably strengthened to ensure that appropriate punishment is speedily awarded.
Further Recommendation
4.3.4 The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made with regard to
proposed amendments in the relevant sections of the IPC.
4.4 Border Area Development Programme (BADP)
Recommendation
4.4.1 The Committee feels that border areas in the North Eastern part of the country have been
neglected for a long time. Even today some border areas are not easily accessible. The Committee
is constrained to note that in spite of its recommendation made in earlier reports, the Cabinet Sectt.
has not taken any decision on the issue of transferring of BADP scheme to Ministry of DONER.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issue be resolved immediately in the interest of the
nation.
(Para 16.8 ibid)
Action Taken
4.4.2 In pursuance of Group of Ministers recommendations on border management, a separate
Department of Border Management was created in the Ministry of Home Affairs in January, 2004
to give focused attention to the issues pertaining to border management.
4.4.3 Border Area Development Programme (BADP) was treated as part of the comprehensive
approach to border management and as such, Planning Commission transferred the BADP scheme
to the Department of Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs in the year 2004.
4.4.4 U nder Allocation of Business Rules, the BADP has been shown under two Ministries:
❍ Ministry of Home Affairs — Border Area Development Programme (BADP)
excluding the subjects specifically allocated to Department of Development of North
Eastern Region.
❍ Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region — Hill Area Development
Programme (HADP) and Border Area Development Programme (BADP) in North
Eastern Region.
4.4.5 It has been decided by the Planning Commission that the Department of Border
Management, in the Ministry of Home Affairs, should continue to deal with the BADP in
the North Eastern States also.  Planning Commission would hold discussion with the Department
of North Eastern Region and other concerned authorities in this regard. It was also emphasized by
the Planning Commission that the BADP schemes should only be implemented by MHA in view of
its reach to borders and presence of its manpower (BGFs) and capacity to supervise the works
throughout the borders of the country.
4.4.6 During further review, it was agreed that “all activities relating to BADP would henceforth
be through the MHA which has the basic r esponsibility for border management. Appropriate
instructions would be issued at the earliest.”

17
4.4.7 The Task Force constituted to revamp the Border Area Development Programme has also
noted in Chapter-V of the Report which deals with the Management of Border Area Development
Programme that development of border areas is a part of comprehensive approach to the Border
Management and it is necessary that the Border Area Development Programme is implemented by
the Department of Border Management through the respective border States and the Border
Guarding Forces.
4.4.8 If the work relating to BADP is handled by MHA, it would ensure synergy between the
border population and the border guarding forces for achieving effective and comprehensive border
management. MHA have no objection adding a representative of DONER on the BADP Empowered
Committee. However, in the State Level Screening Committees, representation in respect of DONER
is already provided for.
4.4.9 Further, even if implementation of BADP in NE States come under the DONER,
implementation of BADP in non NE States will continue to be under MHA, and the implementation
of BADP by two different Ministries may not be desirable for its effective implementation. From
the practical and administrative point of view also, it would be desirable that one Ministry/
Department handles BADP.
4.4.10 Keeping in view the position brought out above, it is felt that MHA should continue
to handle BADP for all the 17 States which have international land borders. Accordingly, the
Cabinet Secretariat was requested to amend the Allocation of Business Rules in this regard, who
in turn advised that MHA may send a proposal after obtaining the approval of the Minister Incharge
of DONER and Ministry of Defence. While Ministry of Defence had no objection, Ministry of
DONER has not yet agreed to the proposal of MHA and the matter is under discussion.
Further Recommendation
4.4.11 The Committee desires to be informed of the final decision taken in this regard.

18
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSION/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee is happy to note that 36 additional posts have been approved and
some posts have already been filled. The Committee desires that all the sanctioned posts
be filled up at the earliest. (Para 1.1.3)
MULTIPURPOSE NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS SCHEME
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Government pertaining to the
need and objective of issuance of Multipurpose National Identity Cards Scheme and UID
Scheme. It appears that ultimately it is UID which is going to be the final outcome.
However, it is surprising to note that two pilot projects are again being implemented for
UID, even though results of MNIC pilot projects are already available with the Government.
It appears to be a case of sheer waste of money and manpower. The Committee now hopes
that the data to be created in 2011 census would be utilized successfully and NPR would
be in place as projected in 2013-14. There should not be any further pilot projects.
(Para 3.1.1)
MODERNISATION OF POLICE FORCES
While appreciating that the Ministry of Home Affairs is in the process of devising
a Management Information System (MIS) for proper monitoring and concurrent evaluation
of the scheme in a comprehensive manner, the Committee reiterates that the Central
Government must insist upon all the States to furnish at the earliest the utilization
certificate of funds allocated under modernization of Police Forces. This will ensure optional
utilization of funds in an efficient manner. Modernization of State Police in terms of
technological advancement through procurement of modern gadgets and weaponry is the
need of the hour in view of upsurge of naxal and terror activities particularly, the terrorist
attack that took place in Mumbai on 26.11.2008. The State Governments should take a
lesson from this and try to make use of the funds available under the central scheme.
(Para 3.2.1)
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee is dissatisfied and unhappy with the perfumatory reply of the
Ministry. The Committee would like to observe that targets should have been kept for the
completion of the DRPs and then the implementation of the projects. The Committee hopes
that at least in 2009-10, the DRPs would be completed. (Para 3.3.5)
DELHI POLICE
The Committee notes the initiative taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs for
providing security cover for the forthcoming Commonwealth Games in 2010. However, the
Committee feels that the actual security cover to the people of Delhi and NCR appears to
be inadequate, particularly in the light of the recent serial bomb blasts and more recently
18

19
the Mumbai terror attacks. It needs hardly be emphasized that it is the foremost duty of
the Government to ensure safety and security of its citizens. Towards that end, the Ministry
of Home Affairs must undertake a comprehensive review of the security capability of the
Delhi Police and provide the force with required personnel, weapons and training so that the
life and liberty of the residents of Delhi could be secured. The Committee also desires that
the Metro Stations in Delhi need to be provided full security and no stone should be left
unturned. (Para 3.4.9)
ILLEGAL BANGLADESHI MIGRANTS
The Committee, while taking note of the measures undertaken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs for strict surveillance and patrolling on Indo-Bangladesh Border to prevent
illegal Bangladeshi immigration and other illegal activities, strongly reiterates that the
Ministry should leave no stone unturned in making Indo-Bangladesh border intrusion-free.
The Committee desires that border surveillance must be strengthened by deployment of hi-
tech surveillance equipments, strict patrolling and establishing additional troops in adequate
number. V igilant surveillance along Indo-Bangladesh Border, is all the more necessary
keeping in view the alleged involvement of some Bangladesh terrorist groups in recent
blasts in the country and also recent terror attacks in Mumbai. The Committee is of the
view that any laxity on the Indo-Bangladesh Border would prove detrimental to India’s
security and economic progress. (Para 3.5.1)
MODERNIZATION OF POLICE FORCES
The Committee desires to be informed of the action taken in the matter at the
earliest.
MODERNISATION OF POLICE FORCES
The Committee would like to be informed of the final outcome in the matter
particularly in regard to action taken for obtaining Cabinet approval and thereafter.
(Para 4.2.5)
DELHI POLICE
The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made with regard to
proposed amendments in the relevant sections of the IPC. (Para 4.3.4)
BORDER AREA DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (BADP)
The Committee desires to be informed of the final decision taken in this regard.
(Para 4.4.11)

MINUTES

22

23
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 24 February, 2009, in Committee Room ‘C’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramachandra Khuntia
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri Tapir Gao
11. Shri T.K. Hamza
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
14. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
15. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
16. Km. Agatha K. Sangma
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda
of the day.
3. The Committee, took up for consideration the draft 140th Report on the Action Taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s 132nd Report on Demands
for Grants (2008-09) pertaining to Ministry of Home Affairs. After some discussion, the Committee
adopted the Report without any modification.
23

24
3.1 * * *
3.2 * * *
4. * * *
4.1 * * *
5. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports in both Houses of Parliament during
the Session. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence, Shri Sanjay Raut,
Member, Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, Member, Rajya Sabha
to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Naveen Jindal,
Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence, Shri Tapir Gao, Member, Lok Sabha, to lay a copy each
of the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.