Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT 
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED FORTY THIRD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2023-24) OF THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN 
REGION 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 7th December, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2023) 
 
 
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
250 


Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED 
FORTY THIRD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023- 
24) OF THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 7th  December, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2023) 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 


C O N T E N T S 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2. INTRODUCTION ii 
3. ACRONYM iii 
4. REPORT 1-20
Chapter - I 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
2-6
Chapter - II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
7-16
Chapter - III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
17-19
Chapter - IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received 
20 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE- 
AT A GLANCE 
21 
7. RELEVANT 
COMMITTEE
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
6. ANNEXURES 26-33
22-25

i 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Sujeet Kumar
7. Shri Derek O’Brien
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shri Digvijaya Singh
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Dr. Nishikant Dubey1
15. Shri Dilip Ghosh
16. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
17. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
18. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
19. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
23. Shri R. K. Singh Patel
24. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
25. Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi
26. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
27. Shri Ravneet Singh
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
29. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga
30. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Ms. Payal Narendra Ingole, Secretariat Assistant 
1 Dr. Nishikant Dubey, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 5th October, 2023 in place of Shrimati Kirron Kher, MP, Lok 
Sabha. 

ii  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Fiftieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty Third Report of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants (2023- 24) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
(DoNER). 
 
2. The Two Hundred Forty Third Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th March, 2023 and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on 20 th March, 2023. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof 
were sent to the Ministry of DoNER on 20th March, 2023 requesting them to furnish Action Taken 
Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry of DoNER 
furnished the Action Taken Notes (in English) on 4 th July, 2023 and (in Hindi) on 12 th July, 2023 
on the above mentioned Two Hundred Forty Third Report to the Committee. 
3. The statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the said 
Report of the Committee has been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27 th July, 2023 and Lok 
Sabha on 31st July, 2023 in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24th September, 
2004. 
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Fiftieth Report and adopted the same at 
its meeting held on 5th December, 2023. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
5th December, 2023 
New Delhi 
14, Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
Brij Lal 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 

iii  
ACRONYMS 
 
BTC Bodoland Territorial Council 
CNA Central Nodal Agency 
DHATC Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council 
DoNER Development of North Eastern Region 
FPCs Farmer Producer Companies 
FPOs Farmers Producers Organization 
HADP Hill Areas Development Programme  
KAATC Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council 
MDoNER Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
MOVCDNER Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
MSME Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
NEC North Eastern Council 
NLCPR Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources 
NER North Eastern Region 
NERSDS North East Road Sector Development Scheme 
NESIDS North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme 
NECBDC North Eastern Cane and Bamboo Development Council 
NERAMAC North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited 
NEHHDC North Eastern Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation 
NEDFi North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Limited 
PFMS Public Finance Management System 
PMFME Prime Minister Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises Scheme 

1  
Report 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of 
Development of North Eastern Region on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred 
Forty Third Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry. The 
Two Hundred Forty Third Report was presented to Rajya Sabha on 17th March, 2023 and laid on 
the Table of Lok Sabha, on 20th March, 2023. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty Third Report have been categorized as 
follows: 
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 2.3.8, 2.5.3, 3.1.7, 3.1.8, 3.2.9, 3.9.6, 4.5.4, 4.6.5 and 4.7.2 of 
Two Hundred Forty Third Report. 
Total recommendations- 9 
 
 
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.2.4, 3.3.7, 3.6.3, 
4.1.5, 4.1.6, 4.1.7, 4.1.8, 4.2.5, 4.3.3, 4.3.4, 4.4.2, 4.6.6 and 4.9.2 (ibid) 
Total recommendations - 13 
 
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee 
is not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 3.7.8, 3.8.7 and 4.8.6 ( ibid) 
Total recommendations – 3 
 
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of  which final replies of 
the Government have not been received. 
Total Recommendations – NIL 
 
3. The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation indicated 
above, in the succeeding Chapters. 

2  
CHAPTER I 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
1.1 Utilization of Funds 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1.1 The Committee notes that, in accordance with the Department of Economic Affairs' 
directives, a revamped mechanism for transferring funds under Central Sector Schemes has been 
implemented. The Committee also notes that the Ministry has been able to utilize around 16% of 
the allocated amount in the first three quarters of the financial year. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may strengthen its coordination mechanism with the NEC, States 
and implementing agencies so that such a situation that arose in the Financial Year 2022 -23 can 
be addressed promptly and without delay in order to maximize the utilization of f unds. The 
Committee also recommends that the Ministry make all-out efforts to ensure that the balance of ₹ 
500 crores is accounted for by the close of the financial year 2022-23. 
(Para 2.3.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
1.1.3 Further, due to the CNA system being brought into effect, in this transition period 2022-  
23, there were two sources of funds for the Schemes of Ministry for the States – from the unspent 
balances of releases made previously; and from the budgetary outlays in RE 2022- 23. In 
addition to the ₹ 2,180 crore spent by the States out of the available balances from the previously 
released advances till FY 2021- 22; further expenditure/ utilization of about ₹ 1,295 crore was 
incurred from available unspent balances including from RE 2022- 23 by the SGs / IAs with 
pursuance from the Ministry of DoNER. 
 
1.1.4 Thus, the total expenditure / utilization in FY 2022-23 by the SGs / IAs in the NE Region 
amounted to nearly ₹ 3,475 crore. 
1.2 Capital Section 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.2.1 The Committee notes that due to a change in the classification of Head of Account under 
NESIDS, the major part of the budget outlay has been reflected under Capital Section. Hence, 
the total Revenue outlay has decreased to ₹ 1798.75 crores in BE 2023-24 from ₹ 2140.04 crores in 
BE 2022- 23. The Committee also notes that under the head ‘Schemes of NEC’, there is a 
shortfall of ₹ 381.58 crores in BE 2023- 24 compared to the projected demand of ₹ 1181.58 
crores. The Ministry has also informed the Committee that allocated funds may not be adequate. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry coordinate with NEC to prioritize the 
expenditure out of the present budgetary allocation and seek more funds at the RE 2023- 24 stage 
to meet the shortfalls. The Committee also recommends that the requirement of additional funds 
under the Capital Section may also be realistically assessed at the RE stage and additional funds, 
if required, may be sought. 

3  
(Para 2.5.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
1.2.3 Moreover, of the total expenditure of nearly ₹ 3,475 crore during 2022- 23, the capital 
expenditure accounted for 94% or about ₹ 3,260 crore – [inclusive of ₹ 600 crore from heads 
under Capital Section; and ₹ 2,660 crore for creation of capital assets from heads under Revenue 
Section]. 
 
1.2.4 For the year 2023- 24, it has been envisaged that out of the planned total expenditure of 
nearly ₹ 5,892 crore, the capital expenditure will account for 92% or ₹ 5,417.28 crore – [ 
inclusive of ₹ 4093.25 crore from heads under Capital Section; and over ₹ 1,324.03 crore for 
creation of capital assets from heads under Revenue Section]. 
 
1.2.5 However, the allocation for the overall holistic development, social infrastructure and 
social development targeted Schemes of NEC is ₹ 800 crore in 2023-24; (~20% higher than) ₹ 
666.87 crore, of the RE 2022-23. 
1.3 Schemes of North East Council 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3.1 The Committee notes the role of the NEC in formulating regional plans for integrated and 
balanced socio-economic development of the NER. The Committee also takes note of the reply 
of NEC that the unspent balance of NEC  schemes has been minimized and that much progress is 
being made. For this, NEC should minimize the queries and consider deputing their officers to 
resolve the issues involved through direct meetings with the State Government officials so that 
the implemen tation process is expedited. The Ministry, being the nodal agency for matters 
relating to the planning, execution and monitoring of development schemes and projects in the 
North Eastern Region, should closely coordinate with NEC to ensure the timely implem entation 
of the projects. 
(Para 3.1.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.3.2 The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
 
1.4 Capital Section 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4.1 With regard to the reduced allocation made for the Schemes of NEC, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may coordinate with NEC to prioritize the expenditure out of the 
present budgetary allocation and seek more funds at the RE 2023-24 stage to meet the shortfalls. 
(Para 3.1.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 

4  
1.4.2 The allocation under ‘Schemes of NEC’ at BE 2023- 24 is ₹ 800.00 crore against 
projected demand of ₹ 1181.58 crore. All efforts are being made to fully utilize the budgeted 
outlay. The shortfall of ₹ 381.58 Crore shall be taken up at RE 2023- 24 stage based on actual 
demand prevailing at that point of time. 
 
1.5 Central Pool of Resources for North East and Sikkim /North East Special 
Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.5.1 The Committee notes that in the fiscal year 2022 -23, the Ministry has spent only ₹0.17 
crores against a budget of ₹ 650 crores under the North East Special Infrastructure Development 
Scheme (NESIDS). The reason given for low fund utilization is the introduction of a new process 
for implementing the revised procedure of fund flow under Central Sector Schemes, as has 
already been discussed in the previous chapter. The Ministry has stated that it expects to spend 
₹1104.27 crores by the end of the Financial Year 2022- 23 for the schemes under North East 
Special Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS), Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources 
(NLCPR) and Hill Area Development Programme (HADP). The Committee observes that there 
is low utilization of funds in the first three quarters of the financial year 2022- 23. Non-utilization 
of funds may put additional pressure on the budget for the Financial Year 2023- 24. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must take appropriate steps to ensure that 
its schemes are carried out on time in the forthcoming Financial Year. 
(Para 3.2.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.2 The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
1.5.3 The need to ramp -up States’ implementing capacities t o measure up to the even higher 
budgetary resources mobilized for the MDoNER schemes for FY 2023 -24 onwards and any 
unspent balances upto end of FY 2022- 23 is being focused and impressed upon the IAs and the 
State Governments of the NE Region and being pursued along with right upto the highest levels. 
 
1.6 North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development Corporation Limited 
(NEHHDC) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6.1 The Committee notes that the North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development 
Corporation Limite d (NEHHDC) has been successful in reducing losses over the years. The 
Committee believes that in this new internet age, promotion and advertising have found a new 
outlet through social media platforms. The penetration of various social media platforms to every 
nook and corner of the globe has solved the problem of last -mile reach. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that social media platforms may be used effectively to promote 
handmade products and showcase NER's unique art and crafts. This would also hel p the cause of 
the Make in India scheme, which has strongly advocated for manufacturing goods and services  
in India rather than sourcing them from other countries. The Committee also takes note of the 
resolution passed by NEHHDC to convert into a Section 8 company, 100% wholly owned by the 

5  
Government of India, in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. As the 
matter is under the consideration of the Ministry, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
carefully consider this resolution weighing the benefits it will have on NEHHDC towards 
becoming self-sufficient. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress made on 
this account. 
(Para 3.9.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.2 The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
1.7 Roadways 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.7.1 The Committee believes that completing road projects on time is critical to the economic 
development of NER. The Committee takes note of various road projects carried out in NER 
under various schemes. The Committee notes with satisfaction that all the 12 road projects 
sanctioned under North Eastern States Road Investment Programme (NESRIP) have been 
completed. The Committee notes that physical progress on many road projects (>₹ 300 crores) 
expected to be comp leted between 2023 and 2024 is slow. Similarly, the Committee also notes 
that, few projects under the Schemes of NEC are yet to be completed. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with the NEC and MoRTH, make efforts to 
identify and resolve bottlenecks that are delaying projects so that the benefits intended for the 
North East can be extended as soon as possible. 
(Para 4.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 The observations/recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
1.8 Railways 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.8.1 The Committee takes note of the progress made towards completing various railway 
projects in the NER. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of DONER in coordination 
with the M/o Railways ensure that all ongoing projects are completed within the time frame 
specified to provide NER residents with railway connectivity. The Committee would also like to 
know the status of the currently sanctioned project to connect all State capitals in the North 
Eastern Region, as well as the status of all other projects undertaken by the Northeast Frontier 
Railway (NFR). 
(Para 4.6.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.2 The observations/recommendations of the Committee are noted. 

6  
1.8.3 The status of the currently sanctioned project to connect all State Capitals in North 
Eastern Region, as well as the status of all other projects undertaken by Northeast Railway 
(NFR) is attached at Annexure-I and Annexure-II 
1.9 Waterways 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.9.1 The Committee notes the work carried out by the Ministry for the development of 
National Waterways in NER. It may be stated that North Eastern region has a large potential for 
regional connection through waterways and this may be optimally reaped by the Ministry of 
DoNER and the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
(Para 4.7.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 The observations/recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 

7  
CHAPTER II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the 
matter in view of the Government’s reply 
 
2.1 Scheme-wise projection viz a viz allocation of funds 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1.1 The Committee is pleased to note that all the schemes of the Ministry have been  
approved up to the limit of 2025- 26 and feels that the additional time of 3 years available with 
the Ministry of DoNER may be enough to plan and execute its schemes. The Committee hopes 
that funds under the schemes can now be spent with proper planning and recommends that the 
Ministry prepare a road map in consultation with all s takeholders for the time -bound 
implementation of schemes considering the budgetary allocation available to them. The 
Committee further notes that the road sector schemes under Non- Lapsable Central Pool of 
Resources (NLCPR), Hill Area Development Programme (HADP) and North East Road Sector 
Development Scheme (NERSDS) have been merged under one head of the North East Special 
Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) -Roads component. This will allow the Ministry 
to use the allocated amount of ₹ 2491.00 crore to prioritize their investments. Significant progress 
has been made in developing roadways in the NER during the last couple of years. The 
Committee hopes that this merger of schemes will provide the necessary incentive for 
constructing roads in the unserved regions, hence stimulating economic growth in these areas. 
(Para 2.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.2 The projects under the Schemes of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
(MDoNER) are prioritized, selected and sanctioned as per the laid down procedure in Schemes 
guidelines in consultation with the stake -holders viz. the State Governments, Line Ministries to 
achieve the intended objectives. 
 
2.1.3 In so far as utilization of funds is concerned, MDoNER is fully complying with the revised 
fund flow procedure as per Department of Expenditure’s OM dated 9 th March, 2022 and various 
instructions issued thereafter. Funds are released on ‘just -in-time’ basis as per requirement of 
the projects. 
 
2.1.4 With regard to allocation of funds for NESIDS- Roads, the erstwhile NERSDS, an amount 
of ₹1100.00 crore budgetary allocation has been provided in FY 2023-24. Strategies are in place 
to fully utilize the annual outlay in a time bound manner. 
 
2.1.5 The objective of the NESIDS (Roads) will be to take up rehabilitation/construction/up 
gradation of roads (including bridges on the roads) in the NER falling under the following 
categories: - 
(a) Proposals inter se contributing to road connectivity to every block/sub -division HQ with 
the district HQ through already constructed Highways or roads. Preference to the 

8 
proposals which provide connectivity to the districts to saturate the related (Key 
Performance Indicator) KPIs of Sustainable Development  Goals (SDG) or 
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) either for the entire region or for multiple States 
or for an entire State. 
(b) Roads of strategic importance identified by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) or Ministry
of Defense (MoD) or for major connectivity in areas of Autonomous District Councils.
(c) Replacement of timber/Bailey/temporary bridges having span more than 20 meters on
roads identified at (a) and (b) above.
(d) Proposals for providing Road/Rail and Water connectivity for economic centres or
tourist destinations, which is recognized by Ministry of Tourism/ITDC or falls on tourist
circuits developed by Ministry of Tourism/NEC.
(e) Proposals for providing connectivity to the remote villages which are out of ambit of
PMGSY.
2.2 North East Enterprise Development Scheme (NEEDS) erstwhile loan to North East 
Development Finance Corporation (NEDFi) 
R
ecommendation/Observation 
2.2.1 The Committee appreciates the performance under the North East Enterprise 
Development Scheme (NEEDS) and the loan provided by the North Eastern Development 
Finance Corporation (NEDFi) for the promotion of micro, small, and medium enterprises 
(MSMEs) and microfinance sector which, no doubt, contributes towards more inclusive and 
equitable growth in the NER. The Committee would also like to commend the efforts to disburse 
about 92% of ₹ 100.00 crores by 31st December, 2022. The Committee notes that NEDFi has 
been designated as Central Nodal Agency for implementing the schemes. Hence, NEDFi now 
has a greater responsibility for managing funds for various schemes in NER. The Committee 
recommends that NEDFi, in coordination with Ministry of DoNER and NEC, must develop a 
robust and transparent mechanism for the transfer of funds and effectively streamline the ‘just - 
in-time’ disbursement of funds to maximize the benefits of the revised guidelines 
(Para 3.3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 North East Development Finance Corporation (NEDFi) Ltd. has fully implemented the 
revised fund flow mechanism and the funds are released on ‘just -in-time’ manner as per revised 
guidelines, through Public Finance Management System (PFMS). For better monitoring of funds 
released and progress of projects, a Dashboard is being developed by NEDFi which will 
incorporate requirements of all stakeholders. The Dashboard for Central Nodal Agenc y (CNA) 
transactions will include features like: (i) Scheme -wise status of fund authorized to CAN; (ii) 
Drawing limit set to Sub -Agencies (SAs) based on the authorization issued by the respective 
Program Divisions (PDs) of MDoNER and NEC; (iii) Project -wise utilization of funds by SAs 
along with the physical progress of the projects; (iv) Scheme -wise balance available in CNA 
account, etc. Development of Dashboard is in advanced stage and it is likely to go live soon. 
2.3 Special Package for Bodoland Territoria l Council (BTC), Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Territorial Council (KAATC) and Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial 
Council (DHATC) 

9 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3.1 The Committee understands that the efficient working of Bodoland Territorial Council 
(BTC), Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council (KAATC) and Dima Hasao 
Autonomous Territorial Council (DHATC) would lead to socio- economic infrastructure 
development like roads and bridges, power, agriculture, art and culture in their respective 
territorial regions. With the mentioned committed liabilities, the Committee finds that a 
significantly larger sum of ₹ 100 crores has been allocated under each of the heads for Financial 
Year 2023- 24. The Committee also notes that most projects sanctioned since inception under 
DHATC and KAATC are still pending completion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may take necessary action so that the identified infrastructure and development 
projects pending under these heads are completed in a time -bound manner. Further, the 
Committee would like to be apprised, in detail, about ongoing 10 projects under DHATC and the 
measures proposed to be taken to utilize the allocated amount under special package of BTC, 
KAATC and DHATC for development of these areas. 
(Para 3.6.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 Out of total ‘12’ projects sanctioned under DHATC package, ‘10’ projects costing 
₹154.94 crore are ongoing. Against these ‘10’ project, ₹107.33 crore have been released and out of 
which ₹86.21 crore have been utilized. The details of these ‘10’ projects are at Annexure-III. 
2.3.3 Further, continuous efforts made by the Ministry for timely implementation of the 
projects include regular review of ongoing projects under special packages of Assam (BTC, 
DHATC & KAATC) with the officers of the State Government of Assam/Councils. 
2.4 Agriculture and Allied Sectors 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.1 Agriculture is one of the major sources of livelihood for the people of North Eastern 
Region and assisting and encouraging the farmers to continue their farming activities through the 
implementation of various schemes like Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, Mission Organic Value 
Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) etc. give impetus to agricultural 
development and upliftment of the farmers in North Eastern Region. The Committee appreciates 
the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) which is providing insurance coverage and 
financial support to the farmers in the event of failure of any notified crops due to natural 
calamities, pest and diseases. The scheme also encourages farmers to adopt innovative and 
modern agricultural practices. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should 
make efforts that such schemes have a wider reach in NER and that maximum benefits are 
reaped out of these schemes by the farmers. 
(Para 4.1.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare has informed that Government is promoting 
certified organic farming in value chain mode in all the North Eastern Region states since 
2015-16 through the schemes of Mission Organic Value Chain Development (MOVCDNER). 

10  
The scheme provides end -to-end support to farmers to develop their value chain from 
production to processing, certification and marketing. Under MOVCDNER, an assistance of ₹ 
46,575/ha for 3years is provided for the creation of FPO, support to farmers for organic inputs, 
quality seeds/ planting material and training, hand holding and certification. Financial 
assistance @ ₹ 32500/ ha for 3 years is provided to farmers for on- farm/off–farm organic inputs 
under the scheme. Under the scheme need based assistance is provided for various components 
namely Integrated Processing unit @ ₹ 600 lakh, Collection, aggregation and grading unit @ ₹ 
10.00 lakh, Integrated Pack house @ ₹ 37.50 lakh, refrigerated vehicle @ ₹ 
18.75 lakh, pre -cooling, cold stores, ripening chambers @₹18.75 lakh and transportation / 4 
wheeler @ ₹ 6.00 lakh. 
 
2.4.3 Since 2015-16, under MOVCDNER, 1.73 lakh ha area has been covered under organic 
farming by developing 379 FPO/FPCs involving 1.89 lakh farmers. In addition, 7 NE states have 
developed their own brands for organic products. So far, ₹ 886.16 crore has been released under 
the scheme. With the help of MOVCDNER and state -run schemes, Other North Eastern States 
are also expanding their areas under organic farming to transform into organic farming State. 
 
2.4.4 The flagship scheme of the Government namely, Pradhan MantriFasalBimaYojana 
(PMFBY) and Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) were launched 
from Khari f 2016 season in the country. 27 States/Union Territories have implemented the 
scheme in one or more seasons since inception of the scheme. The scheme is optional for  
States. Therefore, States are free to opt in favour of the scheme. Five North- Eastern St ates 
namely, Assam,Manipur, Meghalya, Sikkim, Tripura have opted for implementation of the 
scheme. 
 
2.4.5 The following measures have been taken to increase the coverage and absorption of 
funds in NER States under PMFBY: 
• Financial sharing pattern between Centre and North Eastern States has been revised 
from 50: 50 to 90 :10 w.e.f. Kharif 2020 season. 
• Provision has been made for dedicated budget provision by insurance companies for 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) including intensive publicity to cre ate 
awareness among the farmers. 
• To increase the dialogue and to impress NER States to adopt PMFBY/RWBCIS, 
dedicated nodals have been assigned under Technical Support Unit (TSU) of PMFBY. 
• NERAMAC also has been playing a very important role in various schem es for the 
benefit of NER farmers. It has also taken collaborative steps with various Government 
Departments like National Backward Classes, Finance and Development Corporation 
(NBCFDC), Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Ministry of Food Processi ng, 
etc through which NERAMAC strives to encourage farmers by promoting modern 
farming practices and also to develop value-added products. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.4.6 Taking note of the uniqueness of Boka Saul rice, the Committee believes that the 
potential of this variety of rice can be tapped. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 

11  
special consideration may be given and efforts may be made to commercialize this special 
variety of rice and bolster its reach beyond the State of Assam. 
(Para 4.1.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.7 NERAMAC has been regularly supporting the farmers and entrepreneurs dealing with 
Boka Saul rice or Kumol Saul (as locally known) by providing market linkages. NERAMAC 
promotes this product through its retail outlets located as strategic places like airport, zoo 
premise, railway stations as well as at Dilli Haat, New Delhi. NERAMAC also promotes 
Boka/Kumol Saul/Magic Rice by displaying it at various events and export/buyer -seller 
meetsthat it participates in. The uniqueness of  Boka Saul is that it does not require cooking and 
can be consumed by directly soaking it in water for few hours. Going forward, NERAMAC will 
surely give special consideration and efforts to commercialize this special variety of rice and 
bolster its reach beyond the state of Assam. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.8 Similarly, considering the abundance of Bamboo in NER the Committee notes that its 
commercial viability has not been fully tapped. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may facilitate carrying out research activities in collaboration with various 
organizations well versed in this subject like the Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training 
Institute (IPIRTI), situated in Bengaluru. This will enable the Ministry and respective States to 
utilize the immense potential of abundantly grown Bamboo in NER. 
(Para 4.1.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.9 Bamboo is one of the sub- sector that has been covered under the “Agriculture Task 
Force” jointly formed by Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and MDoNER to steer 
the growth of agriculture sector in the NER and efforts are being made in this direction. 
 
2.4.10 Through NEDFi, NEC has also finalized an “Action Plan for promotion of Bamboo in 
NER” in consultation with stakeholders and shared the same with Central Ministries including 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and the NE States. 
 
NEC has also supported number of projects in this regard, some of them are:- 
1) Bamboo Development Project in Mizoram, Mizoram. 
2) Bamboo nursery raising and farming in parts of NER under AATMANIRBHAR BHARAT 
ABHIYAN (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Meghalaya) 
3) Bamboo resource creation through plantation 
4) Promotion of commercial bamboo plantation in North East India etc. 
 
2.4.11 North East Bamboo Development Council (NECBDC) with its rich experience in the 
bamboo sector can play a vital role in facilitating research activities in identified areas that are 
stagnating the growth of the bamboo industrial activities. NECBDC is making arrangements 
with institutes like IITG, NID, IPIRTI (now, IWST) and other agencies to take up bamboo-related 
research and development relating to bamboo charcoal, bamboo shoot, bamboo handicraft and 
furniture, and constructions. It is also working with IIP (Indian Institute Of Packaging) on the 

12  
development of bamboo crates for the packaging of fruits and vegetables to replace plastic 
crates. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.12 The Committee further recommends that research on other indigenous crop varieties, 
such as betel -nut, jackfruit etc. that are abundantly grown in NER, may be explored for its use 
for the welfare of not only the people of the region but also other parts of the country. 
(Para 4.1.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.13 NEC has supported projects for Arecanut cultivation through “Promotion of Arecanut 
plantation integrated with turmeric in the North Eastern Region of India (NERCRMS)” which 
has been sanctioned during FY 2022-23 
 
2.4.14 Village level arecanut processing units have also been established in Changlang District 
of Arunachal Pradesh especially for making of disposable plates under the initiation of 
NERCRMS (A society under NEC, M/o DoNER, GoI.) 
 
2.4.15 NERAMAC has recently taken steps to promote the indigenous crop varieties of NER and 
13 registered GI crops with the Company is one of the best examples of this. All these GI 
products are Agri-Horti items and fall under indigenous crop varieties. Moreover, NERAMAC is 
planning to roll out various projects to develop banana fiber, jackfruit chips, Assam lemon juice, 
etc. in FY 2023-24. 
 
2.5 Organic Farming in NER 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5.1 The Committee notes that Sikkim has achieved the status of a fully organic farming state. 
However, there is a need for dedicated machinery in NER looking into the capacity -building 
mechanism of States and various agencies involved in agriculture and allied services towards 
strengthening their organic farming infrastructure. The Committee recommends the Ministry of 
DoNER to provide its support and encouragement to other States of NER to achieve the status of 
an organic farming state. 
(Para 4.2.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 The “Action Plan on Organic Farming in Agri -Horti Crops” prepared by NEC through 
NEDFi is under consideration. In this regard, NEC has supported number of projects from time 
to time. 
Some of the recently sanctioned projects are: - 
• Turmeric Providing sustainable livelihood s cientific method of organic production of 
turmeric (Curcuma longa along with certification as organic produce C&RD Block, Ri - 
Bhoi district, Meghalaya. 
• Organic Tropical Fruit, Tamenglong 
• Organic Tea Cultivation in Tamenglong District, Manipur 

13  
• Promotion of Organic Plantation of Khasi Mandarin Orange in Meghalaya 
 
2.5.3 Also, NERAMAC has introduced two brands namely “Organic North East (One)” and 
NE Fresh” to promote the organic and natural products of NER. Moreover, as one of the 
implementing agencie s for the CSS formation & promotion of the 10,000 FPOs scheme, 
NERAMAC has formed and FPOs/ FPCs and encourages them to adopt organic/ natural 
farming techniques. 
 
2.5.4 Further Organic Farming is promoted in NER by Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare through the scheme of Mission Organic Value Chain Development (MOVCDNER). The 
details of the same may kindly be seen in reply to para 2.6.2 above. 
2.6 Cold Storage facilities in NER 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6.1 The Committee observes that, out of 434 micro food processing enterprises in Assam 
with sanctioned loans under Prime Minister Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises 
Scheme (PMFME), loans have been disbursed to only 252 micro food processing enterprises. 
The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry may take up the matter with concerned 
stakeholders for timely disbursal of loans to the remaining micro food processing enterprises. 
(Para 4.3.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.2 Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has informed that a total of 706 loans 
have been sanctioned to micro food processing enterprises in Assam (till 31.03.2023) under the 
Prime Minister Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises Scheme (PMFME). Out of 
these, 389 loans have been disbursed. The micro enterprises are required to comply with terms 
& conditions of the lending banks and of scheme guidelines before disbursement of loans leading 
to gap between number of loans sanctioned and number of loans di sbursed. However, MoFPI 
pursues the issue of timely disbursal of loans to the remaining micro food processing enterprises 
with the concerned banks and also with State Level Banking Committee (SLBC) from time to 
time. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.6.3 The Committee notes the efforts taken by the Ministry for the development of cold chain 
infrastructure. It feels that there is a scope for progress in the export and promotion of 
agricultural produce in different markets with the help of efficient cold chain storage  and 
distribution facilities. The Committee further observes that two approved projects under 
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme of Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) in the State of Nagaland are still under implementation as on 31 st 
January, 2023. The Committee therefore recommends that Ministry may coordinate with the 
concerned stakeholders to take necessary measures towards operationalization of these projects 
at the earliest. The Committee further recommends that the  Ministry of DoNER may take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) for building more cold chain 

14  
storage facilities with an efficient transport infrastructure support system which may boost the 
supply of products of agriculture and allied sectors into other markets. 
(Para 4.3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.4 MoFPI has informed that in order to create/augment the preservation and processing 
capacity including Cold Chain storage facilities in the country including Nagaland, MoFPI has 
been incentivizing setting up of cold chains units through Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure scheme under Central Sector umbrella scheme Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA 
Yojana (PMKSY). MoFPI provides credit linked capital subsidy in the form of grants -in-aid for 
setting up such cold chain units to eligible entrepreneurs under the scheme. In order to attract 
proposals from North Eastern States under the scheme, a number of special incentives/ 
concessions is offered to such proposals vis -à-vis those located in general areas. A few such 
special incentives are as follows- 
 
i. Credit Linked capital subsidy in the form of Grants-in-aid is provided @ 50% of eligible 
project cost for difficult areas including NER (as against 35% for general areas); 
ii. The stipulated timeline for completion of project in difficult areas/ NER is 30 months against 
24 months for general areas. 
iii. Net worth of an applicant from NER needs to be equal to the grants sought (against 1.5 times 
net worth for general areas) 
 
2.6.5 MoFPI regularly follows up with concerned promoters for timely completion of the 
projects and handholds them in resolving issues/ clearances required by them. Details of Cold 
Chain projects assisted in Nagaland State under the scheme are as attached at Annexure –IV. 
 
2.6.6 Also, NERAMAC emphasizes on preserving Agri -Horti products with the help of cold 
storage units. NERAMAC is preparing for a collaborative approach with Bodoland Territorial 
Council (BTC) for setting up five solar/ hybrid powered cold storage in v arious districts of BTC. 
Moreover, NERAMAC is also exploring the option of setting up more such cold storages in select 
areas of NER 
2.7 Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.7.1 The Committee takes note of the Ministry of Tourism's efforts to promote tourism in the 
North East Region to make the region a preferred tourist destination. The Committee believes 
that there has been a post -COVID tourism boom around the world. This can be best utilized by 
promoting tourism in NER. Every State in the North East has its own la nguage, food, and 
cultural practices, which are beautifully represented through annual festivals such as the Hornbill 
Festival of Nagaland, the Sangai Festival of Manipur, the Behdienkhlam Festival of Meghalaya, 
and so on. Efforts may be made to make the journey and experience of tourists more comfortable 
and pleasurable so that more people want to visit these festivals and other attractions in the North 
Eastern States. This implies that a seamless transportation infrastructure for tourists is required. 
There is also a need to develop a structure that allows tourists to experience this rich culture 
while also preserving the autonomy of these tribal areas. The Committee recommends that the 

15  
Ministry of DoNER, in collaboration with the Ministry of Tourism, focus on developing a 
mechanism to foster healthy and holistic growth in the tourism sector, thereby boosting the NER 
economy. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the details of 80 infrastructure 
projects worth ₹ 2598.15 Crores relating to water supply, power and connectivity which may 
support the tourism sector in NER. 
(Para 4.4.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 The observations/recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
2.7.3 In order to support tourism in the North Eastern Region, 80 projects worth ₹ 2598.15 
crore relating to connectivity, water supply and power supply have been sanctioned under the 
North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS). Of these, 80 projects, 51 
projects amounting to ₹ 1647.01 crore relating to connectivity, 23 projects amounting to ₹ 
678.13 crore relating to water supply and 6 projects amounting to ₹ 273.01 crore relating to 
power supply have been sanctioned. Out of these, 02 projects amounting to ₹ 42.40 crore 
relating to connectivity, 03 projects amounting to ₹ 85.99 crore relating to water supply and 01 
project amounting to ₹ 20.96 crore relating to power supply have been completed. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.7.4 The Committee also notes that the dela y in completing the Agartala -Akhaura rail link 
project is due to issues with the contractual agency in Bangladesh and that the Indian side will be 
completed by June 2023. The Committee recommends that all efforts be made to complete the 
Indian side work by the projected date. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the matter 
may be taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs for further discussion at a higher level, so 
that project work gets underway on the Bangladesh side. 
(Para 4.6.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.5 Agartala-Akhaura Rail Link (Indian Side -5.46 km) is funded by MDoNER. Out of the two 
components on the Indian side, the Nischintpur Yard (under Phase -1) was completed in 2021 
and ready for train operations once the works on the Bangladesh side is completed. The physical 
progress of the Viaduct (under Phase -2), which connects Nischintpur Yard to Agartala main 
station, is 85% as on 30.04.2023 and efforts are being made to complete the work within the 
stipulated time. For the timely completion of the work on Bangladesh side (6.8 km being funded 
by Ministry of External Affairs), weekly review meetings are undertaken to monitor the progress. 
7th, 8th and 9th PSC meetings were held on 26 th July 2022, 15 January 2023 and 20 March 2023 
respectively. The next Project Steering Committee (PSC) meeting is also to be held shortly. 
Extension of Time has been granted till 30 th June 2023. The revised work plan has been 
submitted by Texmaco and verified by IRCON to complete the project by June 2023. 
 
2.8 Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport (KMMTT) 
Recommendation/Observation 

16  
2.8.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts made towards the completion of the waterways 
component of the Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport (KMMTT), a strategic connectivity 
project to co nnect the eastern ports of India with Myanmar, and all the works that have been 
done for the operationalization of the port. The Committee notes and hopes that since a new 
Project Executing Agency has been appointed for execution of the road component of K MMTT, 
similar commitment may be shown to realise the completion of road component of the project in 
a time bound manner. 
(Para 4.9.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 IRCON International has been appointed as the new Project Executing Agency for 
KMMTT on 7 th March, 2022. IRCON, in turn has awarded contract for entire 109 km of road 
work to local subcontractors. Earthwork is in progress for about 50 km stretch of the project and 
preliminary works like survey, site cleaning, approach road etc are going on in the balance 
stretches of the project. All efforts are being made to complete the work within the stipulated 
time. 

17  
CHAPTER III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
3.1 Prime Minister’s Development Initiative for North East Region (PM-DevINE) 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1.1 The Committee takes note of the Ministry of DoNER's allocation of ₹ 2,200.00 crores 
under the Prime Minister's Development Initiative for North East Region  (PM-DevINE) Scheme 
for the Financial Year 2023 -24. The Committee also notes that the PM -DevINE would create 
infrastructure, support industries, social development projects, and livelihood activities for youth 
and women, creating income and jobs. The Commi ttee observes that this programme seeks to 
promote various development projects not limited to a single sector. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may have a mechanism to closely coordinate with the NEC to 
monitor the pace and pattern of fund utilization of the various projects under this programme to 
prevent cost and time overruns. 
(Para 3.7.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.2 In the PM-DevINE scheme guidelines, a robust monitoring & evaluation mechanism has 
been put in place to monitor the pace and pattern of fund utilization of various projects to 
prevent cost and time overruns. Specifically, Secretary, North Eastern Council (NEC) is a 
member of the PM -DevINE Empowered Inter -Ministerial Committee (EIMC) tasked with the 
following: 
• To recommend effect ive means for Monitoring and Evaluation through field inspection 
inter alia through suitable third-party agencies; 
• To review the progress of project implementation under PM-DevINE. 
 
3.1.3 In addition, the PM -DevINE scheme guidelines, also state that to limit construction risk 
(time and cost over runs), infrastructure projects should be awarded in Engineering-  
Procurement-Construction (EPC) mode, on fixed cost basis, with provision for liquidated 
damages. The tender notices and contracts may also include binding c lauses for incentives to 
contractors for early completion and penal provision for delay. In case of projects worth more 
than ₹100 crore, there should be adequate contractual provisions for concurrent monitoring of 
the projects by an independent third-party agency. All these provisions would limit cost and time 
overruns in PMDevINE projects. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1.4 The Committee notes the Ministry’s efforts in putting a mechanism in place to limit 
the construction risks of time and cost overruns  for the newly introduced PM -DevINE 
scheme. However, the Committee would also like to bring to the Ministry’s notice that, 
time and again, the implementation and completion of the infrastructural projects under 

18 
various developmental schemes have been affected by the slow pace of projects due to 
varied issues despite many such monitoring mechanism in place. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the progress made so far for implementation of this scheme. 
3.2 North East Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation (NERAMAC) 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.2.1 The Committee notes that, in BE 2023-24, an allocation of ₹ 7.67crores has been made for 
North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation (NERAMAC) out of which ₹2 crores 
is for capital head and ₹5.67 crores is for revenue head. The Committee is of the considered view 
that various infrastructure facilities related to agriculture and allied services need to be scaled up. 
This will promote Agri-Horti products, allowing them to reach their full potential. Focus needs to 
be given to augment support facilities like transport, storage, sale and profit generation even 
through the remote areas of the NER. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Government consider improving infrastructure support for agriculture and related sectors. 
(Para 3.8.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 NERAMAC has undertaken numerous activities to improve infrastructure support for 
agriculture and other related sectors. NERAMAC’s processing plants of cashew and pineapple 
in Tripura and Ginger in Meghalaya are in various stages of being made operational and are 
expected to be fully functional by mid-2023. Moreover, numerous primary/ secondary processing 
plants for value addition of NER Agri -Horti commodities are planned for FPOs in FY 2023- 24. 
Five Cold storage facilities are being set up in BTC, Assam at the request of the Council. 
NERAMAC is also initiating the process to enroll some FPCs to avail the Agricultural 
Infrastructure Fund supported and promoted by the Ministry of Agriculture  and Farmers 
Welfare. 
F
urther Recommendation/Observation 
3.2.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and appreciates the numerous 
activities taken to improve the infrastructure support for agriculture and allied sector. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of all the details pertaining to infrastructure activities 
being undertaken by NERAMAC in NER Region. 
3.3 Civil Aviation
Recommendation/Observation 
3.3.1 The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry of DoNER and the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation in constructing and operationalizing a number of new airports in NER. North Eastern 
Region connectivity is a critical attribute for the region's overall development. The Committee 
also suggests that a similar impetus may be given and efforts made to operationalize th e 
remaining airports. This will help to promote tourism and last-mile connectivity in NER. The 

19  
Committee would like to be updated on the status of the UDAN scheme's implementation in 
NER, as well as the frequency of flight operations and aircraft types used at these newly 
identified/operational airports 
(Para 4.8.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 The observations/recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
3.3.3 Updated status of UDAN Scheme as informed by Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA) is 
attached at Annexure-V 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.3.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that 
air connectivity in the NER is crucial for overall development and last mile reach in the 
region and UDAN scheme can play a huge  role in bolstering the connectivity in the region. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry of DoNER should coordinate with the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and the State Governments concerned for better synergy and removal of the 
bottlenecks in implementati on of the projects that are yet to be operationalized as per 
Annexure V. 

20  
CHAPTER IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of the Government have not 
been received 
 
 
NIL 

21  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
The Committee notes the Ministry’s efforts in putting a mechanism in place to limit 
the construction risks of time and cost overruns for the newly introduced PMDevINE 
scheme. However, the Committee would also like to bring to the Ministry’s notice that,  
time and again, the implementation and completion of the infrastructural projects under 
various developmental schemes have been affected by the slow pace of projects due to 
varied issues despite many such monitoring mechanism in place. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the progress made so far for implementation of this scheme. 
(Para 3.1.4) 
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and appreciates the numerous 
activities taken to improve the infrastructure support for agriculture and allied sector. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of all the details pertaining to infrastructure activities 
being undertaken by NERAMAC in NER Region. 
(Para 3.2.3) 
 
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that 
air connectivity in the NER is crucial for overall development and last mile reach in the 
region and UDAN scheme can play a huge role in bolstering the connectivity in the region. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry of DoNER should coordinate with the Min istry of 
Civil Aviation and the State Governments concerned for better synergy and removal of the 
bottlenecks in implementation of the projects that are yet to be operationalized as per 
Annexure V. 
(Para 3.3.4) 

MINUTES 
22

23 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 p .m. on Tuesday, the 05 th December, 2023 
in Committee Room No. 2, First Floor, PHA-Extention, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri  Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Dr. Anil Jain
3. S hri Neeraj Shekhar
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
6. Dr.(Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
8. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
9. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
10. Shri R.K.Singh Patel
11.
Shri  Vi shnu Dayal Ram
12. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
13. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

24 
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.Jason, Joint Secretary
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary
Smt. Prabita Khoyumthem, Joint Director
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary
Shri Manoj H M, Committee Officer
2. xxx ∗ xxx x xx
3. Thereafter, the Chairman moved on to inform about the agenda of the
m
eeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following two draft Reports of the
Committee:-
i. xxx* x xx xxx
ii. 250th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Two Hundred Forty
Third Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the
Ministry of Development of  North Eastern Region
4. The Chairman further explained xxx    xxx  xxx and that the
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region furnished the Action Taken
Notes on 04 th July, 2023. It was also shared to the Members that most of the
recommendations, as proposed by the Committee, were accepted by the
concerned Ministries. In this context, the Chairman asked the Members to offer
their suggestions, if any, on the recommendations and observations given in the
draft Reports.
5. The Committee then took up the xxx 
   xxx xxx  and 250th 
Reports for consideration and adopted them without any change.
6. The Committee authorize d the Chairman to carry out any
typographical/factual errors and also to nominate Members for
presentation/laying of the Reports to Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha during the current
Session of Parliament and nominate Members for presentation/laying of the
∗ xxx   Relates to others matter 

25 
Reports to Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha so that further necessary action can be 
initiated on the said Reports.
7. xxx ∗ xxx xxx
8. xxx
xxx xxx
9. xxx x
xx x xx
10. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee
wa
s kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 3.22 p.m.
*****
∗ xxx   Relates to others matter 

ANNEXURE 
26

27 
ANNEXURE-I 
STATE CAPITAL CONNECTIVITY (NORTH EASTERN REGION) 
State Capitals of Assam, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh have been connected by Broad Gauge 
(BG) Rail network of Indian Railways. For capital connectivity of remaining 5 States of North 
Eastern Region - Meghalaya (Shillong), Manipur (Imphal), Nagaland (Kohima), Mizoram 
(Aizawl) and Sikkim (Gangtok), Railway has taken up following New Line projects: 
(1) Manipur: Jiribam - Imphal (111 km) new line project has been taken upfor connecting Imphal
with Indian Railways (IR) network. Cost of the project is `14,323 crore and expenditure of
`13529.96 crore has been incurred on the project upto 31.03.2023. An outlay of `800 crore has
been provided for 2023- 24. The section from Jiribam to Khongsang (55 km) has been
commissionedand work has been taken up in remaining length. TDC: March 2025.
(2) Mizoram: Bhairabi - Sairang (51 km) new line project has been taken upfor connecting
Aizawl with IR network (Sairang is suburban city of Aizawl, the Capital city of Mizoram). Cost of
the project is `5,522 crore and expenditure of `6138.76 crore has been incurred on the project upto
31.03.2023. An outlay of `915 crore has been provided for 2023- 24. The construction work has
been taken up throughout the length of project. TDC: February 2024.
(3) Nagaland: Dimapur (Dhansiri) - Zubza (Kohima) (82 km) new line project has been taken
upfor connecting Kohima with IR network (Zubza is suburban city of Kohima, the Capital city of
Nagaland). Cost of the project is `6,911 crore and expenditure of `2217.83 crore has been i ncurred
on the project upto 31.03.2023. An outlay of `1,100 crore has been provided for 2023- 24. The
section from Dhansiri -Sukhovi(16.5 km) has been commissionedand work has been taken up in
remaining length. TDC: March 2026.
(4) Sikkim: Sivok - Rangpo (44 km) new line project has been taken upin first phasefor
connecting Gangtok with IR network (Rangpo is 40 km short of Gangtok). Cost of the project is
`8,043 crore and expenditure of `4865.71 crore has been incurred on the project upto 31.03.2023.
An outlay of `2,250 crore has been provided for 2023- 24. Work on this project has been taken up.
TDC: December 2024. Further, Final Location Survey from Rangpo to Gangtok (40 km) has been
sanctioned in February 2022.
(5) Meghalaya: Two new line projects have been taken up simultaneously for connecting
Shillong, the capital of Meghalaya, with IR network:
(i) Tetelia - Byrnihat (22 km) new line project has been taken up. Cost of the project is `1,043
crore and expenditure of `1070.77 crore has been incurred on the project upto 31.03.2023. An
outlay of `65 crore has been provided for 2023 -24. 10 km length of the project falling in
Assam State from Tetelia to Kamalajarigot completed in October, 2018. Work on this project
in Assam portion has been taken up. TDC: Not fixed.
(ii) Byrnihat - Shillong (108 km) new line project has been taken up. Cost of the project is
`4,083 crore and expenditure of `267.79 crore has been incurred on the project upto
31.03.2023. Land acquisition for the project has been initiated. Land acquisition and
execution is held up due to protest by the Khasi Students Union (KSU). TDC: Not fixed.

28 
ANNEXURE-II 
Status of all ongoing projects (excluding Capital Connectivity projects in NER) undertaken by 
NFR: 
SN Name of Project 
with length (km) 
Year of 
sanction/ 
inclusion 
in Budget 
Latest 
Antici- 
pated 
Cost 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Exp. upto 
March 
2023 
(₹ in crore) 
Outlay 
proposed 
for 
2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Present Status 
NEW LINE 
1 New Moynaguri- 
Jogighopa New Line 
with Gauge 
conversion of new 
Mal-Moynaguri Road 
and New 
Changrabanda- 
Changrabanda (285 
km) 
2000-01 4075 4148.66 10 New Moynaguri- 
Jogighopa new line 
has been 
commissioned. 
Balance Material 
Modifications have 
been kept in abeyance. 
2 Murkongselek- 
Pasighat 
(27 km) 
2011-12 980 347.15 400 Work taken up. 
3 Agartala-Akhaura 
(5.46 km) 
2012-13 709 708.72 200 Entire land has been 
acquired. Works have 
been taken up on this 
project. 
4 Dimapur-Tizit (257 
km) 
2013-14 4274 0 0.0001 The work has been 
included in Budget 
2013-14 subject to 
requisite approvals. 
5 Salona-Khumtai (99 
km) 
2017-18 6542 0 0.0001 The work has been 
included in Budget 
2017-18 subject to 
requisite approvals. 
6 Sibsagar-Jorhat (62 
km) 
2017-18 2696 0 0.0001 The work has been 
included in Budget 
2017-18 subject to 
requisite approvals. 
7 Tezpur-Silghat (25 
km) 
2017-18 2280 0 0.0001 The work has been 
included in Budget 
2017-18 subject to 
requisite approvals. 
8 Mahisasan (India) – 
Zero Point 
2020-21 39 6.83 10 The  project  has  been 
sanctioned in 2020-21. 

29 
Status of all ongoing projects (excluding Capital Connectivity projects in NER) undertaken by 
NFR: 
SN Name of Project 
with length (km) 
Year of 
sanction/ 
inclusion 
in Budget 
Latest 
Antici- 
pated 
Cost 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Exp. upto 
March 
2023 
(₹ in crore) 
Outlay 
proposed 
for 
2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Present Status 
(Bangladesh) 
(2.7 km) 
Work has been taken 
up. 
DOUBLING 
1 New Bongaigaon - 
Agthori via Rangiya 
(143 km) 
2013-14 2048 1702.19 600 New Bongaigaon-Bijni 
(17.53 Km)  section 
has been 
commissioned. 
Work taken up in 
remaining section. 
2 New Bongaigaon- 
Kamakhya via 
Goalpara (176 km) 
2015-16 2950 2660.73 500 104 km doubling has 
been commissioned. 
Azara-Kamakhya (13 
km) involves shifting 
of alignment outside 
forest area. 
Work taken up in 
remaining section. 
3 Saraighat Bridge 
(doubling) 
(7 km) 
2017-18 1478 0.70 15 The work has been 
included in Budget 
2017-18 subject to 
requisite approvals. 
4 3rd Line between 
Kamakhya- Guwahati 
(5.74 km) 
2023-24 394.64 0 This project has been 
sanctioned on 
27.04.2023 in place of 
Kamakhya-New 
GuwahatQuadrupplin 
g. 
5 Lumding-Tinsukia Jn. 
Doubling (381 km) 
2019-20 3810 0 100 The work has been 
included in Budget 
2019-20 subject to 
requisite approvals. 

30 
ANNEXURE-III 
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) 
(₹ In Crores) 
S.No Project
Name 
Sector District Date of 
Approval 
Project 
cost 
Grant 
approved 
Released Status 
1 Nagaland 
Integrated 
Cold 
Chain 
Mixed 
(F&V, 
Meat & 
Fishery) 
Dimapur 17.04.2017 18.59 6.98 6.98 Operational 
2 T J Foods Meat & 
Poultry 
Dimapur 08.01.2021 12.8 5.5 1.41 Under 
Implementation 
3 Mountain 
Fruits and 
Vegetables 
F&V Dimapur 31.03.2021 15.72 9.91 0 Under 
Implementation 

31 
ANNEXURE-IV 
STATUS OF RELEASE & UTILISATION OF FUNDS PROJECTS SANCTIONED UNDER 
DHATC AS ON 31.05.2023 
(Ongoing Projects) 
(₹ in Crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
DHATC Project Date of 
Sanction 
Approved 
cost 
Total 
Release 
Total 
utilisation 
Miscellaneous 
1 Project Enhancement of Rural Socio- 
Economy with sustainable livelihood 
through piggery farming in Dima Hasao 
in Assam 
19-05-2022 4.00 2.00 0 
2 Establishment of Bamboo Industrial Park 
(BIP) at Manderdisa, NC Hills, Assam 
sanctioned under DHATC Package 
13-03-2020 49.43 24.71 24.71 
3 Construction of Community Hall at 
Dehangi Bazar under PWD ( Building), 
Haflong division (DHATC) 
26-07-2017 2.94 1.47 1.47 
4 C/o Community hall at Diyungbra 
(Digendu) under PWD(Building), 
Haflong division (DHATC) 
26-07-2017 2.94. 1.47 1.47 
5 C/o Community Hall at Nobdiangting 
under PWD (Building), Haflong division 
(DHATC) 
26-07-2017 2.94 1.47 1.47 
6 C/o Community hall at Mahur under 
PWD ( Building), Haflong division 
(DHATC) 
26-07-2017 2.94 1.47 .29 
7 Construction of S.R. Thaosen Media 
Centre at Haflong, Dima Hasao District. 
28-03-2016 8.16 4.08 4.00 
8 Integrated Skill Development Centre at 
Dima Hasao District of Assam. 
29-02-2016 36.60 30.30 30.30 
Total of Miscellaneous (8 Projects) 109.95 66.97 63.71 
Road & Bridges 
9 Improvement of PGHJ road from 19th to 
74th km (Umrangso to Dilhnagi) under 
PWD (Roads), Haflong Division 
(DHATC) 
08-08-2017 34.98 30.64 17.49 
Total of Road & Bridges (1 Projects) 34.98 30.64 17.49 
Tourism & Culture 
10 Construction of Center for Ethnic 
Community Cultural Practice 
(DilaobraSangibraSamathuraoniNodrang) 
at Haflong. 
29-02-2016 10.00 9.70 5.00 
Total of Tourism & Culture (1 Projects) 10.00 9.70 5.00 
GRAND TOTAL (10 Projects) 154.94 107.31 86.20 

32 
ANNEXURE-V 
Status of North Eastern Region under UDAN 
During four round of bidding, 142 valid Fixed wing and Helicopter routes are awarded in North 
Eastern States, which will help in attracting tourist, investors and add to ease of doing business. 
The following airports/Heliports/Water Aerodromes are identified und er the UDAN scheme in 
NER; 
Identified: 36 Operationalized: 10 
The details of fund allocated for the development of these airports, heliports & water aerodromes 
along-with the operationalization status & RCS routes awarded under the UDAN scheme are 
given below: 
S. 
No. 
State Airport/Heliport/ 
WA 
Budget 
allocation in 
Crores 
Expenditure as 
on 31.05.2023 
in Crores 
Remarks 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Daparizo (H) 8.50 4.03 Yet to operationalize 
2. Itanagar(H) 4.26 1.32 Yet to operationalize 
3. Passighat 5.07 0.07 Operationalized 
4. Tezu 76.46 85.55 Operationalized 
5. Tuting (H) 4.10 3.72 Yet to operationalize 
6. Walong (H) 8.00 4.42 Yet to operationalize 
7. Yinghiong (H) 5.00 0.53 Yet to operationalize 
8. Ziro (H) 7.50 6.26 Yet to operationalize 
9. Holongi Nil - Operationalized 
10. 
Assam 
Geleki (H) 8.00 0.53 Yet to operationalize 
11. Guwahati River 
Front (W) 
20.00 2.98 Yet to operationalize 
12. Jorhat 0.00 0.03 Operationalized 
13. Kaziranga Not allocated Yet to operationalize 
14. Lilabari 9.65 9.21 Operationalized 
15. Misa (H) Dropped - Dropped as per the 
request of State 
Govt. 
16. Nagaon(H) 10.49 1.00 Yet to operationalize 
17. Rupsi 84.50 84.47 Operationalized 
18. Tezpur 0.00 0.19 Operationalized 
19. Umrangso 
Reservoir (W) 
20.00 3.81 Yet to operationalize 
20. 
Manipur 
Jiribam(H) 15.00 9.15 Yet to operationalize 
21. Moreh(H) 8.00 4.10 Yet to operationalize 
22. Parbung(H) 8.50 6.32 Yet to operationalize 
23. Tamenglong(H) 8.00 1.52 Yet to operationalize 

33 
S. 
No. 
State Airport/Heliport/ 
WA 
Budget 
allocation in 
Crores 
Expenditure as 
on 31.05.2023 
in Crores 
Remarks 
24. Thanlon(H) 13.50 7.59 Yet to operationalize 
25. 
Meghalaya 
Dawki (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
26. Jowai (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
27. Khliehrat (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
28. Nongstoin (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
29. Shella (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
30. Shillong (Barapani) 56.35 57.12 Operationalized 
31. Sohra (H) 8.00 - Yet to operationalize 
32. Tura 8.00 - Yet to operationalize 
33. Williamnagar (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
34. Nagaland Dimapur 0.00 2.72 Operationalized 
35. Sikkim Pakyong 203.38 202.17 Operationalized 
36. Tripura Kailashahar Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
Total 608.27 498.81 
Note: (H) for Heliport and (W) for Water Aerodrome. 
***** 