PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 139
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY NINTH REPORT
ON
THE PRIVATE DETECTIVE AGENCIES (REGULATION) BILL, 2007
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY NINTH REPORT
ON
THE PRIV ATE DETECTIVE AGENCIES (REGULATION) BILL, 2007
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 13 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 13 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-269

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—17
Chapter-I
Introduction ....................................................................................................... 1—3
Chapter-II
Presentation on the Bill .................................................................................. 4—5
Chapter-III
Views/suggestions of States/Union Territories,
Private Detective Agencies/individuals ........................................................... 6—9
Chapter-IV
Issues raised by Committee and comments of Ministry thereon ........... 10—15
Chapter-V
Observations/conclusions and recommendations of Committee ............... 16—17
4. R
ELEVANT M INUTES O F T HE M EETINGS O F T HE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 19—31
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................ 33— 112
I The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007 .................................. 35—61
II Press Communique dated 13th September, 2007 ............................................. 62
III List of individuals/organizations who expressed their views on the Bill ..... 63—64
IV List of States/UTs which furnished their comments on the Bill .................. 65
V Comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the suggestions from
State Governments and UTs ................................................................................ 66—79
VI Comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the suggestions from
private detective agencies and individuals .......................................................... 80—112

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2007)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri N. Jothi
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri Raghunath Jha
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
*22. Shri Amitava Nandy
23. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
27. Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
(i)
* Nominated w.e.f. 12 December, 2007 vice  Shri T.K. Hamza who was nominated to Standing Committee on Commerce.

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2008)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sanjay Raut
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri T.K. Hamza
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
21. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
22. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
23. Shri Sachin Pilot
24. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
26. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
27. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
*28. Ms. Agatha K. Sangma
@29. V acant
#30. V acant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
* Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  1st December, 2008.
@ Consequent upon change in nomination as Member and appointment as the Chairman of DRPSC on Agriculture, Shri Mohan
Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  5th December, 2008.
# Consequent upon vacation of his seat in Lok Sabha as a result of his election to Legislative Assembly of Chhattisgarh,
Shri Ajit Jogi ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 26th December, 2008.
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirty-ninth Report on the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation)
Bill, 2007 ( Annexure I ).
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred
K the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation)
Bill, 2007 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 13th August, 2007 and pending therein, to the
Committee on 17th August, 2007 for examination and report within three months. Due to
preoccupation of the Committee with other urgent and pressing legislative business, the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, granted extensions of time to it thrice, for presentation of the Report, the last being
upto 15 March, 2009*.
3. The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007 provides for regulating the private
detective agencies through constitution of a Central Board at the Central level and State Boards at
State level, for the purpose of grant of licences and also to make holding of licences mandatory
for carrying on the business of private detective agencies and other related matters.
4. The Committee issued a Press Communique ( Annexure II ) on the Bill on
13th September, 2007 inviting memoranda from individuals/organizations. In response thereto, several
memoranda were received by the Committee (List at Annexure III ). The Committee also sought
views/suggestions of the State Governments/UTs on the said Bill, after obtaining the permission of
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. Some of the States and UTs responded (List at Annexure-IV).
5. The Committee considered the Bill in four sittings held on 18th September 2007, 13th June
and 4th December, 2008 and 16th January, 2009.
5.1 The Committee in its meeting held on 18th September, 2007, heard the presentation of the
officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the Bill and held preliminary discussion thereon.
However the deliberations remained inconclusive. The Committee again heard the Home Secretary
on 13th June, 2008. In response to certain issues, particularly some policy issues, the Ministry vide
its letter dated 15 September, 2008 informed that it had constituted an Expert Group to examine
the policy issues and the final replies would be furnished after the receipt and examination of the
Expert Groups’ report.
5.2 The Committee in its sitting held on 4th December decided to await the report of the Group
constituted by the Ministry to consider the policy issues concerning the Bill, and the final
comments on the various queries raised by the Members.
5.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide  its letter dated 6th January, 2009 informed the
Committee that the Expert Group was an internal arrangement. As no consensus among the
members of the Expert Group emerged, the formal report on the subject was not submitted. The
Ministry of Home Affairs took the view that the replies furnished by the Ministry may be treated
as their considered response.
k See Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No 44351 dated 20th August, 2007.
* See Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No 45628 dated 19th December, 2008.

5.4 In this background, the Committee in its sitting held on 16th January 2009, termed the reply
of the Ministry as self-contradictory and felt that the policy issues raised by the Members of the
Committee remained unaddressed. The Committee, therefore, decided not to take up the clause-by-
clause consideration of the Bill and present the report containing its views and recommendations.
6. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 10th February, 2009 and
adopted the same.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-V of the Report.
8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable
contributions made by the witnesses who deposed before it and facilitated the Committee in the
process of examining the Bill.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
10 February, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
Introduction
1.0 The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007 provides for regulation of the private
detective agencies through constitution of the Central Board at the Central and State Boards at the
State level, for the purpose of grant of licenses and also to make holding of licenses mandatory,
for carrying on the business of private detective agencies and other related matters.
Salient features of the Bill
1.1 The salient features of the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007 are briefly as
under:—
(i) The constitution of Central and State Regulatory Boards. The Central Board would be
responsible for granting all-India licences for operating in more than one State,
whereas the State Boards would be authorized to grant licence for operating in that
State. Both the Central and State Boards would also have powers to cancel/suspend
or revoke licences granted in their respective jurisdiction (s) on the grounds specified.
(ii) No person shall engage in the business of private detective agency unless he/she
holds a licence issued by the concerned licensing authority. The licence will be valid
for Five years and may be renewed from time to time after the expiry of five years,
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed. Any existing private detective agency,
which has been operating before commencement of this Act, shall also obtain a
licence within a period of 180 days from the date of such commencement.
(iii) A person shall not be considered for is sue or renewal of a licence under this Act,
if he/she has been:—
(a) convicted by a competent court for an offence and sentenced in respect
thereof to imprisonment for not less than two years; or
(b) keeping links with any organization or association which is banned under any
law on account of their activities prejudicial to national security or public order;
or
(c) indulging in activities which are prejudicial to national security or public order;
or
(d) dismissed or removed from Government service.
(iv) A company, firm or an association of persons shall not be considered for issue of
a licence under this Act, if, it is not registered in India, or having a proprietor or a
majority shareholder, partner or director, who is not a citizen of India.
(v) Imparting of training, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, is mandatory
for the agency to its detective agents with a view to ensuring a reasonable level of
skill/quality in the profession.

2
(vi) Private detective agents are not to be engaged without due verification of character/
antecedents; should be citizen of India; should have minimum requirement of the age
of 21 years; physical standards and should have completed the prescribed detective
training successfully.
(vii) Any person who contravenes the provisions of the Bill under clause 7 (which
prohibits any persons or private detective agency from carrying on or commencing
the business of private detective agency without a licence), in the first instance, shall
be liable to penalty by the Board which may extend to two lakh rupees; and on
persistent violation of the said Section, shall be punishable by the competent court,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(xii) The right of an individual to privacy and freedom is safeguarded and any violation
is punishable with imprisonment and monetary penalty and may invite suspension/
cancellation of licence.
(xiii) The Central Government is vested with powers to relax the requirement of
qualification for employing or engaging any person as private detective agent or the
requirement of licensing for performing private detective work in certain cases, for
the reasons to be recorded in writing, in respect of a private detective agent or a
private detective agency, if such agent or agency is recognized or registered under
the law of any country. This provision has been made to give some legal scope for
foreign operators to operate in India for a specified period and for a declared
purpose.
Background of the Bill
1.2 Explaining the necessity of the Bill, the Ministry, in their background note made the
following submissions:
(i) There are many private detective agencies presently functioning in the country and in
fact, some of the private security agencies are also engaged in the work of detective
agencies. They are engaged in multifarious activities ranging from individual espionage
such as matrimonial matters, adultery of spouses, love affairs of children, to the
matters of patent, R&D, credit card frauds, etc. Thus, there is likelihood of such
detective agencies invading and encroaching upon the privacy of individuals by their
actions. It is also possible that these private detective agencies could interfere into the
functional domain of police and other investigative agencies of the Government.
(ii) Due to increase in the number of private detective agencies which did not care for
the right of privacy of others and also keeping in view the functioning of these
agencies, a need was felt to evolve or enforce proper norms for functioning of these
private detective agencies and also to .ensure closing down of the business of
agencies, with dubious style of functioning, instead of proliferating. It was also felt
necessary to demarcate the areas of operations between the police and such private
detective agencies.
(iii) The need for regulating the functioning of the private detectives operating on agency
basis has been felt since long. All India Police Science Congress in the year 1974
suggested that there should be a legislation to regulate the functioning of private
detective agencies in India. Subsequently, the Bureau of Police Research and
Development conducted a detailed study in 1975. The study suggested a common Act
to regulate the private security and detective agencies. The objective of regulation was

3
to enlist the agencies by licensing, bring about some sense of responsibility by
inspection and audit of work and introduce quality by setting standards. A study by
a Group of Officers at Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad
in 1976 came out with ten point modalities for legislating on the subject of private
security/detective agencies.
(iv) Besides, during discussions on the Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2005
in the Rajya Sabha on 10th May, 2005, some members had suggested for enactment
of a separate law to regulate private detective agencies also. In response, the Home
Minister had stated as under:—
“One of the most important suggestions made by one or two Members here related to the
law to regulate the detective agencies. This is the law which is being framed to regulate
the security agencies. It is suggested that let us have a law to regulate the detective
agencies also. I think it is a very good suggestion, and, may I say on the floor of the
House, we will look into it, and may be, very soon, will come to this House with a law
for this purpose”.
1.3 The Ministry accordingly stated that for regulating the functioning of the private detective
agencies, making them work within legal framework and accountable to a regulatory authority, it
had been decided to enact a legislation which would provide for constitution of a Central Board
at the Central level and State Boards at the State level for the purpose of grant of licenses and
also to make holding of licenses mandatory for carrying on the business of private detective
agencies and other related matters. According to the Ministry, the main purpose of the legislation
was to ensure that the private detective agencies worked within the ambit of law and were
accountable to a regulatory mechanism.

4
CHAPTER-II
PRESENTATION ON THE BILL
2.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 18th  September, 2007 heard the presentation of the
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Additional Secretary explaining the reasons
behind bringing the Bill, stated that during the course of discussion in Rajya Sabha on the
10th May, 2005 on the Private Security Agencies Bill 2005, some members had suggested for
enactment of a law to regulate private detective agencies also and the then Home Minister had
assured the House that a Bill to regulate the private detective agencies would be introduced. She
further added that due to increase in the number of private detective agencies which did not care
for the right of privacy of others and also keeping in view the functioning of these agencies, a
need was felt to evolve or enforce proper norms for functioning of these private detective agencies
and also to ensure that agencies with dubious style of functioning closed down their business
instead of proliferating.
2.1 The Joint Secretary, MHA, while making a power-point presentation on the Bill, dwelt on
the main provisions of the Bill, which inter-alia included the procedure pertaining to giving licences
to detective agencies; evolving or enforcing proper norms for their functioning; verifying the
antecedents of the personnel employed; ensuring the closure of the detective agencies of dubious
character and prohibiting their proliferation. The Committee was apprised that the Lok Nayak
Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science, (LNJN NICFS) in
consultation with the experts and various stakeholders prepared the preliminary draft of the Bill.
The Committee was further informed that a Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs with members from 1B, BPR&D, LNJN, NICFS, Delhi Police
and the States held deliberations on the draft Bill, and felt that the profession of private detective
agencies should be broadly self-regulatory on the lines of the regulatory bodies dealing with
chartered accountants, cost accountants, company secretaries and architects, etc.
2.1.1 Member raised several issues/queries during the course of the presentation on the Bill. The
Committee not being satisfied with the replies given, decided to hear the Home Secretary later.
Oral evidence of Home Secretary
2.2 The Committee took the oral evidence of the Home Secretary on the Bill on
13th June, 2008. The Home Secretary giving a detailed background to the Bill, stated that it
provides for verification of the antecedents of the agencies and the personnel employed by them
as private detective agents; safeguard the right to privacy and freedom of an individual; lay down
the standards of training for the profession; prescribe the code of ethics for conduct of private
detective agency and the private detective agents and above all to ensure that private detective
agencies of dubious reputation close down their business and do not proliferate.
2.2.1 During the course of the Home Secretary’s oral evidence, a brief presentation was made
giving details of the Bill. During the presentation, he dwelt on the following issues.
(i) The proposed Bill ensures the induction of the right kind of persons in the business;
that a private detective agency shall not employ or engage any person as a private
detective agent unless he is a citizen of India; having minimum age of 21 years;
4

5
satisfies the agencies about his character and antecedents in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(ii) The private detective agency shall furnish such information, which is relevant to the
issue under enquiry and which relates to the lawful objective for which the enquiry
was undertaken, only to the client or to his authorized representative.
(iii) If c ommission of any cognizable offence is noticed by any private detective agent
during the course of discharge of his duties, he shall bring it to the notice of his
superior who in turn shall forthwith inform the police either through his employer or
agency or on his own. [Clause 26(1)]
(iv) The respective Boards are empowered to cancel/suspend the licence on the basis of
misrepresentation or suppression of material facts for obtaining licence, use of false
documents or photographs, violation of any provision of acts/rules, impersonation,
passing on information obtained during the discharge of his duties to other persons.
However, reasonable opportunity will be given to the licence holder to present his
case before his licence is cancelled (Clause 16)
(v) The provision of offences and penalties are provided in the Bill viz. (i) Operation
without licence: fine upto Rs.2 lakh in the first instance, imprisonment for two year
and fine of Rs.5 lakh in case of persistent violation; (ii) Violation of training
requirement (under clause 12); (iii) Employment of an ineligible person as agent
(clause 13); and (iv) non-disclosure of information to the Board (clause 15), fine upto
Rs.50,000 in addition to suspension/cancellation of license (clause 27(2)). Moreover,
in case of violation of the rights of an individual to privacy and freedom,
imprisonment upto six months and fine upto Rs.50,000/- would be imposed.
2.2.2 The Home Secretary further stated that the Bill had been drafted by Lok Nayak Jayprakash
Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science (LNJN NICFS). A Committee
under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs including representatives
from Intelligence Bureau, Bureau of Police Research and Development, LNJN NICFS, MHA, Delhi
Police and the States had deliberated on the draft Bill. Copies of the Bill were also forwarded to
other agencies such as Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, Financial Intelligence Unit, Research
and Analysis Wing, Central Board of Excise and Customs, Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion, Enforcement Directorate, Department of Economic Affairs, Department of Legal Affairs
for comments. He stated that based on the comments received from various agencies, the proposed
Private Detective (Regulation) Bill 2007 had been framed.
2.2.3 It was further submitted that similar laws of USA, Australia, Canada and Singapore were
also studied. In USA and Australia there were different legislations in different States. Canada had
one law. The City State of Singapore had a powerful regulatory regime which included carrying
out search and arrest by the police/licencing officer. In most of these laws, there was provision
for punishment on violations, by imposition of fine of varying amounts.
2.2.4 According to the Home Secretary, no State Government had expressed any reservations in
respect of the proposed legislation. He further clarified that the State Police was not seeking the
help of the Private Detective Agencies. However, in Tamil Nadu, in some cases, the evidence
collected by the Private Detective Agencies had been filed as exhibits before the court of law.

6
CHAPTER-III
VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS OF STATES/UNION TERRITORIES,
PRIV ATE DETECTIVE AGENCIES/ INDIVIDUALS
Views/suggestions/ received from States/Union Territories
3.0 The Committee invited suggestions from the State Governments/Union Territories
Administrations on the provisions of the Bill. Some States/UTs have responded (List of those
States/UTs is at Annexure-IV).
3.1 The important suggestions of State Governments and Union Territories Administrations, have
been summarized as under:—
(i) As per the definition under clause 2 of the Bill, “Private Detection Work” means
“collection of information in a lawful manner” but the Bill does not define “lawful
manner”;
(ii) Two representatives from central security/intelligence agencies ( e.g. Intelligence
Bureau, Special Branch, Local Police, etc.) and one member with legal background
(e.g. an officer from Ministry of Law or from the Department of Law of the State
Government) be nominated by the Central Government on Central Private Detective
Regulatory Board;
(iii) Chairperson of the Central Board/State Board should be a Police Officer not below
the rank of Inspector General of Police;
(iv) An Officer of the rank of Secretary may be Chairman of the State Private Detective
Regulatory Board in place of Joint Secretary of State Government. Further, out of
three members not more than one and in case of five members not more than two,
as the case may be, shall be from the recognized chambers of trade and commerce
and the private detective agency, to be nominated by the State Government;
(v) In view of shortage of officers of the rank of Joint Secretaries in the U.T.s,
appointment of any Class I officer from the Administration as the chairperson and
other members of the State Board, may be considered.
(vi) An appropriate provision in the Bill be incorporated which could bind the detective
agencies to bring to notice of the Police any matter, relevant to internal security
which comes to their notice during the detective work;
(vii) Representative from Private Detective Agency in the State Board is not desirable and
may be avoided;
(viii) A representative of Special Branch of the State may be in the State Board which
would help provide inputs to that Board regarding the applicants and desirability of
allotting them the licence;
(ix) The punishment for contravention of the provisions of clause 7, may be enhanced
in Clause 27 which should be minimum imprisonment of three years which may
extend upto five years.
6

7
(x) V erification of antecedents of Private Detectives may be entrusted to the SB-CID at
the State level and the Intelligence Bureau at the national level;
(xi) The functioning of Private Detective Agencies may affect privacy of an individual or
an institution or any company/firm/body, etc.;
(xii) Procedure for issuing license to the Private Detective Agencies (clauses 8 to 10) be
made more stringent so that only genuine agencies with good credentials, are issued
the licence;
(xiii) Under no circumstances, the foreign agencies or agents should be allowed to act as
Private Detective Agencies. No Private Detective Agencies of the country should be
allowed to enter into any collaboration with a foreign detective agency;
(xiv) Though Clause 9 mentions that a convicted person with an imprisonment of not less
than two years, becomes ineligible for issue or renewal of licence, it does not
mention about the person facing a criminal charge. This needs to be considered.
Similar provision needs to be considered under Clause 13 (2). It may not be
desirable/agreeable to make eligible, a person who was convicted, irrespective of
period of imprisonment, for private detective agency in addition to the condition
stipulated in the Bill.
(xv) Private Detective Agency may be precluded from conducting inquiry into a
cognizable offence, by providing a separate section in the Bill;
(xvi) Clause 25 should appropriately be modified to make it mandatory for it Private
Detective Agency to divulge certain information in its possession to the police as the
same is extremely helpful in prevention, detection and investigation of crime and also
in the maintenance of law and order;
(xvii) The inform ation collected by the private detective agency or any member thereof
bears no authenticity and hence difficult to be used as evidence in the court of law
even if the private detective agency or any member thereof may appear as witness;
(xviii) There is possibility of private detective agencies becoming parallel to the state
investigating agencies;
(xix) Clause 10 (1) needs to be appropriately amended by incorporating a proviso viz.
“Provided that Central Board, before taking final decision on an application seeking
license to operate in two or more States, shall call for the viewpoint of the
concerned State and consider the same”;
(xx) the words “or by the police on duty” may be substituted by “or by any police
personnel on duty”, in sub-clause 3 (a) of clause 20;
(xxi) Clause 35 empowers the Central Government to relax the requirement of
qualifications for employing or engaging any person as private detective agent or the
requirement of licensing for performing private detective work in certain cases.
There should be no relaxation in qualification as such agencies would be handling
sensitive cases;
3.1.1 The comments of the Ministry on each suggestion/views of the State Governments/UT
Administrations are placed at Annexure-V:
Views/suggestions from private detective agencies and individuals
3.2 In response to a Press Release inviting memoranda from individuals/organizations on the
Bill, the Committee received several suggestions/ memoranda.

8
3.2.1 The suggestions/memoranda are as under:—
(i) Relaxation offered by Clause 35 could be exploited by foreign agencies to infiltrate
the Indian market to the disadvantage of Indian companies and endanger the security
of the country;
(ii) The prescribed fees for licence and its renewal should be reduced as most of the
agencies cannot afford such huge amount;
(iii) Under clause 17 there should be provision of appeal, in case of State Board to High
Court of that State and in case of Central Board to the Supreme Court of India.
Further, there has to be a provision of appeal to Supreme Court against the order
of High Court.
(iv) Conditions like minimum qualifying physical standards under sub-clause (e),
completion of prescribed detective training successfully under sub-clause (d) and
other conditions as prescribed in sub-clause (f) of clause 13, are onerous as there
are very few detective training institutions in the country;
(v) The Bill must contain provisions for safeguarding interest of the detective agencies
from the Inspector of Police or person authorized by Board, as clause 19 violates
the right of privacy. There should also be a provision for safeguarding the interests
of the agencies, in case of financial predicament;
(vi) There is no mention of educational qualification, experience, for a detective agent in
the Bill;
(vii) Detectives may be permitted to work in the entire country because some cases
naturally get connected to other parts of the country and one should apply directly
to Central Board and get licence for it;
(viii) The period of licence may be increased from 5 to 10 years and accordingly fees may
be fixed for 10 years;
(ix) Under clause 11(3), ‘no objection certificate’ may be obtained from the Central
Agency (IB) instead of from the police;
(x) In clause 16(1) (K), instead of “Assistance to police”, the words “co-operation to
the police” would be better so that the work can be done without any prejudices and
detective and police can jointly and honestly reach near the truth;
(xi) The work/activities of the detective agencies should be reported upon and reviewed
by IB;
(xii) In the interest of private detective agencies, there should be provision in the Bill that
after discussion with association of detectives, Government should make nominations
on the Board;
(xiii) Under clause 13 of the Bill a private detective agency shall engage a person who has
completed the prescribed detective training norms successfully and he has also to
fulfill other conditions which may be provided in the Bill, itself;
(xiv) Under clause 11 (1), for renewal of license, late fee can be imposed in case of delay
in renewal of license. The period of limitation of 120 days for applying for renewal
may be removed and late fee system may be in effect;

9
(xv) Under Clause 30 of the Bill , the right to legal proceeding should be given to Private
detective Agency(ies) as there is no provision in the Bill regarding the powers of
Private Detective after getting the Licence from Government of India;
(xvi) Private Detectives encroach upon the right to citizens to privacy and Private
Detectives are used for blackmailing purpose and extract the confidential information
of the company by rival companies;
3.2.2 The suggestions and comments received from the Ministry of Home Affairs are placed at
Annexure-VI.

10
10
CHAPTER-IV
ISSUES RAISED BY COMMITTEE AND COMMENTS OF MINISTRY THEREON
4.0 The Committee, during the course of oral evidence of the Home Secretary, raised certain
policy issues. The Committee not being satisfied with the oral replies of the Home Secretary
directed him to examine the issues thoroughly and after application of mind, send written replies
thereon. The Ministry of Home Affairs vide its letter dated 15th September, 2008 informed the
Committee that for considering the policy issues identified by the Committee, a group had been
constituted by the Ministry consisting of Dr. Sharada Prasad, DGP (Vigilance and Anti-Corruption),
Assam, Shri D.M. Mitra, Director, NICFS, Shri R.C. Arora, Director (R&D), BPR&D and Shri S.N.
Singh, Joint Director (IB). It was also stated that after receiving the report from the group and after
its due examination, the Ministry would send the final replies on the policy issues. Later the Ministry
vide its letter dated 14th October, 2008 furnished its replies to the policy issues. The issues identified
by the Committee and the written replies furnished by the Ministry, are as under:—
ISSUE
(i) Definition of ‘lawful objective’ and ‘lawful manner’
4.1 The definition of ‘private detective work’ means ‘collection of information in a lawful
manner for such an objective by a licensed private detective agency’. Have the ‘lawful objective’
and ‘lawful manner’ been defined in the Bill?
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.1.1 As per clause 2(g) of the Bill, the definition of  “private detective work” means collection
of information in a lawful manner for such an objective, by a licensed private detective agency.
The PDAs can collect the information for lawful objective in a lawful manner. The private detective
agencies cannot carry on such work which is forbidden by law and cannot breach the law of the
country while collecting information. Therefore, there is, no need to define the meanings of ‘lawful
objective’ and ‘lawful manner’ as these are well understood.
ISSUE
(ii) Jurisdiction of Private Detective Agencies
4.2 The activities of private detectives have not been defined in clause 2 (l) (g). The areas of
operation of private detective agencies should be specified in the Bill.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.2.1 The issue was examined at the time of formulation of the Bill and a view was taken that
it would not be practicable and feasible to enumerate all the activities that can be carried out by
the private detective agencies. Further, it was felt that since no legal right or legal immunity is
envisaged for private detective agencies/agents, there is no need to specify all the activities. Section
2(g) specifies that the private detective agencies shall act in a lawful manner and for a lawful
objective, and it is felt that this should be sufficient.

11
ISSUE
(iii) Conflict between Private and State Investigating Agencies
4.3 There are possibilities that the information collected by private detective agency may be
contrary to the information being provided by the state agencies and this may lead to contradiction
between the two. A parallel institution should not be established which could lead to conflict
between the State investigating agency and the private detective agency.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.3.1 There is no possibility of any conflict between the state investigating agencies on the one
hand and private detective agencies, as their functional territories are different. The investigating
agencies get the mandate from the various procedural, substantive and criminal laws such as
Cr.P.C; 1973, Indian Evidence Act, 1872, I.P.C., Police Act and other special legislations. Thus, the
powers vested on State investigating agencies are not available to private detective agencies. In any
case, the evidentiary value of the information collected by a PDA shall be regulated by the different
provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 in the same way as the court (Criminal and Civil) deals
with the evidence adduced before it by the prosecution/defence and parties to the litigation.
ISSUE
(iv) Legal Sanctity to Private Detective Agencies
4.4 The Bill is aimed to regularize or recognize the private detective agencies and to give them
some power. The Private Detective Agencies would need license to operate. Will this Bill not give
legal sanctity to the agencies which they do not have today?
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.4.1 As per Article 19(1) of the Constitution, a citizen has right to practice any profession or
carry on any occupation, trade or business. The private detective agencies are thus carrying out
a business or profession. However, with the enactment of the Bill, it is expected that there will
be some regulation of the activities done by the private detective agencies, who would be working
within the legal parameters, and would be accountable to a regulatory authority. Of course, since
these agencies would be regulated through the Act and would need licence to operate, it would give
recognition to the agencies under the law but there would be prima facie, no issue of regularisation
involved. The Bill provides for conditions to be eligible to be a private detective agent which include
the physical fitness and completion of successful detective training by a individual. In addition, the
agency is required to verify the character and antecedents of the private detective agent whom they
seek to employ. Thus, the induction of agents shall be streamlined and only trained individuals shall
be employed as private detective agents. There is also a provision that if these conditions are not
satisfied, the licence of the agency is liable to be cancelled. Under the circumstances, the working
of the private detective agencies could be expected to improve. The Bill does not confer any legal
sanctity on the report and findings of the private detective agencies.
ISSUE
(v) Foreign Detective Agencies in India
4.5 As per Clause 9(2) of the Bill a company, firm or an association or persons shall not be
considered for issue of a license, if it is not registered in India, or having a proprietor or a majority
shareholder, partner or director, who is not a citizen of India. It could mean that minority foreign
shareholders may be allowed to operate in the country.

12
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.5.1 The aim of the Government is that control over such companies or agencies should be in
Indian hands. The issue of pattern of share-holding had been considered when the Bill was
formulated. It was observed that this activity was not included in the sectors where FDI is
prohibited or any sectoral caps are stipulated, thus making 100% FDI through automatic route
possible. Therefore, a decision was taken to impose a condition as indicated in clause 9(2) of the
Bill.
ISSUE
(vi) Multi-national corporations in Detective Business in India
4.6 If any multi-national corporation wants to work in the country, it has to be registered in
India. The requirement of registration will not create any barrier for them. This point has to be
taken care of in the Bill.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.6.1 The registration clause has been kept so that those companies which are registered outside,
may not operate directly, but should do so through a company registered in India, which will be
accountable to the laws of the country.
ISSUE
(vii) Jurisdiction of MHA on the subject-matter of the Bill
4.7 As per the provisions of the Bill, “Private Detective Agency” means a person or a body of
persons or firm or a company holding a valid license to carry out a detective work for
remuneration or reward on agency basis for other persons. So; it is customer vis-a-vis the agency.
How does this come within the purview of the Home Ministry? It should be dealt with by the
Consumer Affairs Ministry because the consumer is i nvolved. In the United States, this subject is
under the Department of Consumer Affairs, instead of Department of Homeland Security.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.7.1 The main objective of the Bill is to regulate the functioning of PDAs, and towards that end
providing the licensing regime which inter alia  would enable a check on antecedents of companies/
persons engaged in private detective work, as also on their activities. All this would have a
relationship with security and related matters. Merely because this involves the rendering of a
service to consumers would not make the subject come under the purview of the Department of
Consumer Affairs, the activities of which are generic in nature.
ISSUE
(viii) Infringement of Privacy of Individual
4.8 In the absence of any privacy law in our country, who will protect a person from the
infringement on his civil liberty, privacy, by a private detective agency?
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.8.1 There is no privacy law in the country. In the absence of any privacy law, protection of
privacy of persons is covered under the Constitution. Clause 28 is specifically drafted to take care

13
of this issue. Any complaints on this score can be addressed under various provisions of the
law.
ISSUE
(ix) Qualification or the background of the Board members
4.9 That would be the qualification or the background of the Board members? The Bill or the
rules to be framed thereunder, should throw some light on this.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.9.1 The Ministry has taken note of the suggestion of the Committee in respect of making
provisions under the rules regarding background etc. of the Board members.
ISSUE
(x) Demarcation of areas of cognizable offence
4.10 The scope of cognizable offence which is required to be reported by the Private Detective
Agencies to the Police, which it may come across, during the course of investigation, needs to be
specified.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.10.1 The clause 26(1) of the Bill relating to cognizable offence, prescribes that if the commission
of any cognizable offence is noticed by any private detective agent during the course of discharge
of his duties, he shall bring it to the notice of his superior immediately who in turn shall forthwith
inform the police either through his employer or agency or on his own.
As far as specifying the offences to be covered under this Clause, no such exercise has been
carried out since the intent was to cast a duty upon the detective agencies. The present law, vide
Section 39 of Cr.P.C. also enjoins on any member of the public, the duty of giving information
in respect of offences listed therein. Any suggestion/advice of the Committee in this regard, in so
far as detective agencies are concerned, will be duly considered.
ISSUE
(xi) Evidentiary value of reports of private detective agencies
4.11 Like the Commissions of Inquiry Act, there should be provision in the Bill to say that the
reports of private detective agencies should not be cited as evidence, and if necessary, Evidence
Act, 1872 may be suitably amended.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.11.1 The Ministry of Law and Justice was consulted in the matter and they have mentioned that
it does not appear to be a legal issue. In the view of MHA, it does not appear to be necessary
to make a provision in the Act as the evidentiary value of the information collected by PDA shall
be regulated by the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 in the same way as the court deals
with the evidence adduced before it by the prosecution/defence and parties to the litigation. No
amendment in Evidence Act is contemplated with reference to the present Bill.
Besides the above policy issues, the following issues were also raised by the Committee upon
which the Ministry furnished its comments:—

14
ISSUE
(i) Taking cognizance and recording of information provided by PDA
4.12 Clause 26(1) of the Bill envisages the private detective to be duty bound to report to the
police forthwith if he notices any cognizable offence having been committed. This again is a matter
which falls under the purview of the Evidence Act. Under what provision of law the police
authority would be eligible to take cognizance and record such information when provided by a
private detective service provider since the Criminal Procedure Code denies admissibility of
evidence like confessional statements etc. when obtained by Police itself ? Whether Government is
contemplating amendment of Cr.P.C. in order to make the provision of clause 26(1) consistent with
Cr.P.C.?
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.12.1 As far as specifying the offences to be covered under this Clause, no such exercise has
been carried out since the intent was to cast a duty upon the detective agencies. The present law,
vide Section 39 of Cr.P.C., also enjoins on any member of the public, the duty of giving
information in respect of offences listed therein. Any suggestion/advice of the Committee in this
regard, in so far as detective agencies are concerned, will be duly considered. With reference to
the procedural aspects, no amendment of Cr.P.C. is contemplated.
ISSUE
(ii) Contradiction between clauses 9 and 35
4.13 Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to provide discretionary authority to Government to relax the
requirements for grant of private detective agencies licence to any individual or to a private
detective service provider company etc., whereas clause 9(1) and (2) categorically stipulate the
conditions in the absence of which, persons and companies, firm etc. respectively “shall not” be
granted licence. The reasons for incorporating the ‘relaxation’ provisions in clause 35 even though
it contradicts clause 9 (1) and (2)?
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.13.1 The clause 9 contains grounds on which a person shall not be considered for issue or
renewal of licence to carry on the business of private detective work. In clause 35, it is mentioned
that the Central Government may relax the requirement of qualifications for employing or engaging
any person as private detective agent or the requirement of licensing for performing private
detective work in certain cases, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, in respect of a private
detective agent or a private detective agency, if such agent or agency is recognized or registered
under the law of any country. This is only an enabling provision for any contingency. The Central
Government will use this provision with due care.
ISSUE
(iii) Need for a separate law for PDAs
4.14 Countries with much older private detective laws, e.g. Canada, Singapore, California, etc.
have a common law to govern both the private security service and private detective service
whereas in India we have enacted a separate law for private security services and a separate law
is proposed for private detective services. The Committee wanted to know the rationale behind not
having a common law for the both?

15
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
4.14.1 Unlike some foreign countries who have common law to govern security and detective
services, the Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (29 of 2005) was enacted for the
first time in the country. Now the proposal is to make a separate law to regulate the activities of
Detective Agencies. We are not in favour of a common law as the work of security guards and
detective agents are different.

16
16
CHAPTER-V
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMITTEE
5.0 As already stated elsewhere in this report, several policy issues were raised by the Members
of the Committee during the course of the oral evidence of the Home Secretary on the
13 June, 2008. The Committee not being satisfied with the oral replies given by the Home
Secretary, it directed him to examine the issues thoroughly and send written replies. The Ministry
of Home Affairs later, vide its letter dated 15 September, 2008, informed the Committee that for
considering the policy issues, a Group was constituted by the Ministry consisting of representatives
of various agencies and that the Group was expected to finalise its report’ and submit the same
to the Ministry. It was further stated that after receiving the report of the Group and after its due
examination, final replies on the policy issues would be sent to the Committee.
5.1 The Ministry, vide its letter dated 14 October, 2008, sent the replies to the issues raised
by the Committee. The issues raised and the replies of the Ministry have already been dealt with
in Chapter - III. The Committee, in its sitting held on 4 December, 2008, observed that although
the Ministry had send its responses, inter alia, on the policy issues, it appeared that the Group
constituted by the Ministry had not finalized its report and in that backdrop, came to the conclusion
that it would be advisable to await the report of the Group based on which the Ministry could
communicate their final comments on various queries raised by the Members. Accordingly, the
Ministry of Home Affairs was requested to expedite their final responses on the policy issues and
also to submit copies of the Report of the Group, for circulation amongst the members of the
Committee.
5.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs, responding to the communication of the Rajya Sabha
Secretariat, vide its d.o. letter dated 6 January, 2009, stated as under:
“I may mention here that the said internal Group consisting of officers of NICFS, BPR&D,
IB and DGP (Assam) was constituted to deliberate on the eleven policy issues/observations
raised by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, so as to facilitate this Ministry to firm up
its response to the queries/observations of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing Committee.
There was, however, no consensus among the Members of this Group and as such the
Group did not present a Report in the matter.
Keeping in view the position mentioned above, the matter had been discussed in meetings
in the Ministry, in which the Members of the Group had also been invited. The replies of
the Ministry in respect of the policy issues raised by the Committee with regard to the
Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill were framed after considering all aspects.
I would, therefore, state that the replies furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs to the
Rajya Sabha Secretariat on the policy issues raised on the Bill, vide this Ministry’s O.M.
dated 14 October, 2008, 
reflect the considered views of the Ministry and may be treated
as our final reply . Further , we do not have any formal Report of the internal Group of MHA
to share with the Hon’ble Committee.” (emphasis added)
5.3 The Committee, in its sitting held on 16 January, 2009, took up the Bill for further
consideration. The Committee also took note of the contents of the communication dated
6 January, 2009 received from the Ministry of Home Affairs and felt that the

17
communication received from the Ministry was self-contradictory. On the one hand, it was
mentioned that the Group could not reach any consensus, and on the other, the Ministry
had mentioned that the replies were final and were framed considering all aspects. It
appeared to the Committee that the Ministry had sent the replies for the sake of disposing
of the matter. The Committee was not satisfied and convinced by the so-called ‘final reply’
received from the Ministry. As a matter of fact, despite several rounds of oral evidence and
discussions with the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry could not
convince the Committee about the sine-qua-non of the Bill. The Committee, accordingly,
decided not to proceed with the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill and to request the
Ministry to have are-look at the Bill in the light of the issues flagged by it.
5.4 The Committee is constrained to observe that the Ministry of Home Affairs have
finalized the replies on the important policy issues raised by the Committee, in a
perfunctory manner. The responses of the Ministry appeared to the Committee to be
laboured explanations. The replies framed by the Ministry were not acceptable to the
Committee, when the Group constituted by the Ministry itself could not arrive at a
consensus on important policy issues. The Committee is of the considered view that the
issues need to be thoroughly examined in consultation with all the concerned Departments,
agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may have a re-look at
the provisions of the Bill in the light of the issues raised and suggestions made by it.

MINUTES

20

21
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 18th September, 2007 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri N. Jothi
8. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri Tapir Gao
11. Shri T.K. Hamza
12. Shri Raghunath Jha
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
15. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
16. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
17. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Additional Secretary
2. Shri G.S. Patnaik, Joint Secretary
3. Shri K.C. Jain, Director
4. Shri D.M. Mitra, Director, National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science
21

22
Representative of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairperson apprised the members that the meeting had been convened
to discuss the Private Detective Regulation Bill, 2007. The Chairperson thereafter welcomed the
Additional Secretary and other officers of MHA and asked her to make a presentation on the
provisions of the Bill.
3. The Additional Secretary explained the reasons behind bringing the Bill. She informed that
during the course of discussions in Rajya Sabha on the 10th May, 2005 on the Private Security
Agencies Bill, 2005, some members had suggested for enactment of a law to regulate private
detective agencies also and the Home Minister had assured the house that a Bill to regulate the
private detective agencies would be introduced. Elaborating the reasons for introducing the Bill, the
Additional Secretary further added that due to increase in the number of private detective agencies
which did not care for the right of privacy of others and also keeping in view the functioning of
these agencies, a need was felt to evolve or enforce proper norms for functioning of these private
detective agencies and also to ensure that agencies with dubious style of functioning close down
their business instead of proliferating.
4. Thereafter, the Joint Secretary, MHA made a power-point presentation on the Bill. Dwelling
on the main features of the Bill, the presentation included procedure pertaining to giving licences
to detective agencies; evolving or enforcing proper norms for their functioning; verifying the
antecedents of the personnel employed; ensuring the closure of the detective agencies of dubious
character and prohibiting their proliferation. The Joint Secretary further apprised the Committee that
the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Science, (LNJN
NICFS) in consultation with the experts and various stakeholders prepared the preliminary draft of
the Bill. He further stated that another Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary,
MHA with members from IB, BPR&D, LNJN, NICFS, Delhi Police and the States held deliberations
on the draft Bill, and felt that the profession of private detective agencies should be broadly self-
regulatory on the lines of the regulatory bodies dealing with chartered accountants, cost
accountants, company secretaries and architects, etc.
4.1 The Chairperson wanted to know whether any victim had complained against any private
detective agency and whether any organization has requested for a law. Responding to the query
about victims’ complaints, the Additional Secretary stated that the data related to victims’
complaints was not readily available and assured the Committee to supply the same to it later.
4.2 Thereafter, Members raised the following queries:— (i) Home Ministry had not tried to
collect the data related to number of detective agencies, complaints and the profiles of the owners
of these agencies. (ii) Through passage of the Bill, influential detective agencies with money power
and political clout may ruin small detective agencies. (iii) The functioning of detective agencies may
be in conflict with the intelligence agencies like IB, RAW and others. (iv) During the drafting of
the Bill, National Security Council and the National Security Adviser should have been consulted.
(v) Since there are government investigating agencies, there is no need to have private detective
agencies and so is the Bill. (vi) Whether this type of Bill to regulate private detective agencies exist
in other countries; and if so whether the same has been studied or not; (vii) Whether the opinion
of the police department was obtained before framing the Bill. (viii) Clause 25(2) in Chapter VI
prescribing that “the private detective agencies shall not divulge any information which the agency
might receive in the course of inquiry referred to under sub-section (1) to any person or any other
agency” gives rise to concern. (ix) The Bill has many riders/conditions which require due diligence
as it would have serious implications. (x) What would be the coordination mechanism between the
government agencies and other private agencies. (xi) This subject comes under Concurrent List and

23
this could lead to conflict between Centre and States as States may pass different legislations at
different points of time. (xii) What is the number of State Governments who have agreed with the
recommendations of the Bill; (xiii) The number and names of experts consulted during the
preparation of the Bill.
5. The Additional Secretary, MHA, then replied to the queries raised by the Members.
However, the discussion remained inconclusive. The Chairperson directed the Additional Secretary
to send written answers to all the queries raised and also informed her that the Committee would
hear the Home Secretary later in the light of the replies received.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.

24
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, 13th June, 2008 in Committee Room “C”,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramachandra Khuntia
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Tiruchi Siva
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
9. Shri Amitava Nandy
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Addl. Secretary (CS)
3. Shri D.K. Kotia, Joint Secretary
4. Shri D.M. Mitra, Director, NICFS
5. Shri Alok Bhatnagar, Director
6. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary
24

25
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. She also
welcomed Shri Tiruchi Siva, Member, Rajya Sabha who had been newly nominated to the
Committee.
2.1. * * *
2.2. * * *
2.3 The Chairperson then recapulating the discussion held on the Private Detective Agencies
(Regulation) Bill, 2007, stated that the Committee had so far heard the official presentation of the
Additional Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs on 18th September, 2007 and since she could
not satisfactorily respond to the queries of the Members, the Committee decided to hear the Home
Secretary on the said Bill.
3. The Chairperson, then, welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials accompanying him
and asked him to make a presentation before the Committee on the Bill.
3.1 The Home Secretary, while giving a detailed background to the Bill, stated that the Bill was
drafted by the Lok Nayak Jayprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic
Science (LNJN NICFS). A Committee, under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary, Ministry of
Home Af fairs, including representatives from Intelligence Bureau, Bureau of Police Research and
Development, LNJN NICFS, MHA, Delhi Police and the States had deliberated on the draft Bill.
Copies of the Bill were also forwarded to other agencies such as Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence, Financial Intelligence Unit, Research and Analysis Wing, Central Board of Excise and
Customs, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Enforcement Directorate, Department of
Economic Affairs, Department of Legal Affairs for comments. He also stated that based on the
comments received from various agencies, the proposed Bill had been formulated.
3.2 The Home Secretary further stated that the Bill provided for verification of the antecedents
of the agencies and the personnel employed by them as private detective agents; safeguarding the
right to privacy and freedom of an individual; standards of training for the profession; the code
of ethics for conduct of private detective agencies and the private detective agents and above all
to ensure that private detective agencies of dubious reputation closed down their business and did
not proliferate. During the presentation, he also dwelt upon other features of the Bill.
3.3 Thereafter, Members of the Committee raised some queries pertaining to the provisions of
the Bill and implications thereof. The Chairperson then asked the Home Secretary to send written
replies to the queries/issues raised in the meeting.
3.4 The witnesses then withdrew.
4. The Committee thereafter felicitated its former Member, Shri G. Karunakara Reddy on his
election to the Karnataka Legislative Assembly and appointment as a Minister in the Government
of Karnataka.
5. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 
P.M. to meet again on 27th June, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

26
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 4th December, 2008 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramachandra Khuntia
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti
8. Shri T.K. Hamza
9. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Committee chose Shri S.S. Ahluwalia to act as
Chairman for the meeting. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia then welcomed the members of the Committee and
apprised them of the agenda of the meeting.
2.1 * * *
2.2 * * *
2.3 The Committee thereafter observed two minutes’ silence as a mark of respect to the
departed souls.
3.0 The Chair, then, informed the Members that the day’s meeting had been convened to further
discuss the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007, in the light of the comments/replies
furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the queries raised by the Members in the meetings of
the Committee held on 18th September, 2007 and 13th June, 2008 and on the views/suggestions
contained in the memoranda received from the State Governments/UTs and individuals/organizations.
26
*** Relate to other matters.

27
3.1 The Chair referred to a D.O. letter dated 15th September, 2008 received from the MHA,
addressed to the Secretariat, wherein it was communicated that to consider the policy issues
concerning the Bill, a Group was constituted by the Ministry, by an executive order, consisting of
Shri D.M. Mitra, Director, NICFS, Dr. Sharada Prasad, DGP (Vigilance and Anti-Corruption),
Assam, Shri R.C. Arora, Director (R&D), BPR&D and Shri S.N. Singh, Joint Director (IB). As per
the communication of the Ministry, the Group had met twice and was expected to finalise its report
soon and submit the same to the Ministry. It was also communicated by the Ministry that after
receiving the report from the group and after its due examination, the Ministry would send the final
replies on policy issues.
3.2 In that context, the Chair observed that although the Ministry of Home Affairs had sent its
responses inter-alia on the policy issues, it appeared that the Group set up by the Ministry had
not finalised its report and in that scenario, two options were available to the Committee. Either
the Committee can further deliberate on the Bill based on whatever replies/responses had been
received from the Ministry or it may like to await for the final responses of the Ministry based
on the report of the Group. The Members of the Committee were unanimously of the view that
it should appropriately consider the Bill further only after receipt of the final replies of the Ministry
on policy matters connected with the Bill. The Members of the Committee also expressed their
dissatisfaction over the written responses received from the Ministry.
3.3 The Committee, after some discussion, came to the conclusion that it would be advisable
to await the report of the Group based on which the Ministry could communicate their final
comments on the various queries raised by the Members related to the Bill. Be that as it may, the
Committee noted that it would not be possible for it to complete its examination of the Bill and
present its report thereon within the extended period  i.e. , the last week of the current session
(214th Session).
3.4 Accordingly, the Committee authorized its Chairperson to request Hon’ble Chairman kindly
to grant further extension of time to it, upto the last day of the first week of the Budget Session
2009. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to write to the MHA for expediting their final
responses on the policy issues connected with the Bill and also to submit copies of the report of
the Group for circulation among members of the Committee.
3.5 Thereafter, the Chair referred to a letter dated 2 December, 2008 written by him, addressed
to the Chairperson of the Committee, seeking a discussion on the Eighth Report of the Second
Administrative Reforms Commission on “Combating Terrorism”, presented in June, 2008.
3.6 The Chair then announced that the Secretariat would circulate copies of the said letter
amongst the members of the Committee so that they could send their views on the subject and
suggest in what manner the subject could be taken up for discussion in the Committee.
3.7 * * *
3.8 * * *
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

28
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 16th January, 2009 in Room No. 074, Ground
Floor, PLB, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramachandra Khuntia
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Tapir Gao
9. Shri T.K. Hamza
10. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shri Raman Srivastava, Special Secretary
3. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary (Police)
4. Shri Shyam Jindal, Director
Representatives of CISF
1. Shri N.P. Das, Director-General
2. Shrimati Manjari Jaruhar, IG
3. Shri Ajay Bhatnagar, DIG
2. * * *
28
*** Relates to other matters.

29
2.1 * * *
2.2 * * *
2.3 * * *
2.4 * * *
3.0 * * *
3.1 * * *
3.2 * * *
3.3 * * *
3.4 * * *
4.0 * * *
4.1 * * *
4.2 * * *
(The Committee adjourned for lunch at 1.00 
P.M. and reassembled at 1.40 P.M.)
5. The Committee, thereafter, took up the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007
for further consideration. The Committee while taking note of the contents of the communication
dated 6 January, 2009 received from the Ministry of Home Affairs, felt that it was self-
contradictory. On the one hand, it was mentioned that the Group of officers of National Institute
of Criminology and Forensic Science (NICFS), Bureau of Police Research and Development
(BPR&D), Intelligence Bureau (IB) and Director General of Police (Assam), constituted to
deliberate upon the eleven policy issues raised by the Standing Committee, could not reach any
consensus, and on the other, the Ministry had mentioned that the replies to the policy issues were
final and were framed considering all aspects. The Committee felt that the Ministry had sent the
replies for the sake of disposing of the matter. The Committee was not satisfied and convinced
by the so-called ‘final reply’ received from the Ministry. The Committee, accordingly, decided not
to proceed with the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill and desired that the Ministry should
have a re-look at the Bill in the light of the issues flagged by it.
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 2.10 
P.M.. to meet again on 23rd and 24th January, 2009.
*** Relates to other matters.

30
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 10 February, 2009, in Room No. 074,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Sanjay Raut
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them that Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted extension of time to it for presenting its Report on the Land
Ports Authority of India Bill, 2008 upto 31st March, 2009.
3.1 The Committee, then, took up for consideration following draft Reports:—
(i) 137th Report on the Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants;
(ii) 138th Report on the Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008; and
(iii) 139th Report on the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007.
3.2 A Member of the Committee suggested some changes in the draft 138th Report which were
briefly discussed. The Committee adopted the draft report with some modifications in paras 3.4.2
and 3.10.2.
3.3 The Committee adopted draft 137th and 139th Reports without any change.
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports in both Houses of Parliament on
13th February, 2009. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence, Shri S.S.
30

31
Ahluwalia, Member, Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, Member,
Rajya Sabha, to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Biren
Singh Engti, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence, Shri Baju Ban Riyan, Member, Lok Sabha,
to lay the Reports on the Table of that House.
5. * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
13TH AUG., 2007
Bill N O. XL of 2007
THE PRIV ATE DETECTIVE AGENCIES (REGULATION) BILL, 2007
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE C ENTRAL  P RIV ATE D ETECTIVE  R EGULATORY B OARD
3. Constitution of Central Board.
4. Powers and functions of Central Board.
CHAPTER III
T
HE S TATE P RIV ATE D ETECTIVE  R EGULATORY B OARD
5. Constitution of State Board.
6. Powers and functions of State Board.
CHAPTER IV
REQUIREMENT  OF LICENCE  TO CARRY OR COMMENCE  THE BUSINESS  OF PRIV ATE DETECTIVE  WORK
7. Persons or private detective agency not to carry on or commence the business of
private detective agency without licence.
8. Eligibility for licence.
9. Persons not eligible for licence.
10. Application for grant of licence.
11. Renewal of licence.
12. Conditions for commencement of operation and engagement of agents.
13. Eligibility to be a private detective agent.
14. Conditions of licence.
15. Exhibition of licence and voluntary disclosure.
16. Cancellation and suspension of licence.
35

36
17. Appeals.
18. Register to be maintained by a private detective agency.
19. Inspection of licence.
20. Issue of photo identity card.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
CLAUSES
21. Grants by Central Government and constitution of Fund.
22. Grants by State Governments and constitution of Fund.
23. Accounts and audit of Central Board.
24. Accounts and audit of State Board.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
25. Disclosure of information to other persons.
26. Matters relating to a cognizable offence.
27. Punishment for contravention of certain provisions.
28. Prohibition for violating the privacy or causing annoyance.
29. Offences by companies.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. Indemnity.
31. Power of Central Government to make rules.
32. Power of State Government to make rules.
33. Act not in derogation of any other law.
34. Powers of Central Government to give directions.
35. Power to relax in certain cases.
36. Power to remove difficulties.

37
ANNEXURE-I
AS I NTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
18 DEC., 2008
Bill No. XL of 2007
THE PRIV ATE DETECTIVE AGENCIES (REGULATION)
BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of private detective agencies and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Private Detective Agencies
(Regulation) Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
37
Short title
extent and
commencement.

38
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) “appropriate/Government” means the Central
Government or a State Government;
(b) “Board” means the Central Regulatory Board or, as
the case may be, a State Regulatory Board;
(c) “Central Board” means the Central Private Detective
Regulatory Board constituted under section 3;
(d) “licence” means a licence granted under sub-
section (5) of section 10;
(e) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette;
(f) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(g) “private detective work” means collection of
information in a lawful manner for such an objective by a
licensed private detective agency;
(h) “private detective agency” means a person or a
body of persons or a firm or a company holding a valid
licence to carry out the detective work for remuneration or
reward on agency basis for other persons;
(i) “private detective agent” means a person who
carries out the private detective work for a private detective
agency;
(j) “State Board” means the State Private Detective
Regulatory Board constituted under section 5;
(k) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory,
includes the Administrator thereof appointed by the President
under article 239 of the Constitution.
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined
but defined in the Indian Penal Code shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Code.
CHAPTER II
T
HE C ENTRAL P RIVATE D ETECTIVE  R EGULATORY B OARD
3. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification,
constitute the Central Private Detective Regulatory Board for
the purposes of this Act to be called “the Central Board”.
(2) The Central Board shall consist of not less than five
but not more than seven members including the Chairperson
to be appointed for a term of three years, and on such terms
and conditions including salary and allowances as may be
prescribed:
Definitions.
50 of 1968.
Constitution of
Central Board.

39
Provided that the Central Government may nominate an
officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India as the Chairperson of the Board and
other members from the Departments and agencies of the
Central Government:
Provided further that out of five members not more than
two and in case of seven members not more than three, as the
case may be, shall be from the recognised chambers of trade
and commerce and the private detective agency, to be
nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The Central Board may evolve its own procedures for
functioning and conduct of business.
(4) The Central Government may, for efficient discharge of
the functions by the Central Board, provide it with such officers and
staff as may be considered necessary.
4. ( 1) The functions of the Central Board shall be to:—
(a) grant, renew, suspend or revoke an all India
licence to a private detective agency under the provisions
of this Act,
(b) lay down the standards of training for the
profession for private detective agents throughout the country,
(c) prescribe code-of-ethics for conduct of private
detective agency and the private detective agents operating in
the country,
(d) advise the Central Government on-any matter of
policy concerning private detective agencies,
(e) perform the functions of State Board in terms of
proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 5 at the request of the
concerned State,
(f) lay down the code of conduct for private detective
agencies and its agents, particularly with regard to protection
of rights of individuals to privacy, freedom, etc.,
(g) any other matter for carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
(2) The Central Board may issue directions to a private
detective agency, to whom it has issued a licence, for ensuring
compliance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
Central Government may, suo motu  or on receipt of a report from
a State Government or any other information, order the revocation
or suspension of a licence issued by the Central Board if it is
satisfied that the activities of a private detective agency are
prejudicial to the national security or public interest and a copy of
such order shall be sent forthwith to the Central Board:
Powers and
functions of
Central Board.

40
Provided that every such order of revocation or suspension of
a licence shall conform to the provisions of sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4)
of section 16.
CHAPTER III
THE S TATE P RIVATE D ETECTIVE  R EGULTORY B OARD
5. (1) The State Government may, by notification,
constitute the.....(name of the State) State Private Detective
Regulatory Board for the purposes of this Act to be called “the
State Board”:
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent a State
Government from entrusting the functions of State Board to a
State Board of adjacent State with the prior consent of that
State, or to the Central Board with the prior consent of the
Central Government.
(2) The State Board shall consist of not less than three
but not more than five members including Chairperson to be
appointed for a term of three years, and on such terms and
conditions including salary and allowances as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the State Government may nominate an
officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to that
Government as the Chairperson of the State Board and other
members from the Departments and agencies of the State
Government:
Provided further that out of three members not more
than one and in case of five members not more than two, as
the case may be, shall be from the recognised chambers of
trade and commerce and the private detective agency, to be
nominated by the State Government.
(3) The State Board may evolve its own procedures for
functioning and conduct of business.
(4) The State Government may, for efficient discharge of the
functions, by the Board, provide it with such officers and staff as
may be considered necessary.
6. (1) the functions of the State Board shall be to:—
(a) grant, renew, suspend or revoke a licence to a
private detective agency under the pr ovisions of this Act,
(b) advise the State Government on any matter of
policy concerning private detective agencies,
(c) perform the functions of State Board for another
State in terms of proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 5 at
the request of that State,
(d) any other matter for carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
Constitution of
State Board.
Powers and
functions of
State Board.

41
(2) The State Board may issue directions to a private detective
agency functioning in that State for ensuring compliance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
State Government may, suo motu  or on receipt of any information,
order the revocation or suspension of a licence issued by its State
Board if it is satisfied that the activities of a private detective agency
are prejudicial to the national security or public interest and a copy
of such order shall be sent forthwith to the State Board:
Provided that every such order of revocation or suspension of
a licence shall conform to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4)
of section 16.
CHAPTER IV
R
EQUIREMENT  OF LICENCE TO CARRY OR COMMENCE  THE BUSINESS  OF
PRIV ATE DETECTIVE  WORK
7. No person shall carry on or commence the business of
private detective agency, unless he holds a licence issued under this
Act:
Provided that the person carrying on the business of private
detective agency, immediately before the commencement of this Act,
may continue to do so for a period of one hundred and eighty days
from the date of such commencement and if he has made an
application for such licence within the said period of one hundred
and eighty days, till the disposal of such application.
8. An application for issue of a licence under this Act shall
only be considered from a  person or persons after due verification
of his antecedents.
9. ( 1) A person shall not be considered for issue or renewal
of a licence under this Act, if he has been—
(a) convicted by a competent court for an offence, the
prescribed punishment for which is imprisonment of not less
than two years; or
(b) keeping links with any organisation or association
which is banned under any law on account of their activities
which pose threat to national security or public order or there
is information about such a person indulging in activities
which are prejudicial to national security or public order; or
(c) dismissed or removed from Government service; or
(d) found violating the provisions of sections of 20 and 25.
(2) A company, firm or an association of persons shall not be
considered for issue of a licence under this Act, if, it is not
registered in India, or having a proprietor or a majority shareholder,
partner or director, who is not a citizen of India.
Persons or
private
detective
agency not to
carry on or
commence the
business of
private
detective
agency without
licence.
Eligibility for
licence.
Persons not
eligible for
licence.

42
10. (1) An application for grant of licence to a private
detective agency shall be made to a State Board for a licence for
operating in that State or to the Central Board in case of licence for
operating in two or more States, in such form as may be
prescribed.
(2) The applicant shall submit an affidavit incorporating the
details in relation to the provisions contained in section 9, ensure the
availability of the training for its private detective agents required
under sub-section ( 2) of section 12, fulfilment of conditions under
section 14 and details of any criminal case, registered with police or
pending in a court of law, involving the applicant.
(3) Every application under sub-section ( 1), shall be
accompanied by a fee of—
(a) rupees fifty thousand if the private detective agency
is to operate in one State.
(b) rupees three lakhs if the private detective agency is
to operate in two or more States.
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), the
Board may, after making such inquiries or consultations as it
considers necessary and obtaining no objection certificate from the
concerned police authority, by order in writing, either grant a
licence or refuse to grant the same within a period of ninety days
from the date of receipt of the application with complete particulars
and the prescribed fee:
Provided that no order of refusal shall be made unless—
(a) the applicant has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard; and
(b) the grounds on which licence is refused is
mentioned in the order.
(5) A licence granted under this section—
(a) shall be valid for a period of five years unless the
same is cancelled under sub-section ( 1) of section 16;
(b) may be renewed from time to time after the expiry
of five years, for a further period of five years on payment
of such fee as may be prescribed; and
(c) shall be subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
11. (1) An application for renewal of licence shall be made to
the Board, not less than one hundred and twenty days before the
date of expiry of the period of validity thereof in such form as may
be prescribed by the Central Government and shall be accompanied
by the prescribed fee and other documents required under sections
8, 10 and 14.
Application
for grant of
licence.
Renewal of
licence.

43
(2) The Board shall pass an order on application for renewal
of licence within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt
of the application complete in all respects along with renewal fee.
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), the
Board shall, after obtaining no objection certificate from the police
and making such inquiries or consultations as it considers necessary,
may by order in writing, renew the licence or refuse to renew the
same:
Provided that no order of refusal shall be made except after
giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(4) All orders of refusal to renew the licence shall set forth
the grounds for such refusal.
12. (1) Every private detective agency shall, within one
hundred and eighty days of obtaining the licence, commence its
activities.
(2) Every private detective agency shall ensure imparting of
such training and skills to its private detective agents as may be
prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that the person carrying on the business of private
detective agency before the commencement of this Act, shall ensure
the required training to its detective agents within a period of one
year from the date of such commencement.
(3) A private detective agency shall not employ or engage a
person unless he fulfils the conditions specified in sub-section ( 1) of
section 13.
13. (1) A private detective agency shall not employ or engage
any person as a private detective agent unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) has completed twenty-one-years of age;
(c) satisfies the agency about his character and
antecedents in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) has completed the prescribed detective training
successfully;
(e) fulfils such physical standards as may be
prescribed; and
(f) satisfies such other conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) No person who has been convicted by a competent court
for an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a period of two
years or more, shall be employed or engaged as a private detective
agent.
14. (1) The appropriate Government may, in consultation with
the Board, make rules to prescribe the conditions on which licence
shall be granted under this Act and such conditions shall include
Conditions for
commencement
of operation
and
engagement of
agents.
Eligibility to
be a private
detective
agent.
Conditions of
licence.

44
requirements as to the training which the licensee is to undergo,
details of the person or persons forming the agency and obligation
as to the information to be provided from time to time to the Board:
Provided that a person opening another private detective
agency, when the licence issued in respect of his own agency is
suspended or cancelled, shall not be eligible for a licence with
respect to the other agency.
(2) The appropriate Government may make provision in the
rules to verify about imparting of required training to the private
detective agent under sub-section ( 2) of section 12 and to review
continuation or otherwise of licence of such private detective
agency which may not have adhered to the condition of ensuring
the required training.
15. (1) Every private detective agency shall exhibit its licence
or a copy thereof in a conspicuous place of its business.
(2) Every private detective agency shall disclose to the Board
information regarding the agency, its objects, activities and in
respect of its promoters, directors or proprietors, as the case may
be.
16. ( 1) The Board may cancel or suspend any licence on
anyone or more of the following grounds, namely:—
(a) that the licence has been obtained on
misrepresentation or suppression of material facts;
(b) that the licence holder has used false documents or
photographs;
(c) that the licence holder has violated the provisions of
this Act or the rules made thereunder or any of the conditions
of the licence;
(d) that the licence holder has misused information
obtained by him during the discharge of his duties as the
private detective agency by unauthorisedly passing on the said
information to any industrial or business undertaking or a
company or any other person;
(e) that the licence holder by using any letter-head,
advertisement or any other printed matter or in any other
manner represented that the private detective agency is an
instrumentality of the Government or such agency is or has
been using a name different from that for which licence has
been granted;
(f) that the licence holder is or has been impersonating
or permitting or aiding or  abetting any body to impersonate
as a public servant;
(g) that the private detective agency had failed to
commence its activities within the specified time period;
Exhibition of
licence and
voluntary
disclosure.
Cancellation
and suspension
of licence.

45
(h) that the licence holder is or has wilfully failed or
refused to render the services agreed to any person;
(i) that the licence holder has done any act which is in
violation of a court order or an order of a lawful authority or
is or has been advising, encouraging or assisting any person
to violate any such order;
(j) that there have been repeated instances when the
private detective agent or agents provided by the private
detective agency
(a) committed a breach of trust or
misappropriated the property or a part thereof which
they were concerned with;
(b) were found to be involved in committing
crimes;
(c) had conspired in or abetted a crime against
the person or property concerned with;
(k) that the licence holder has done any act which
poses a threat to national security, or did not provide
assistance to the police or other authority in the discharge of
its duties or acted in a manner prejudicial to national security
or public order or law and order;
(l) that the licence holder or its agent has violated any
of the provisions of section 25, 26 or 28.
(2) Where the Board, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
is satisfied that pending the question of cancelling of licence on any
of the grounds mentioned in sub-section ( 1). it is necessary to do
so, the Board may, by order in writing, suspend the operation of the
licence for such period not exceeding thirty days as may be
specified in the order and require the licence holder to show cause,
within fifteen days from the date of issue of such order, as to why
the suspension of the licence should not be extended till the
determination of the question of cancellation.
(3) Every order of suspending or cancelling of a licence shall
be in writing and shall specify the reasons for such suspension or
cancellation and a copy thereof shall be communicated to the person
affected.
(4) No order of cancellation of licence under sub-section ( 1)
shall be made unless the person concerned has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
17. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board
refusing the licence under sub-section (4) of section 10 or renewal
under sub-section ( 3) of section II or order of suspension of licence
under sub-section ( 2) of section 16 or cancellation of licence under
sub-section ( 1) of that section, may prefer an appeal against that
order to the Central Government in case of orders passed by Central
Appeals.

46
Board, or to the State Government in case of orders passed by State
Board, within a period of sixty days of the date of such order:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of
the said period of sixty days if the appellant satisfies the appropriate
Government that he has sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal within that period.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section ( 1) shall be made in such
form as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a copy of
the order appealed against.
(3) Before disposing of an appeal, the appropriate Government
shall give the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
18. (1) Every private detective agency shall maintain a register
containing—
(a) the names and addresses of the persons managing
the private detective private agency;
(b) the names, addresses, photographs and salaries of
the private detective agents engaged by it;
(c) the names and addresses of the persons whom it
had provided private detective agents and gist of the services
provided; and
(d) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board may call for such information as it considers
necessary from any private detective agency or private detective
agent to ensure due compliance of the Act.
19. The Board or any other officer authorised by it in this
behalf, not below the rank of Inspector of Police, may at any
reasonable time, enter the premises of the private detective agency
and inspect and examine the place of business, equipments used in
providing detective services, the records, accounts and other
documents connected with the licence and may take copy of any
document thereof.
20. (1) Every private detective agent shall be issued a photo
identity card, by the private detective agency employing or engaging
the agent.
(2) The photo identity card under sub-section ( 1) shall be
issued in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) Every private detective agent—
(a) shall carry his identity card issued by the agency,
while performing private detective work and shall produce it
on demand for inspection by the Board or any other officer
authorised by it in this behalf or by the police on duty; and
(b) shall not wear any garb or carry any token or
emblem resembling that which is used by the police forces or
armed forces of the Union.
Register to be
maintained by
a private
detective
agency.
Inspection of
licence.
Issue of photo
identify card.

47
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
21. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Central Board
by way of grants such sums of money as that Government may
consider necessary for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
(2) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Central
Board Fund and there Shall be credited thereto—
(i) any grants made to the Central Board by the Central
Government; and
(ii) all fees and charges received by the Central Board
under this Act.
(3) the Fund referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall be applied for
meeting salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members,
officers and other employees of the Central Board and the expenses
of the Central Board incurred in the discharge of its functions under
this Act.
22. (1) The State Government may, after due appropriation
made by Legislature by law in this behalf, make to the State Board
by way of grants such sums of money as that Government may
consider necessary for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
(2) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the State
Board Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(i) any grants made to the State Board by the State
Government; and
(ii) all fees and charges received by the State Board
under this Act.
(3) the Fund referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall be applied for
meeting salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members,
officers and other employees of the State Board and the expenses
of the State Board incurred in the discharge of its functions under
this Act.
23. (1) The Central Board shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts
in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be
specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the Central Board to the Comptroller
and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of
the Central Board under this Act shall, have the same rights and
Grants by
Central
Government
and constitu-
tion of Fund.
Grants by
State
Governments
and constitu-
tion of Fund.
Accounts and
audit of
Central Board.

48
privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with
the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have
the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the
offices of the Central Board.
(4) The accounts of the Central Board as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Central Board
and the Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid
as soon as may be after it is received before each House of
Parliament.
24. (1) The State Board shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts
in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the State Board shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be
specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the State Board to the Comptroller
and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of
the State Board under this Act shall, have the same rights and
privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with
the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the
right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office
of the State Board.
(4) The accounts of the State Board as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be
forwarded annually to the State Government by the State Board and
the State Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon
as may be after it is received, before the State Legislature.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
25. (1) The private detective agency shall furnish such
information, which is relevant to the issue under enquiry and which
relates to the lawful objective for which the enquiry  was
undertaken, only to the client or to his authorized representative.
(2) The private detective agency shall not divulge any other
information which the agency might have received in the course of the
enquiry referred to in sub-section ( 1) to any other person or agency.
Accounts and
audit of State
Board.
Disclosure of
information to
other persons.

49
26. ( 1) If commission of any cognizable offence is noticed by
any private detective agent during the course of discharge of his
duties, he shall bring it to the notice of his superior immediately
who in turn shall forthwith inform the police either through his
employer or agency or on his own.
(2) No person engaged by a private detective agency,
including private detective agent shall tamper with evidence at any
scene of crime or carry out any search at any place relating to a
cognizable offence, which in any manner hampers or obstructs
investigation by the police.
27. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section
7 shall, in the first instance, be liable to penalty by the Board, which
may extend to two lakh rupees; and, on persistent violation of the
said section, he shall be punishable by the competent court, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(2) Any person or private detective agency who contravenes,
the provisions of section 12, 13 or 15, shall be liable to punishment
with a fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, in addition
to suspension or cancellation of the licence.
(3) Any person or private detective agency who obtains or
attempts to obtain any information contravening the provisions of
this Act, or uses the information collected during the course of
private detective work for black-mailing any person or contravenes
the provision of section 26, shall be liable for punishment under the
Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force, in
addition to suspension or cancellation of the licence.
28. A private detective agent shall not violate the rights of an
individual to privacy and freedom and for any such violation, the
agent shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months and also with fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees, in addition to the suspension or cancellation of the
licence of the concerned private detective agency.
29. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a company, every person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company
for the, conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where any offence under this Act has been committed by a
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
Matters
relating to a
cognizable
offence.
Punishment
for
contravention
of certain
provisions.
Prohibition for
violating the
privacy or
causing
annoyance.
Offences by
companies.
45 of 1860.

50
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on
the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation. — For the purpose of this section—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes
a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “Director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Board or the State Board or any other officer
authorised by it in respect of anything in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act
31. (1) The Central Government may , by notification, in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution of the Central Board and terms and
conditions of its members.
(b) the form for grant of licence and the fee and term
for renewal of licence for operating in two or more States.
(c) the provisions regarding training and skills to
detective agents under sub-section ( 2) of section 12.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
32. (1) The State Government may, by notification, in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
Indemnity.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.
Power of State
Government to
make rules.

51
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure for verification of character and
antecedents under clause ( c); the type of training under clause
(d); the physical standards under clause ( e); and other
conditions under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 12;
(b) the form of an application for grant of licence
under sub-section ( 1); and the form in which the licence is
to be granted under sub-section ( 4) of section 9; and
conditions subject to which such licence is to be granted
under section 13;
(c) the form of an application and fee for renewal of
licence under sub-section ( 1) of section 10;
(d) the form under sub-section ( 2) of section 17 for
preferring an appeal;
(e) the particulars to be maintained in a register under
sub-section ( 1) of section 18;
(f) the form in which photo identity card under sub-
section ( 2) of section 20 be issued;
(g) the constitution of the State Board and the terms
and conditions of its members.
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government may frame model rules
in respect of all or any of the matters with respect to which the
State Government may make rules under this section, and where
any such model rules have been framed in respect of any such
matter, they shall apply to the State until rules in respect of that
matter is made by the State Government and while making any such
rules, so far as is practicable, they conform to such model rules.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this
section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it  is made, before
each House of the state legislature where it consists of two Houses,
or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
(4) In respect of Union territories, every rule made to carry
out the provisions of the Act shall be laid before each House of
Parliament and where there exists a Legislative Assembly, before that
Assembly.
33. (1) Nothing in this Act shall discharge a private detective
agency or private detective of agent from any civil or criminal
liability or any act or omission under any other law for the time
being in force.
Act not in
derogration of
any other law.

52
(2) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
34. The Central Government may, in exercise of its powers
and performance of its functions under this Act, issue directions in
writing to the Central Board or the State Board and such Central
Board or State Board, as the case may be, shall be bound to comply
with such directions.
35. The Central Government may relax the requirement of
qualifications for employing or engaging any person as private
detective agent or the requirement of licensing for performing
private detective work in certain cases, for the reasons to be
recorded in writing, in respect of a private detective agent or a
private detective agency, if such agent or agency is recognised or
registered under the law of any country.
36. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of the period of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made. before each House of Parliament.
Powers of
Central
Government to
give directions.
Power to relax
in certain
cases.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

53
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Economic growth and development in the wake of globalization and
liberalization of the Indian economy has led to establishment of a large number
of private business enterprises. At the same time, the security scenario of the
country has been affected by international terrorism and extremism, keeping the
police and security agencies occupied primarily in facing these emerging
challenges. There has been increasing reliance on private investigation of
vigilance by the business establishments for their information or intelligence
gathering purposes as most of them tend to hire detective agents from private
sources. Therefore, a large number of private detective agencies have come up
all over the country. While, in most of the cases, private detective agencies have
helped in meeting the private investigation and vigilance needs of business
establishments, there has been a growing concern about the manner of
functioning of these agencies, as some of these conduct the operations without
due verification of antecedents of the personnel employed as private detective
agents; or due regard to the protection of rights of individuals spied upon by
these private detectives has not been observed.
2. It has been felt that there is a need to evolve or enforce proper norms
for functioning of these private detective agencies and to ensure that detective
agencies of dubious reputation close down their business and do not proliferate.
Therefore, the Central Government have been considering to regulate the
functioning of these private detective agencies so that they are run within legal
parameters and are accountable to a regulatory authority.
3. In view of above, it is proposed to regulate the private detective agencies
through legislation which provides for constitution of a Central Board at the
Central level and State Boards at the State level for the purpose of grant of
licences and also to make holding of licences mandatory for carrying on the
business of private detective agencies and other related matters.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; SHIVRAJ V . PATIL
The 15th May, 2007.
53

54
54
Notes on Clauses
Clause 2 defines the various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3  provides for establishment of a Central Private
Detective Regulatory Board for the purposes of the Bill to be called
“the Central Board” which may consist of five to seven members
including Chairperson to be appointed for a term of three years on
such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. It provides that
the Central Government may nominate an officer not below the rank
of Joint Secretary to the Government of India as its Chairperson. It
also provides that out of five members not more than two and in
case of seven members not more than three members shall be
nominated by the Central Government from the recognised
Chambers of trade and commerce and private detective agency. It
empowers the Board to evolve its own procedure for functioning
and conduct of business; and for its efficient discharge of the
functions, the Central Government may provide such officer and as
staff as it considers necessary.
Clause 4  provides for the powers and functionings of the
Central Board which inter alia  include the power to grant, renew,
suspend or revoke all India licence of a private detective agency, lay
down the standards of training, the code of conduct, etc., advise
the Central Government on any matter of policy and perform the
functions of State Boards in terms of proviso to sub-clause (1) of
clause 5 at the request of the concern State.
Clause 5 provides for establishment of the.......(name of the
State) State Private Detective Regulatory Board for the purposes of
the Bill to be called “the State Board” which may consist of three
to five members including Chairperson to be appointed for a term
of three years on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
It provides that the State Government may nominate an officer not
below the rank of Joint Secretary to that Government as its
Chairperson. It also provides that out of three members not more
than one and in case of five members not more than two members
shall be nominated to the State Government from the recognised
Chambers of trade and commerce and private detective agency. It
empowers the Board to evolve its own procedure for functioning
and conduct of business; and for its efficient discharge of the
functions, the State Government may provide such officers and as
staff as it considers necessary.
Clause 6 provides for powers and functions of the State
Board which ‘ inter alia ’ include the power to grant, renew, suspend
or revoke the licence of a private detective agency, advise the State
Government on any matter of policy and perform the functions of

55
the State Board for another State in terms of proviso to sub-clause
(1) of clause (5) at the request of that State.
Clause 7 provides for requirement of licence to carry on or
commence the business of private detective agency.
Clause 8 provides that an application for issue of licence shall
only be considered from a person or persons after due verification
of his antecedents.
Clause 9 enumerates various reasons when a person becomes
ineligible for issue or renewal of a licence under the Bill.
Clause 10 provides the manner of making an application to
the Central Board or the State Board, as the case may be, for grant
of licence and makes provisions for licence fees, period of validity,
etc., of licence.
Clause 11  provides for conditions and procedure for renewal
of a licence. This clause also provides that the Board shall pass an
order on such application within a period of ninety days and no
refusal shall be made without giving the applicant a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
Clause 12 specifies the conditions for commencement of
operation and engagement of private detective agents. This clause
also provides that a private detective agency shall ensure imparting
of such training and skills to its private detective agents as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Clause 13 enumerates detailed provisions regarding eligibility
criteria to be fulfilled for employment or engagement of any person
as a private detective agent by a private detective agency.
Clause 14 provides for framing of rules by the appropriate
Government in consultation with the Board, to prescribe conditions
on which licence shall be granted under the Bill including
requirements as to training, which the licensee is to undergo, details
of persons forming the agency and obligation to furnish the
information to the Board from time to time.
Clause 15 provides that the private detective agency shall
exhibit its licence or a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at its
business and shall also disclose the information regarding the
agency, its objects, activities and in respect of its promoters,
directors, proprietors to the concerned Board.
Clause 16 lays down detailed grounds for cancellation or
suspension of licence
Clause 17 provides for preferring of appeals by aggrieved
persons to the Central Government or the State Government and
also specifies the period within which an appeal may be preferred.
Clause 18 provides for maintenance of register by the private
detective agency giving full details of the persons managing the

56
agency, particulars of detective agents engaged by it, gist of
services provided, etc.
Clause 19  provides for inspection and examination of place of
business; records, accounts, etc., of a private detective agency by
the concerned Board.
Clause 20  provides for issue of a photo identify card to every
private detective agent employed or engaged by an agency so as to
prove their identity and authority.
Clause 21  empowers the Central Government, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, to provide
for grants to the Central Board. It also provides for constitution of
a Central Board Fund for receiving grants made by Central
Government, credit all fees and charges received by the Central
Board and also to meet salary, allowances and other remuneration of
its members, officers and other employees of the Central Board and
other expenses incurred by the Central Board.
Clause 22 empowers the State Government after due
appropriation made by Legislature by law in this behalf, to provide
for grants to the State Board. It also provides for constitution of a
State Board Fund for receiving grants made by State Government,
credit all fees and charges received by the State Board and also to
meet salary, allowances and other remuneration of its members,
officers and other employees of the State Board and other expenses
incurred by the State Board.
Clause 23 provides for maintenance of proper accounts by
the Central Board and periodical audit of the same by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. It also provides that the
Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid as soon
as may be, after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 24 provides for maintenance of proper accounts by
the State Board and periodical audit of the same by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India. It also provides that the State
Government shall cause the audit report to be laid as soon as may
be, after it is received, before the State legislature.
Clause 25 provides that the private detective agency shall
provide such information, which is relevant to the issue under
enquiry and which relates to the lawful object for which enquiry is
undertaken only to the client or his authorised representative and it
also provides that the private detective agency shall not divulge any
other information which it might have received in course of enquiry.
Clause 26 specifies the course of action to be taken by a
private detective agent if he notices commission of any cognizable
offence during the course of discharge of his duties.
Clause 27 provides that any person who contravenes the
provision of clause 7 of the Bill shall be liable to a penalty by the
Board, up to two lakh rupees; and on persistent violation of the said

57
clause he shall be punishable by a competent court with
imprisonment for a term up to two years and with fine up to five
lakh rupees. It also provides that any person or private detective
agency who contravenes the provisions of clauses 12, 13 and 15
shall be liable to punishment up to fifty thousand rupees in addition
to suspension or cancellation of licence. It also provides that any
person of private detective agency who obtains or attempts to obtain
any information contravening the provisions of the Bill or uses the
information collected during the course of private detective work for
black-mailing any person or contravenes the provision of clause 26,
shall be liable for punishment under the Indian Penal Code or any
other law for the time being in force, in addition to suspension or
cancellation of licence.
Clause 28 aimed to safeguard the rights of an individual to
privacy and freedom and for the contravention of his provision
provides for punishment with imprisonment up to six months and
also with fine up to fifty thousand rupees, in addition to suspension
or cancellation of licence.
Clause 29 provides for punishment for commission of
offences by companies under the Bill. It also defines the expression
“a company”, “director”, etc., for the purpose of this clause.
Clause 30 provides for Immunity from any suit, prosecution
or other legal proceeding against the Central Board or the State
Board or any officer authorized by it in respect of anything in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Bill.
Clause 31 empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. It enumerates the matters
in respect of which the Central Government shall make rules. This
clause also provides for laying of rules made by the Central
Government before each House of Parliament.
Clause 32 empowers the State Government to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of
which the State Government shall make rules are enumerated in this
clause. This clause also provides for laying of the rules made by the
State Government before the State legislature and in respect of rules
made by the Union Territories before each House of Parliament or
where there exists a Legislative Assembly before that Assembly.
Clause 33 provides that nothing in this Bill shall discharge a
private detective agency or private detective agent from any civil or
criminal liability or any act or omission under any other law for the
time being in force, it also provides that provisions of the Bill are
in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other
law for the lime being in force.
Clause 34  empowers the Central Government to issue
directions to the Central Board or to the State Board, which shall be
binding for compliance on the concerned Board.

58
Clause 35  enables the Central Government for relaxation of
certain provisions of the Bill in respect of a private detective agent
or a private detective agency, if such an agent or agency is
recognized or registered under the law of any other country.
Clause 36 vests the Central Government with the power to
remove any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the
provisions of the Bill, by making such provisions, as may be
necessary for removing the difficulty. The clause also provides that
no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of the Bill and that every
such orders shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

59
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (I) of clause 3 of Bill proposes to constitute the
Central Private Detective Regulatory Board. Sub-clause (2) of clause
3, inter alia , provides that the Central Board shall consist of not
less than five but not more than seven members including the
Chairperson to be appointed for a term of three years, on such
terms and conditions including the salary and allowances as may be
prescribed. Clause 21 provides that the Central Government may,
after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law in this behalf,
make to the Central Board by way of grants such sums of money
as that Government may consider necessary for being utilized for
the purposes of the Bill and constitution of Central Board Fund.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 proposes to constitute the State
Private Detective Regulatory Board for the purposes of the Bill. Sub-
clause (2) of clause 5, inter alia , provides that the State Board shall
consist of not less than three but not more than five members
including the Chairperson to be appointed for a term of three years,
on such terms and conditions including the salaries and allowances
as may be prescribed. Clause 22 makes provision for grants by
State Governments to the State Board and constitution of State
Board Fund.
3. For the efficient functioning of the Board, it will also
require adequate supporting staff. It is not possible to indicate
precisely at this stage the exact number and the categories of staff
required for the Central Board. This will require to be worked out
separately at an appropriate stage before the Board is actually set-
up. In addition to the expenditure on the supporting staff,
expenditure will also have to be incurred for accommodation,
acquisition of furniture and fittings and other office equipments. On
a rough estimate, the recurring expenditure on running the Central
Board is expected to be of the order of about Rs. 81.8 lakh per
annum. The capital expenditure that will have to be incurred is
expected to be of the order of about Rs. 7.2 lakh.
4. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Board
would help the Government in monitoring and regulating the
activities of private detective agencies so that they are run within
legal parameters and are made accountable to a regulatory authority.
5. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure recurring
or non-recurring in nature.
59

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules to carryout the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may,
inter alia , provide for (i) the constitution of the Central Board and
terms and conditions of its members; (ii) the form for grant of
licence and the fee and term for renewal of licence for operating in
two or more States; (iii) the provisions regarding training and skills
to detective agents under sub-section (2) of section 12.
2. Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to
make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the
Bill. Such rules may, inter alia  provide for (i) the procedure for
verification of character and antecedents under clause (c); the type
of training under clause (d); the physical standards under clause (e);
and other conditions under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section
12; (ii) the form of an application for grant of licence under sub-
section (1) and the form in which the licence is to be granted under
sub-section (4) of section 9; and conditions subject to which such
licence is to be granted under section 13; (iii) the form of an
application and fee for renewal of licence under sub-section (1) of
section 10; (iv) the form under sub-section (2) of section 17 for
preferring an appeal; (v) particulars to be maintained in a register
under sub-section (1) of section 18; (vi) the form in which photo
identity card under sub-section (2) of section 20 be issued; (vii) the
constitution of the State Board and the terms and conditions of its
members; (viii) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
prescribed.
The Central Government may frame model rules in respect of
all or any of the matters with respect to which the State
Government may make rules under this section and where any such
model rules have been framed in respect of any such matter, they
shall apply to the State until rules in respect of that matter is made
by the State Government and while making any such rules, so far
as is practicable, they conform to such model rules.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under
the aforesaid provisions are matter of procedure and administrative
detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill. The
rules made under the Bill are also required to be laid before
Parliament or State Legislature, as the case may be. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
60

61
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of private detective agencies and for
matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)

62
ANNEXURE-II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS INVITES SUGGESTIONS ON
PRIVATE DETECTIVE AGENCIES (REGULATION) BILL, 2007
Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007 as introduced in Rajya Sabha on 13
August, 2007 and pending therein has been referred to Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs headed by Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P. for examination and report.
2. The Bill seeks to regulate the functioning of private detective agencies and provide for
constitution of a Central Board at the Central level and State Boards at the State level for granting
of licences and also to make holding of licences mandatory for carrying on the business of private
detective agencies.
3. The Committee invites written memoranda containing suggestions/views/comments of
individuals/institutions/organisations interested in the subject matter of the Bill.
4. Those desirous of submitting memoranda to the Committee may send two copies (each in
English and Hindi) thereof to Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001 {Tele: 011-23035410 (O) and 23012007 (fax)}
within 30 days of the date of this advertisement indicating whether they would also be interested
in giving oral evidence before the Committee.
5. The memorandum submitted to the Committee would form part of its records and would
be treated as confidential and therefore should not be printed, circulated or publicized by anyone,
as such an act would constitute a breach of privilege of the Committee.
6. The Bill was published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, dated the
13 August, 2007. Interested individuals/institutions/organisations, etc. may obtain, on written
request, a copy of the Bill from Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer, Rajya Sabha
Secretariat, Cabin ‘A’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001. Its electronic text
is also available on the official website 
http://rajyasabha.nic.in by clicking the option “Bills with
Committees”.
Website:- E-mail: (i) dk.mishra@sansad.nic.in
http://rajyasabha.nic.in (ii) rs-ha@sansad.nic.in
62

63
ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF THE ORGANIZATIONS/INDIVIDUALS FROM WHOM MEMORANDA
ON THE BILL WERE RECEIVED
1. Major Gen. Satnam Singh
Director
National Institute of Security Management Applied Technology Premier Shield Pvt. Ltd.
Premier House
C-146, Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi
2. Shri Deepak Kumar Jolly
Managing Director
Secret Eye Detective Services Pvt. Ltd.
39A, 1st Floor, Heera Panna Mall, Near Oshiwara Police Station, New Link Road,
Andheri (W) Mumbai-53
3. Shri Satyadev Sharma
Director
Golden Eagle Detectives Ltd.
M-14. New Mahavir Nagar, New Delhi-18
4. Shri Madan Kumar
Manager
M. Kumar and Company
D-24, Upper Floor, Sector-02, Noida Delhi NCR
5. Shri George Joseph, Superintendent of Police (Retd.) T.C 11/957 (2), Nalanda Nanthencode,
Trivandrum
6. Shri R.S. Saini
CMD
Dynamic Security and Detective Agency Private Limited
210, Hema Industrial Estate, Sarvodya Nagar, Andheri (East), Mumbai-400 060
7. Shri Gurcharan Singh Chauhan
President
Security Association of Maharashtra (SAM)
2, Welfare Chambers, 1st Floor, Sector-17, Vashi, Navi Mumabi- 400705
8. Shri A.P. Sharma
Ex-editor
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri R.N. Pimple
Chairman
Piiii, People’s Media Initiative
Flat No. 002, GF, Parasrampuriya Tower No. 6, Lokhandwala, Oshiwara, Andheri (W)
Mumbai-53
63

64
10. Shri R.C. Madan
Consulting Detective Security Hazards Expert
B-35, Hill View Apartments, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi-57
11. Shri T.S. Ahluwalia Proprietor
Chief Executive
Tiger Detective
Bangla-21, VPO Manak Tabra Dist. Panchkula (Haryana)
12. Com. O.P. Bakshi
Chairman
Security Association of India, Mumbai
13. Golden Eagle Detective
New Mahabir Nagar,
New Delhi
14. Shri Anil Kumar
President
A.G . Missing Detective Bureau (Regd.), Village Muzafarpur, Near Railway Station Punjab
15. Shri Virender Kumar Goel
Private Detective
138, Shiv Nagar, Sodal Road, Jalandhar City Punjab
16. Shri Parag Shah
A 1/16, Asmita Jyoti, CHSL, Marve Road, Malad (W) Next to fire brigade, Mumbai
17. Shri Ramji Singh
Village Akhtiyapur, Chandva Police Station, Udanant Nagar, Bhojpur
18. Shri Lav Kumar Sinha, Silampur, Plaza, Lane-2 Patna-800003
Journalist and Crime Researcher Salimpur Ahra, Lane No. 2 Patna
19. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, MP (Rajya Sabha)

65
ANNEXURE-IV
LIST OF THE STATES/UNION TERRITORIES COMMENTING ON THE
PROVISIONS OF THE BILL
1. Gujarat
2. Rajasthan
3. Puducherry
4. Maharashtra
5. Jammu and Kashmir
6. Tripura
7. Madhya Pradesh
8. West Bengal
9. Sikkim
10. Manipur
11. Meghalaya
12. Tamil Nadu
13. N.C.T. of Delhi
14. Lakshadweep
15. Daman and Diu
65

66
ANNEXURE-V
COMMENTS OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS ON THE VIEWS OF STATE/UT
GOVERNMENTS ON THE PRIV ATE DETECTIVE AGENCIES (REGULATION)
BILL, 2007
Name of the State : GUJARAT
Sl. Views of the Government of Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. Gujarat on the PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
12 3
1. It is utmost requirement to regulate the Private Agreed.
Detective Agencies in the country.
2. Proper legislation should be passed to regulate Agreed.
the working of the Private Detective Agencies
in the country.
3. Provisions of the punishment proposed in
 the Suitable penalty clauses have been
bill for violation of the Act are not sufficient. incorporated in the clause 7 of the
We suggest more deterrent punishment. It Private Detective Agencies (Regulation)
should be minimum of 3 years  and maximum Bill that in the event of violation of the
upto 5 years imprisonment because the, provisions of the Bill by the detective
working of Private Detective Agencies is such agencies, specifically if any person
that affect privacy of an individual or an contravenes the provisions of the Bill
institution or any Company/Firm/Body, etc. So under clause 7 (which prohibits any
there are chances of misuse of powers by the person(s) or private detective agency
Private Detective Agencies or detective agents. from carrying on or commencing the
In case violation is done by the Private business of private detective agency
Detective Agencies, damage caused to  subjects without a licence), in the first instance,
is irreparable. Hence stringent punishment is shall be liable to penalty by the Board
required. which may extend to two lakh rupees,
and on persistent violation of the said
Section, shall be punishable by the
competent court, with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years
and also with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees. The penalty proposed
in the Bill seems sufficient.
4. Procedure for issuing the license
 to the Private The eligibility and procedure for issue of
Detective Agencies should be made more license has been prescribed in clauses 8
stringent so as to know the real strength and to 10 of the Bill. As per clause 8 an
genuineness of the Private Detective Agencies. application for issue a licence under this
Act shall only be considered from a
person or persons after due verification
66

67
12 3
of his antecedents. As per clause 10 an
application for grant of licence to a
private detective agency shall be made
to a State Board for a Licence for
operating in that State or to the Central
Board in case of licence for operating in
two or more States, in such form as
may be prescribed. The Central
Government shall prescribe the
conditions on which licence will be
granted. The procedure proposed in the
Bill seems stringent.
5. The Chairperson of the Central Board/State The Bill envisages constitution of Central
Board should be from the Police Department and Private Detective Regulatory Board and
not below the rank of Inspector General of State Private Detective Regulatory Boards.
Police. The working of the Private Detective The Central Board would be responsible
Agencies is related to national security and State for granting all India licence for operating
security. Police officials are well conversant with in more than one State, whereas the
the security scenario of the nation/State so they State Boards would be authorized to
will suit the requirement of the Board more grant licence for operating in that State.
effectively. Both the Central and State Boards would
also have powers to suspend or revoke
licences granted in their respective
jurisdiction(s). The Central Board shall
consist of not more than 7 members,
including a Chairperson, who shall be an
officer not below the rank of Joint
Secretary to be nominate by the Central
Government. The State Government can
nominate an officer not below the rank
of Joint Secretary to that Government
as Chairman of the State Board.
Therefore a Police Officer can be
nominated as Chairman of the Central/
State Board by Central/State
Government concerned. It is upto the
Central Government and the State
Government to nominate such an officer
on the Board.
6. In the Regulatory Body of the Central Government The Central Government/concerned
as well as State Governments there should be State Government is free to nominate a
at least one member of Police Department out
 of police officer as a member of State
the five/three members of the Board. Board/Central Board.
7. Their area of operation will be limited to private It is difficult to enumerate all the areas
sector only and not the Government machinery. of operation/activities, of private detective
agencies. Since no legal right or legal

68
12 3
immunity is envisaged for private
detective agencies/agents, its activities
have not been specified. Its activities
are mostly in the private sector.
However, they can be of service to
Government.
8. Police shall take the help of the Private Detective The Police, if required, can take help
Agencies as and when required for detection of private detective agencies.
and prevention of crime.
9. Number of Private Detective Agencies should Agreed.
be regulated so as to control them
 in an
effective manner. Mushroom growth of Private
Detective Agencies will hamper the interest of
Private and Public sectors.
10. There may be chance of counter spying
 of The private detective agencies cannot
private and public institution and individuals by carry on such work which is forbidden
Private Detective Agencies on their own.
 It should by law and cannot break law of the
not be allowed in any circumstances as they country while collecting information/
may blackmail the subjects, and it will be conducting inquiry.
counter productive.
11. Use of Private Detective Agencies by an As per 10 above.
institutions/firm/company/individual etc.  for their
competitive interest should not be allowed and
violation of this nature should be viewed
seriously and stringent punishment should be
imposed.
12. In no circumstances, the foreign agencies or The provisions have already been made
agents should be allowed to act as a Private in Clauses 9 and 13 of the Bill which
Detective Agencies. seem adequate.
13. No Private Detective Agencies of the
 country As per 12 above.
should be allowed to enter into any collaboration
with a foreign detective agency.
Name of the State : RAJASTHAN
Sl. Views of the Government of Rajasthan on the Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
12 3
1. The Government of Rajasthan agrees with the Noted.
proposed bill except with the provisions of
Section 25.
2. Certain informations are extremely helpful
 in It is basically an agreement between
prevention, detection and investigation of crime private detective agency and the

69
12 3
and also in maintenance  of law and order, The individual. Therefore, this clause 25 has
police should have access to  such informations been incorporated. However if police
if it is learnt that the same is being held by require certain information the detective
Private Detective Agency,  However, plain  reading agency has to give it as per law.
of Clause 25 of the proposed Bill gives an Modification of clause 25 of the Bill is
impression that if a Private  Detective Agency has not suggested.
certain informations  in its possession the agency
is not obliged to divulge the same to police  even
if it is useful for the above mentioned purposes.
Therefore, Clause 25 should  appropria-
tely be modified to meet the above requirement.
Name of the UT/S tate : PUDUCHERRY
Sl. Views of the Government of Puducherry on Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. the PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
12 3
1. The ambit for the “Private Detective W ork” has The lawful objective and lawful manner
not been provided in the definition under have not been defined in the Bill. The
section 2 of the proposed Bill. The terms “Private Private Detective Agency should not
Detection Work” as per the definition u/s 2 of carry on such work which is forbidden
the Bill, means “Collection of Information in by law and should not break law of the
Lawful Manner” and the Bill does not contain country while collecting information/
explanation for the terms “lawful means”. The conducting inquiry. Section 2(g) specifies
sphere of activity in the process of collection that the private detective agencies shall
of such information should be provided specifi- act in a lawful manner and for a lawful
cally in the definition part or in a separate objective. Clause 28 of the Bill prohibits
section so that the activity of the Private violating the privacy or causing annoyance.
Detective Agency can be kept with metes and It has been thought appropriate that the
bounds to prevent encroachment on the personal Central Board should prescribe code of
liberty of the citizens at the hands of the over- ethics for conduct of private detective
zealous private detective agents. In order to agency and the private detective agents
ensure a uniform policy all over the country, operating in the country.
such a measure is required in the legislation
itself and it is felt that leaving the matter
 in the
codes of conduct for such agents to be framed
by the Central and State Boards as per sections
4 and 5 of the Bill not be considered proper.
2. In sub-section 3 (a) of section 20 of the Bill, No change in section 20 is suggested
the words “or by the police on duty” may be as Police means all Police Officers on
substituted as “or by any police personnel on public duty.
duty”.
3. The nature of the cases/complaints that can
 be There is no possibility of private
dealt by the Private Detective Agency shall be detective agencies becoming parallel to
specifically provided in the Bill.  The investigation the state investigating agencies because

70
12 3
of a cognizable offence is a sovereign duty, the State investigating agencies are
which shall be exercised by the police only. If authorized to investigate under the
the proposed Bill is enacted as a substantive law, provisions of Cr.P.C. and have to
it is likely that parallel enquiry would be function under the provisions of Cr.P.C.,
conducted by the Private Detective Agency in 1973 and Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
such cases in the grab of statutory right as Since Private Detective Agencies are not
against the investigation conducted by the authorized to investigate under Cr.P.C.,
Police. As such clash of interests and they cannot be considered parallel to the
unnecessary confrontations between the two State agencies.
agencies, cannot be warded off. As such, it is
suggested that the Private Detective Agency may
be precluded from conducting enquiry into a
cognizable offence by providing a separate
section in the proposed Bill in addition
 to the
provisions already provided under section 26.
Name of the State : MAHARASHTRA
Sl. Views of the Government of Maharashtra on Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. the PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
12 3
1. Considering the fact that a number of Private We agree with the views of Government
Detective Agencies have come all over the Country of Maharashtra;
for various reasons like requirements of business
houses for collecting business information, that
of Private individuals, for information of rivals,
spouses etc. The time is ripe for regulating the
activities of these detective agencies by enacting
a legislation which on the one hand would
systematize and prioratise the functioning of
these agencies within certain parameters and the
other, make them accountable to the laws of
the land.
2. Section 3 of the said Bill provides for the Inclusion of a person belonging to
constitution of Central Board. Among the Private Detective Agency in the Central
members, the Private detective agency members Board would be beneficial as he would
are also to be nominated by the
 Government. be carrying practical experience in the
The Bill does not convey the purpose of Detective work and would be in a
including such a member and hence needs position to guide the Board to take the
clarification. proper decision in the matter of
granting license for detective work.
3. Section 9 of the said Bill mentions the category The views of Government of
of persons not eligible for licence. Though it Maharashtra that persons facing criminal
mentions that the convicted person with an charges, i.e. offence registered against
imprisonment of not less than two years becomes him may not be made eligible for license
ineligible, it does not mention about the person will be duly considered while verifying
facing the criminal charge i.e.
 offence registered the antecedents of the applicants at the

71
12 3
against him. This needs to be considered. Similar time of considering the issue of licence.
provision needs to be considered under section
13 (2).
4. Section  35 is about power to relax in certain The clause 35 of the Bill enables the
cases. This section empowers the Central Central Government to relax certain
Government to relax the requirement of provisions of the Bill in respect of a
qualifications for employing or engaging any Private Detective Agent or a private
persons as private detective agent or the require- detective agency, if such an agent or
ment of licensing for performing private  detective agency is recognized or registered under
work in certain cases. There should be no the law of any other country. This is
compromise in relaxing qualification as such only an enabling provision and this
agencies would be handling sensitive cases. This relaxation provision will be used with
needs to be considered. due care.
5. Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act It is true that the object of Private
enacted in 2005 has different object and reasons Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005
than the proposed Bill and both i.e. the Act of and Private Detective Agencies
2005 and the proposed Bill can not be said to (Regulation) Bill, 2007 are different.
be the statutes in Pari Materia . While the Private Security Agencies Act
provides for the Regulation of Private
Security Agencies and for matters
connected therewith, the Private
Detective Agencies Bill provides for
Regulation of Private Detective Agencies.
6. The information collected by the private detective The evidentiary value of the information
agency or any member thereof bears no collected by a Private Detective Agencies
authenticity and hence difficult to be used as shall be regulated by the different
evidence in the court of law. Even if the private provisions of the Indian Evidence
detective agency or any member thereof may A ct, 1972 in the same way as the court
appear as witness. (Criminal and Civil) deals with the
evidence adduced before it by the
prosecution/defence and parties to the
civil allegation.
Name of the State : JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Sl. Views of the Government of J&K on the PDA Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. “No such Act is in force in J&K State. The In the Private Detective Agencies
power of investigation is vested in
 police officer (Regulation) Bill, 2007 it is already
by virtue of the fact that he is enrolled as  a provided that this shall extend to whole
police officer under police Act. The evidence of India, except J&K.
collected by these Private Detective Agencies,
if any, has no evidential value in the Court of
Law. Keeping in view the present security
scenario in the J&K State, this agency can be
misused for ulterior motives by the anti-national
elements. Therefore such legislation
 is not required
till normalization of situation in J&K State”.

72
Name of the State : TRIPURA
Sl. Views of the Government of Tripura on the Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
12 3
1. There is no Private Detective Agency in Tripura, Agreed.
at present. Besides, the State Police does not
foresee
 a situation where help of Private  Detective
Agency would be required. However, as is being
seen in other parts of the
 Country, Private
Detective Agency may open their branches in
Tripura and hence there is requirement
 of
regulating them so that the right to privacy of
the individual is safe guarded.
2. The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) It is already provided in clause 21 and
Bill, 2007 has been examined.
 The chapter-III 22 of the Bill that a Central Board Fund
provides for State Private Detective Regulation may be constituted and the Central
Board. The State Board Shall consist of not less Government shall give grants to the
than three but not more than five members Board. Also funds will be received
including Chairperson to
 be appointed for  a term by the Board through fees and charges
of three years, and on  such terms  and conditions received by it. Similarly State Government
including salary and allowances as may be may constitute State Board Fund. The
prescribed. The State Government may nominate State Government will give grants to
an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary S tate Board. Also the State Board will get
to that Government as the Chairperson of the funds by collecting fees and charges.
State Board. Out of three members not more
than one and in case of five members not more
than two, as the case may be, shall be from
the recognized chambers of trade and commerce
and the private detective agency, to
 be nominated
by the State Government. Sub–section  3 of
Section 5 provides that “the State  Government
may, for efficient discharge  of the functions, by
the Board, provide it with such officers and
staff as may be considered necessary”. Thus,
it appears that a separate establishment
 with full
infrastructural facilities has to be  there for the
purpose of constituting Regulatory Board.
Substantial financial involvement is there.
3. Moreover, it will be difficult for the State to find As per clause 5 of the Bill the State
out one or two persons from the recognized Private Detective Regulatory Board shall
Chambers of Board and Commerce and the be constituted by State Government.
Private Detective Agencies
 for the purpose of The Board shall consist of 3 to 5
nominating as a member of the Board. Other members. The States will have freedom
chapters are general in nature applicable in all to nominate suitable members on the
cases. board subject to upper limits provided in
clause 5 of the Bill.

73
12 3
The matter of above said enactment may be
reconsidered, specially Chapter-III for prescribing
the elegibility criterion for appointment of
members of the Board so that either State
Government Officers from Police Department
or Judiciary may be nominated.
Name of the State : MADHYA PRADESH
Sl. Views of the Government of Madhya Pradesh Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. on the PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. In the proposed Bill in section 5(2)
 amendment As per clause 5(2) of the Bill, the State
may be made as under to provide that an Government has to nominate an officer,
Officer of the rank of Secretary may be not below the rank of Joint Secretary to
Chairman of the State Private Regulatory that Government, as the Chairman of
Board in place of Joint Secretary of State the State Private Detective Regulatory
Government :— Board. Therefore, it is left to the
concerned State Government to appoint
“The State Board shall consist of not less a Secretary level Officer as chairman of
than three but not more than  five members the State Private Detective Regulatory
including Chairperson to be appointed for a term Board. Hence no further modification of
of three years, and on such terms and conditions the clause is suggested.
including salary and allowances as may be
prescribed;
Provided that the State Government
may nominate an officer not below the rank
of Secretary to that government as the
 Chairperson
of the State Board and other members from
the Departments and agencies of the State
Government;
Provided further that out of three members
not more than one and in case of five members
not more than two, as the case may be, shall
be from the recognized chambers of trade and
commerce and the private detective agency, to
be nominated by the State Government”.
2. During the course of investigation if necessary The Police of any State is free to take
Police can take help of Private Detective Agency help of any Private Detective Agency
and this provision may be made in the proposed for obtaining information and it is
Bill which is necessary and this
 provision is not expected that the Detective Agency will
in the Bill as right of Police is required  to extend required assistance to Police to
make necessary provision in the Bill. perform its public duty.

74
Name of the State : WEST BENGAL
Sl. Views of the Government of West Bengal Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. Manipur on the PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. There are 10 Private Detective Agencies  in Noted.
operation under Kolkata  Police Jurisdiction.
These agencies are primarily engaged in engaging
detectives to collect profiles
 of the subjects which
are shadowed and put under surveillance.  This
apart, such agencies provide private security
guards to different business establishments,
housing complexes etc. State Government has not
so far felt it necessary to seek any sort of
assistance from such agencies for the purpose
of investigation or any other purpose.
Name of the State : SIKKIM
Sl. Views of the Government of Sikkim on the Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. The State Government is
 of the view that having It is provided in the clause 3 of the Bill
regard to the importance of the field operation, regarding constitution of Central Board
etc. of a Private Detective Agency, clause 10(1) that the Central Board may evolve its
of the Bill requires appropriate amendment by own p rocedures for functioning and
incorporating a proviso as follows:— conduct of business. If necessary, the
Central Board may also consult States.
“Provided that Central Board, before
taking final decision on an application
 seeking
license to operate in two or more states, shall
call for the view point
 from the  concerned
State and consider the same”.
Name of the State: MANIPUR
Sl. Views of the Government of Manipur on the Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. It may not be desirable/agreeable to make eligible The Clause 9 of the Bill enumerates
a person who was convicted, irrespective of various reasons, namely, conviction by a
period of imprisonment, for private detective competent court for an offence
agency in addition to the condition stipulated (imprisonment of not less than two years),
under clause 9 (1)(c) of the Bill and as such keeping links with any organization or
in such case offence may be classified. association, which is banned under any
law, dismissed or removed from
Government service, etc. when a person
becomes ineligible for issue or renewal
of license. The existing provision seems
sufficient.

75
Name of the State: MEGHALAYA
Sl. Views of the Government of Meghalaya on Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. the PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. The Bill will be of immense help when passed It is already provided under clause 26
by the Parliament, as there is good scope that of the PDA Bill that if any cognizable
the State of Meghalaya will be soon need the offence comes to the notice of Private
services of detective agencies due to its rapid Detective Agent, he is required to
development. Further, since the State has its inform the Police as per the provisions
unique geostrategic location in the North East, of the Bill. Therefore, it is expected that
bordering Bangladesh, the draft Bill should have a Detective Agent will bring to the
appropriate provision of binding down the detective notice of Police any criminal activities
agencies to bring to notice of the Police any posing threat to internal security that
matter, relevant to Internal Security which comes to his notice during the course
comes to their notice during the detective works. of his duty.
2. At present, there is no such agency in the State Noted
as per the records available in Criminal
Investigation Department (Hqr.).
3. Further, it is suggested that a representative of As per clause 5(2) of the Bill the
special branch of the state may be in the
 State Central/State Government may nominate
Private Detective Regulatory Board (SPDRB). an officer not below the rank of Joint
This will enable special branch of the State to be Secretary to that Government as the
able to provide inputs to the State Private Chairperson of that Board and other
Detective Regulatory Board (SPDRB) regarding members shall be from the Departments
the applicants and desirability of allotting them and agencies of the State Government,
the licence. It will also enhance the information recognized chamber of Industry and
gathering capability of State Special Branch by Commerce and Private Detective Agency.
liaisoning and networking. At
 the central level, a Therefore, the Central/State Government
representative of Intelligence Bureau (IB) should is free to nominate an officer of the IB/
be inducted in the Central Private Detective special branch to work as member of
Regulatory Board (CPDRB) to monitor Intelligence the Board. Hence no change is the Bill is
gathering and dissemination. suggested.

76
COMMENTS OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS ON THE VIEWS OF STATE/UT
GOVERNMENT ON THE PDA  (REGULATION) BILL, 2007
Name of the State : T AMIL NADU
Sl. Observation raised by the Reply furnished by the Director Comments of
No. Committee with regard to General of Police Tamil Nadu MHA
the Bill
12 3 4
1. Data as to how many In T amil Nadu a total of 35 Private Noted
associations of private Detective Agencies are functioning.
detective agencies are These Private Detective Agencies are
there, how many agencies formed to provide services in matters
are there, what is their role, of socio-economic
 aberrations,  and the
what are their rules, what services so rendered are solely done
are the parameters under on the voluntary complaint by individuals/
which they function etc. concerns on the terms prescribed by
the Detective Agency. The agencies only
collect intelligence on the details requested
for and act only as a provider (of
information). If a prima facie attracting
legal violation/criminality is involved, the
role of the agency will not enter upon
the prerogative powers entrusted with
the police. At present, these agencies act
as per the provisions of Companies Act
of 1956.
The parameters under which
the Private Detective Agencies function
have no boundaries. They are providing
services to their clients in the following
matters.
(i) In civil disputes such as property
dealings.
(ii) Financial and insurance matters.
(iii) Blackmail threat cases.
(iv) Trade mark violations and
intellectual property violations.
(v) Pre-marital affairs and marriage
settlements.
2. What has been the impact of The Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Noted
the Private Security Agencies Act, 2005 is yet to be implemented in
(Regulation) Act, 2005 which the State and modalities of adopting the
has been brought out on act on the lines of Central Act is in
security agencies? Has this process.
Act helped matters in any way?

77
12 3 4
3. Do the police departments The Police Department is not seeking Noted
want to get the help of the the help of the Private Detective Agencies
private detective agency? Has in a routine manner. However in some
anybody asked for the help cases, the evidence collected by the
of the private detective private detective agency is filed as
agency so far? How the exhibits before the court of law by the
information obtained is utilized police department such as in a child
and what sanctity is being missing case at Anjuman Orphanage in
given to the evidence obtained Chennai and also in some false insurance
from detective agencies? claims cases. These evidences are at
best treated as depositions within the
fold of 162 Cr. P.C.
4. Whether any victim has A solitary instance of complaint has been Noted
complained to the State received from one Shrimati S. Savithri
Government against any of V ellore against on Thiru V .
private detective agency. Kulothungacholan and his men of
“Detective International” based at Chennai
city alleging that the agency personnel
were harassing her with the help of
local persons. The complaint is being
investigated as a current reference in
order to ascertain the merit of the petition
and if so deemed fit i.e.
 Attracting
legal proviso, the complaint will take
its, legal course.
5. I am also to state that the States have
following are the suggestions flexibility in
on the Private Detective nominating the
Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007. me mbers of the
Section (5) of the proposed Board as provided
Bill speaks of the constitution under clause 5 of
of a State Board regulating the Bill.
such Private Detective Agencies.
Besides other points that are
agreeable, it is suggested that
the constitution of the State
Board may be as follows:—
(a) A representative from
Director General of Police.
(b) 2 Members from trade
chambers with the Home
Secretary as the Chair/Review
Officer.
(Representative from Private
Detective Agency is not
desirable and may be avoided).

78
12 3 4
6. Further the uniform for the Agreed.
Private Detective Agency
should not be akin to that
of police.
7. V erification of antecedents of Noted.
Private Detectives may be
entrusted with the SB-CID
for those residing in the State
and the Intelligence Bureau
for all those to be verified
outside the state. Further in
order to be stringent on the
use of weapon, the State
Board may be given the
authority to assess the merit
for such possession and
usage thereafter.
Name of the U.T : N.C.T. of Delhi
Sl. Views of the Government of N.C.T. of Delhi Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. on the PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. The Commissioner of Police, Delhi has The Central Board shall consist of 5 to
requested that the following points may be 7 members. In case the Board is
incorporated in the draft Bill: constituted with 5 members, then
besides Chairman, one member shall be
Section 3(2): “Provided further that two members from the recognized chamber of
shall be from Security/lntelligence agencies of commerce and industry and one from
the Government ( e.g. Intelligence Bureau, Special private detective agency and the rest of
Branch, Local Police, etc.) and one member with the members can be from Central
legal background ( e.g. an officer
 from Ministry Go vernment departments/agencies. In
of Law or from the Department of Law of the case the Board is constituted with 7
State Government) to be nominated by the members, then not more than two
Central Government. members shall be from recognized
chamber of commerce and the private
detective agency to be nominated by the
Central Government. Therefore, there is
scope to nominate members from
Government departments/agencies on
the Central Board. The Central
Government can consider to nominate a
police officer from special branch, I.B.,
local police and another from the
Ministry of Law on the Central Board.
Further provision in this regard in the
Bill is not needed.

79
Name of the U.T. : Lakshadweep
Sl. Views of the U.T. of Lakshadweep on the Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. Clause 3(2) : In view of shortage of officers of (1) & (2): In the absence of an officer
the rank of Joint Secretaries in the U.T.; of appropriate rank to function on the
appointment of any Class I officers under the S tate Board, the U.T. Administration can
Administration as the chairperson of the central entrust the functions of State Board to a
board and other members as the members from State Board of adjacent State with the
department and agencies has been suggested. prior consent of that State, as per
clause 5(1) of the Bill.
2. Clause 5(2) : In view of the shortage of officers –do–
of the rank of Joint Secretary and in the
absence of recognized chambers of trade and
commerce and the private detective agency the
State Board of U.T. may consist of Senior
Officers in the Administration and from other
suitable bodies/agencies available in the U.T.
Name of the U.T. : Daman and Diu
Sl. Views of Daman and Diu Administration on Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. the PDA Bill, 2007 Affairs
1. The U.T. Administration of Daman and Diu is Noted.
without legislature.
 Therefore, the decision taken
by the Central Government shall be followed by
this U.T. Administration.

80
ANNEXURE-VI
COMMENTS OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS ON THE MEMORANDA RECEIVED FROM
DIFFERENT AGENCIES — COMMENTS OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS.
Name of the Agency : Premier Shield Pvt. Ltd., Premier House, C-146,
Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi.
Sl. Observation on the Private Detective Agencies Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. (Regulation) Bill, 2007 Affairs on observation of Premier Shield
Pvt. Ltd.
12 3
1. Section 9(2) : “A company, firm or an association The clause 35 enables the Central
of persons shall not be considered  for issue of Government to relax certain provisions
a license under this Act, if it is not registered in of the Bill in respect of a certain private
India, or having a proprietor or a majority  share detective agent or a private detective
holder, partner or director, who  is not a citizen agency, if such an agent or agency is
of India” recognized or registered under the law
Section 35 provides that, “The Central of any other country. This is only an
Government may relax the requirement of enabling provision and will be used with
qualifications for employing or engaging any due care by the Central Government
person as private detective agent or the keeping interest of the country in view.
requirement of licensing for performing private
detective work in certain cases, for the reasons
to be recorded in writing, in respect of a private
detective agent, if such agent or agency is
recognized or registered under the
 law of any
country.”
Observation: Section 35, we feel, allows a foreign
agent/agency to enter the country as private
detective/agency which contradicts Section 9(2),
wherein only a company, firm or an association
of persons shall be issued a
 license if registered
in India, or having a proprietor or a majority
share holder, partner or director, who has to be
a citizen of India. Entry of such agents/agencies
in such sensitive field will definitely pose
 a
threat to National Security.
It is strongly recommended that the relaxation
offered by Section 35, should be totally removed
so that this section is not exploited by
 foreign
agencies to infiltrate the Indian market and
create sensitivities to the countries security. Under
80

81
12 3
no circumstances should an agent/agency be
allowed to carry out Private Detective  work unless
they are registered in India as required by
Section 9. Our concern is that this flexibility
will be exploited by foreign agents/agencies to
conduct the business of Private Detective at the
cost/disadvantage of Indian companies.
Name of the Agency : Secret Eye Detective Services Pvt. Ltd., Andheri (W), Mumbai.
Sl. Observation on the Private Detective Agencies Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. (Regulation) Bill, 2007 Affairs on observation of Secret Eye
Detective Services Pvt. Ltd., Andheri
(W), Mumbai.
1. Some selected Pvt. Detective Agencies in Delhi The Bill has no mention of Detective
have formed two Pvt.
 Detective Associations Associations. We have no comments to
among their own Groups, on their own will, offer.
without consulting all the other agencies, all over
India. The Associations are: (i) AIPDA (All India
Pvt. Detective Association) formed by Mr. Ramesh
C. Madan, which is very old. (ii) A.P.D.I. (All
Pvt. Detective India) formed by Ku. Vikram Singh,
which is hardly two/three years
 old and each
association has their own members, where as
(A.I.P.D.A.) membership fee is  nominal, but that
of (A.P.D.I.) is Rs.5000/- plus, etc.
2. The training clause, some members of (A.P.D.I.) Clause 31 of the Bills empowers the
have formed/forming their own Pvt. Detective Central Government to make rules;
Training Classes,  and charging exhorbitant fees, inter-alia , on training and skills of
in case if other agencies want to exist. detective agents. Clause 32 of the Bill
empowers the State Government to
make rules on the type of training. Once
the Bill is enacted rules will be framed
for proper training of detectives.
3. The members of the committee should be taken The Government will nominate only the
from Industry of commerce, rather from self suit able persons on the Board.
selected Chairman, etc. of Pvt. Detective
Association, as 100% partiality and underhand
blackmailing will be given birth.
4. The license fee of the Pvt. Detective Agencies The license fee of Rs.50,000 for the
should be made yearly and should also be reduced, private detective agency to operate in
as 90% of agencies cannot afford such  huge fee one State and Rs. 3 lakh to operate in
amount, and that is what the plan of the two or more States seems reasonable in
Association, to join them or leave the trade. order to check mushroom growth of PDAs.

82
12 3
5. Many people are existing in this trade from  more Noted.
than 20/30 years and earning their bread and
butter. Please take steps accordingly.
6. Points to be remembered are selection committee The Government will nominate only
members should be other than Pvt. Detective suitable persons on the Board. The
Agencies, training rules and regulation, license provision for training of detective agents
fees, daily bread and butter of the common man, is to be prescribed in the rules. License
members of AIPDA and APDI s hould be merged fee is given in clause 10(3} of the Bill.
together. As regards merger of AIPDA and APDI,
two private bodies, we have no comments
to offer.
Name of the Agency : Golden Eagle Detective Ltd., New Mahavir Nagar, New Delhi.
Sl. Observation on the Private Detective Agencies Comments of the Ministry of Home
No. (Regulation) Bill, 2007 Affairs on observation of Golden Eagle
Detectives Ltd., New Delhi.
12 3
1. The Clause (3) of the Bill stipulates provision Noted.
regarding constitution of Central Board and
Clause (5) for State Board.
 The Clause 3 States
“...Out of five members not more than  two and
in case of seven members not more than three,
as case may be, shall be from the recognized
chambers or trade and commerce and the private
detective agency, to
 be nominated  by the Central
Government.” Similarly Clause  5 of the bill States
“...out of three members not more than one and
in case of five members not more than two,
 as
case may be, should be from the recognized
chambers of trade and
 commerce and the private
detective agency, to be nominated by the State
Government.
2. In the Clause 3 and 5 of the Bill, no specific The specific criteria regarding nomination
criteria have been laid down for nomination of of members will be laid down by the
members of Board by Government, from the Government after the Bill is enacted.
recognized chambers of trade and commerce and
the private detective agency. Nothing is stated
about the eligibility of person who will be
nominated as member of Board. The Bill should
contain a provision regarding selection method/
criteria of nomination of member by the
Government. Taking into the interest of the
detective agencies, the Bill should also contain a
provision/clause for nomination of member of
Board by the concerned Government only after

83
12 3
consultation with association/group of detective
agencies. The concerned Government should/may
choose a member of Board from the list
prepared by the private detective agencies.
3. The clause
 17 of the bill states “a person As per clause 17 of the Bill any person
aggrieved...may prefer an appeal against that order aggrieved by an order of the Board
to Central Government in case of orders passed refusing the license or renewal or
by Central Board, or to the State Government suspension of license or cancellation of
in case of orders passed by State Board........” license can prefer an appeal against that
Instead of provisions of appeal to concerned order to the Central Government in case
Governments, there should be provision of appeals, of order passed by Central Board and to
in case of State Board to High Court of that State Government in case of order passed
State and in case of Central Board to the by S tate Board. However, one is free to
Supreme Court of India. Further, there has to approach court of law, in the country.
be a provision of appeal to Supreme Court There is no need to prescribe such a
against the order of High Court. provision in the Bill.
4. The clause 10(1) of the Bill stipulates grant of For operating in one State, a detective
licence for one or more States, is quite confusing Agency has to take licence from the
as the investigators
 often travel one State to State Board and for operating in more
another for investigation. If a detective agency than one State, it is to take a license
has taken licence for one State but during course from the Central Board as per the
of investigation, the detective
 of that agency provision of the Bill.
travels outside the State, in which licence has
been granted, what will happen? Whether it will
be violation of clauses of the Bill? Bill should
contain clear-cut provisions regarding operation
of detective agency in one State and more than
one State.
5. The clause 10(3) of the bill stipulates that agencies There is a need to evolve and enforce
will have to pay Rs.50,000 as licence fee to proper norms for functioning of these
operate in one State and Rs.3 lakh to operate in private detective agencies and to ensure
two or more States. This is an exhorbitant fee that detective agencies of dubious
for small detective agencies and individual reputation close down their shops and
investigators. The high licence fee will force do not proliferate. If licence fee is
small detective to close down their agencies.
 The lowered then detective agencies will
licence fee should be reduced or alternatively  it proliferate in the country. The main
may be charged on the basis of size and business intention of the Bill is to regulate the
of the detective agencies. The advance charge of activities of private detective agencies
high amount of license fee for five years is and make holding of license mandatory.
burdensome for small detective agencies and
individual investigators if anybody starts detective
agency after paying huge licence fee and the
agency fails to start operation due to some
compelling reason, the licence fee paid will went
in vain. Therefore, the licence fee should be
reduced and/or option may be given to the

84
12 3
detective agencies for payment of licence fee for
minimum period of one year. In Bill there is no
safeguard  for  the  individual  professional
investigators who
 work individually and don’t
have big infrastructure.  The individual detectives/
small detective agencies  will face problems if
bill is passed in its present form.
6. The Clause 13 of the Bill stipulates provision  of Such other conditions, if any will be
minimum qualifying standards for private p rescribed under the Rules.
detectives. The sub-clause (d) of clause 13 has
completed prescribed detective
 training success-
fully  and  sub-clause (f) “satisfies   the  other
conditions  as may be prescribed" are onerous
as there are very few detective  training
institutions in the country. There is no clarity
about the other conditions. The Bill should contain
clear and unambiguous provisions so that the
detective agency should not face problems in
employing or engaging private detective agent.
7. There are some contradictions in the Clause
 19 As per clause 19 of the Bill the Board or
and Clause 25 of the Bill.  The Clause 19 of the any other officer authorize by it in this
Bill says that any officer not below the rank behalf, not below the rank of Inspector
of inspector of a Police who is authorized by of Police, may at any reasonable time,
the Board can enter the premises of an agency enter the premises of the private detective
and inspect and examine all the records, accounts agency and inspect and examine the
and other documents and can take a copy  of place of business, equipments used in
any document and Clause 25 of the Bill States pr oviding detective services, the records,
that the agency  shall give the information if for accounts and other documents connected
which the enquiry was undertaken., “only to the with the licence and may take copy of
client or  to his authorized representative.  Further, any document thereof. As per clause 25{1)
if any person, police inspector/authorized officer the private detective agency shall furnish
after inspection of the premises of the detective such information, which is relevant to
agency leaks the confidential information
 of client the issue under enquiry and which relates
of detective agency to unscrupulous elements  or to the lawful objective for which the
other a unauthorized  person the  detective agency enquiry was undertaken, only to the
will face unnecessary problems.  The said official client or to his authorized representative.
can also harass the agency  without any  purpose.
The Bill must contain provisions for safeguarding As per above provisions of the Bill,
interest of the detective agencies from the said inspection of licence is to be carried out
police inspector
 or person authorized by Board. by the Central Board or State Board
The clause 19 also violates right of privacy. through an authorized police officer of
the rank of Inspector of Police. The
inspection will be done under the
supervision and authorization of the
respective Board and therefore, the
interest of PDAs will be duly taken care
of.

85
12 3
8. That in the Bill there is no provision for The Bill under examination is to regulate
safeguarding the interests of the agencies, in the activities of detective agencies
case of financial predicament. Supposing if any functioning in the country so that they
detective agency faces some problem there perform well within the provisions of
should be some welfare
 legislation for protection the law.
of the interest of the agency.
Therefore, I request that the Bill may be amended,
taking into consideration the facts mentioned
above.
Name of the Agency : M. Kumar and Company, D-24, Upper Floor, Sector 2, Noida, Delhi NCR
12 3
1. Many many thanks for bringing the Private Noted.
Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007. I,
Madan Kumar, on behalf of the agency stated
above give my observation and suggestions
 on
the Bill based on my 30 years experience.  I have
been working in this  field for  the last 30  years.
2. Comments and suggestions on the Bill in brief: The eligibility to be a Private Detective
1. There is no mention of educational Agent is given in clause 13 of the Bill.
qualification and experience to become a It is mentioned in the clause that a
detective. Private Detective Agency shall not employ
or engage any person as a Private
2. What should be the ethics and code  of Detective Agent unless he is a citizen of
conduct of a  detective in the public India, has completed twenty one years
interest and interest of  the country is not of age; satisfies the agency about his
mentioned in the proposed Bill.  On this, character and antecedents in such
there should be detailed discussions. ma nner as may be prescribed; has
completed the prescribed detective
training successfully; fulfils such physical
standards as may be prescribed; and
satisfies such other conditions as may
be prescribed. These will be prescribed
under the Rules. As per clause 4 (f) of
the Bill the Central Board will prescribe
code of conduct of Private Detective
Agency and Private Detective Agent
operating in the country. This will be
framed by the Board after the law is
enacted.
3. Chapter IV Section 10(3) a and b: Regarding fees: For State level licence, the fee will be
The proposed rate of fees is
 excessive and my Rs. 50,000/- for its operation in one
request is to lower it down.  I.R.D.A. (Insurance State, whereas licence for working in
Regulatory Development Authority) determines two or more States the fee will be
the fees of Surveyor/Loss assessor for grant Rs. 3 lakh. The fee seems reasonable in

86
12 3
of licence to them. Similarly, the fees of order to check mushroom growth of
detective agencies may be determined. The PDAs.
work of surveyor is more detailed and technical
and they get money through fees.
 Their income
is not comparable to doctors,  chartered accountants
and advocates. Whereas the income of the
detective is far too less in comparison with them.
On the other hand from investigators of insurance
companies, no fees are taken for grant of licence.
There is no such provision for C.A. It is my
humble  request  that  the  proposed  fee  for
detectives may be made very less. Similarly
their licence renewal fees may be lowered.
4. Chapter IV Section 10(5)(a) – V alidity of licence: In a country like India’s size which is a
Detectives may be permitted to work in the entire sub continent, one Central Board cannot
country because some cases naturally get consider all the cases of grant of licence
connected to other parts of the country.
 Hence and constitution of State Boards for
on this issue there should not be any bar. For granting of licence to detectives is
working in one State or more  than one State the essential.
licence fee may be fixed at the same rate.
Whether a candidate wants to work in one
State or in NCR of Delhi
 he should apply
directly to Central Board and get licence for it.
5. Chapter  IV Section 10(5)(a)–Validity of licence: If licence period is increased from 5 to
The period  of licence may be increased from  5 10 years then it would be difficult to
to 10 years and accordingly fees may be fixed regulate the detective agencies and
for 10 years. maintain their list and be in touch with
them when required, as in the
intervening period the detective agencies
might have moved out of profession or
changed his address. Therefore, licence
for a period of 5 years and then its
renewal seems reasonable.
6. Chapter
 IV — Renewal of licence:  If a candidate It is provided in clause 10(5)(b) of the
fails to apply for renewal of licence within time, Bill that licence may be renewed from
in that situation after ascertaining proper and time to time after expiry of 5 years on
satisfactory reason, licence may  be renewed with payment of such fees as may be
late fee. In the proposed Bill,  there is  no mention prescribed.
about renewal fee.
7. 11(3)  No objection  certificate: It is my suggestion As per clause 11 (3) of the Bill the
that instead of obtaining no objection  certificate Central Board or the State Board on and
from the police, it may be  obtained from the receipt of an application, after obtaining
Central Government Agency (IB). It would be NOC from the Police and making such
better to include I.B. in place of police. inquiries or consultations as it considers
necessary, may by order in writing,
renew the licence or refuse to renew

87
12 3
the same. We do not intent to substitute
IB in place of Police which has a wide
presence in the country.
8. Chapter IV (16-11) 4: Refusal to work: If the A PDA is expected to work for lawful
work received from a person for investigation/ objective and in a lawful manner.
detection is against public interest or against law
and that becomes clear at the beginning or at a
State, later the detective agency may refuse work
to that person. The refusal of work can be given
after seeking permission of
 Central Board and
after giving all information to the Board.
9. Chapter  IV 16(1) J — Cancellation or suspension As per clause 16 of the Bill if a detective
of licence: Undoubtedly at times news come agency is involved in criminal activities
regarding involvement of detective agencies in his licence can be suspended or cancelled
illegal activities, which becomes known to the by the Board. The inquiry can be
public. All detective agencies are not like this, conducted by police.
neither they think about involving themselves  in
this type of work,  but there are some agencies
who come in the news for this.  Therefore, to
stop this type of illegal activity,  stringent laws
may be made.  This type of incidents should  be
investigated by C.B.I.  dispassionately and once
guilty is proved, severe punishment may be
imposed on those individuals so that other
detectives will learn and the illegal activities can
be curbed.
10. Chapter IV 16(1) K
 : Cancellation/ suspension It is the duty of public to assist police
of licence for not helping the police.:  I entirely whenever required in performance of
agree that a detective agency should  not work their duty. The word cooperation does
against  public interest, national security and not seem appropriate in the present
interest. If he works, then in that situation context.
stringent punishment provision may be made in
the law and they may be punished.
 Side by
side, it is my  suggestion that instead of
“Assistance to police” use of the words
“cooperation to the police” would be better so
that the work can be done without any prejudices
and detective and police can
 jointly and honestly
reach near the truth.
11. Chapter IV .19 : Inspection of work and of fice In the Bill there is a clear provision of
of detective:- In my view if the inspection can inspection of office of detective agency
be done by I.B.
 rather than police, it would be by the Board or any other officer
better. authorized by it not below the rank of
Inspector of Police the provisions
seems adequate.

88
12 3
12. Besides  the above, I would like to bring the No comments.
following issues before the Committee for
consideration:—
13. Gradation of detectives:
 The detectives may be The question of review of work of
graded based on their education and  experience detective agencies and grant them grading
after review of their work by I.B. so that it as per their service can be done by the
would be befitting their dignity. If licence f ee is Board only after the law comes into the
fixed as per their gradation, it would be better. force and the work of detective agencies
This is my suggestion. is reviewed.
14. Information about the work: The detective No comments.
agencies should give report on their work to
an officer/Member
 of Parliamentary Committee
regularly. This is my suggestion.  If any member
wants he can make review of the work of
detective and send report to the Board
 secretly.
15. Review of work of Detective Agent: The work The State Boards and Central Board can
of a detective agency is  associated with law review the work of detective agencies
and order, national security, national interest and from time to time by taking the help of
public interest. Hence, supervision of their work Police. The provision seems adequate.
is strictly essential.  Therefore, for dispassionate
inquiry, instead of police,  I.B. may be associated.
Considering the grade of the detective, I.B.
official may be engaged for investigation.
16. Identification of Detectives:
 Identity  card may Provisions have been made in clause 20
be issued to a detective agency with the approval of the Bill.
of Central Board.  The use of uniform of police
or that of armed forces or emblem of police
in letter head, advertisement
 or detective agencies
should be illegal. For the recognition of detective
agency, any symbol in consonance
 with its grade
would be proper,  so that if required a detective
agency can prove before  the concerned  person/
officer that he is a licence holder.
17. The rights and responsibilities of a detective:— There is no need to provide any right or
It is true that it is wrong and illegal for a immunity to PDAs.
detective agency to interfere into privacy or
independence of a person/citizen. The detective
has to perform its work within the ambit of
right and responsibility of a citizen. This is true
and justified. The committee may consider to
give some special right to detective agency to
work, collect information, etc.
18. Punishment:
 If any detective agent is caught in Whether it is detective agent or detective
something wrong doing and if guilt is proved, agency, whosoever is found involved in

89
12 3
in that case the detective agent may  be punished, illegal activities is liable to be punished
not the detective company, for work the agent under the law.
works.
19. Regarding fees of detective:
 The fees of detectives Since the service by a PDA is basically
may be fixed by Hon’ble Parliamentary  Committee, an agreement between two private parties,
based on its grade and volume of work.  For this the fixation of fee does not seem to be
the Committee may look into the  fees list prepared desirable.
by IRDA for Surveyors/Loss Assessors.
20. Security and Medical Benefit of Detectives:— Medical care facilities are available to
The detectives work to collect factual data,  for public through Primary Health Centres,
which they go out of the way and the threat  to Community Health Centres, District
their life and property always remains. Hence, Hospitals and Government Hospitals in
to enable them to work fearlessly and truthfully, different parts of the country. Detective
the Committee may consider to provide medical agency can avail medical facility, as is
care to detective agents. available to public and no special
dispensation for private detectives can
be made in the matter of medical care.
Name of the petitioner : Shri George Joseph, S.P. Retd., Trivandrum
12 3
1. The Private Detective Agencies must hold  a
licence issued by a Central Board for all India
level and a  State Board for State level.
2. The central level Board must have the following
members:
1. Principal Secretary (Home)
2. Director, CBI
3. Director, IB
4. Director, RAW
5. DGP–CRPF/BSF
6. A Rajya Sabha Member
7. A Lok Sabha Member
8. A retired Supreme Court Judge
9. Cabinet Minister Home
3. State level Board must have the following member
1. Principal Secretary (Home)
2. DGP-State
3. DGP- Intelligence
4. DGP – Crime Branch
5. An MLA of Ruling Party
6. An MLA of Opposition Party
7. A retired High Court Judge
8. State Minister, Home
9. DGP Anti-corruption
10. A Senior Officer of Military Intelligence
The provision made in the Bill seems
adequate.
The constitution of Central Private
Detective Regulatory Board is given in
clause 3 of the Bill. No changes are
suggested.
The constitution of State Private
Detective Regulatory Board is given in
clause 5 of  the Bill. No changes are
suggested.

90
12 3
4. In each private Agencies at least a retired Police
Officer/Military Officer and an advocate must be
members. The Police Officer/Military Officer must
be above the rank of Dy. Superintendent of Police/
Major or equivalent.
The retired Police/Military Officer of Class I
level will be able to
 understand that the private case
they undertake should not  affect the integrity of  the
country and the intelligence they  collect should not
reach the hands of anti-national organisation, enemies
of the nation, terrorist/subversive organization, etc.
5. As per Criminal Procedure Code, 1973,
 section 2(h),
investigation includes all the proceedings under this
code for the collection of evidence conducted by a
police officer or by any person (other than a Magistrate).
So, as per the code, only Police can investigate a
cognizable offence or a person authorised
 by a
magistrate. Investigation can be done only by a police
officer as per the code. But in the last part a magistrate
can authorise
 a person. Hence the magistrate can
appoint or authorise a private detective agency to
investigate a case provided a retired Police Officer is
present in the agency who possesses a valid licence
of the Centre/State level.
The Magistrate who receive a complaint from
Chief Judicial Magistrate u/s 192 Cr.P.C. for inquiry
or trial, he can entrust the case to a private detective
agency where a retired Police Officer is present for
investigation and he can commence the trial only when
he is satisfied
 with the result of the evidences collected
by the private detective agencies. So an amendment is
necessary in 192 Cr.P.C.  in part (2). In part (2) the
following words can be inserted. “Any magistrate of
the first class...And thereupon such Magistrate may
hold the inquiry by using
 the service of a licenced private
Detective Agency and if he satisfies with the result of
the investigation” of that agency he can proceed
with the trial.
As per 201 Cr.P.C.
 a Magistrate receive a complaint
who is not competent to take cognizance of the offence
he shall entrust the case to
 a licensed private Detective
agencies and officer examining the result of
investigation he can either commence the trial in his
court or make
 over to another court under whose
jurisdiction the offences have committed. If part
of the offence are committed within
 his jurisdiction
and the remaining in another jurisdiction of one or more
courts,
 he can take cognizance directly or send its major
portion of offences are taken place.
It is left to the person doing business of
detective agency to engage the retired
Police Officer or military officer for
carrying out his detective business.
There is no need for such amendments
at present.

91
12 3
So an amendment of section 201 Cr.P.C.  is essential
here as follows:
201 Cr.P.C. If the complaint is made to a Magistrate.....of
the offence he shall
(a) If the complaint......... to that effect
(b) If the complaint......... to the proper court.
(c) Entrust the complaint to a licenced private detective
agency for investigation and after perusing the result of
investigation
 he can conduct trial either in his court if part
of offence is committed in his jurisdiction or transfer the
complaint and result of investigation to another magistrate
above major offence has been committed. Investigation deals
in Sec. 154 to
 174 Cr.P.C.  and the investigative powers
envisaged in the above sections entrusted only with the
police.
6. The following are the powers usually used by the police: Power exercised by the police
1. Summon any person cannot be given to a private
2. examine any detective agency..
3. record his statement
4. first information can be reduced in writing as F.1
statement and an FIR can be registered.
5. can investigate the case
6. can conduct search including human body.
7. can prepare inquest
8. can prepare mahazer
9. can seize articles
10. Arrest and detain a person for 24 hours
11. can prepare a charge sheet and law claim sheet
before the court
12. request court to take prosecution steps
These are the 12 areas where police use powers. Out
of these 12 areas which can be given to private detective
agencies are to be decided. There is no harm in giving
item No.2, 3 and 8. They are examine a person, record
his statement and preparation of mahazer.
Examine any person: A private detective can
 examine  any
person who is willing or co-operate with  the investigation.
A private detective has no right or power to  summon any
person. He can go to his house or  office  or if the person
is willing he can fix the place to meet.
Recording the statement: No signed statement  should be
taken from the witnesses.  He can reduce it in writing and
certify it by putting his signature as taken in 162 Cr.P.C.
statement.
Preparation of Mahazer: He can prepare a mahazer or any
removable articles, land, buildings, etc.

92
12 3
Provision of Section 43 Cr.P.C.:  The private detective agency
can invoke section 43 of Cr.P.C. which envisage private
persons procedure on arrest.
7. Collection of Intelligence: Privat e detective can collect Police and intelligence
intelligence
 on any matter  and pass on to Government, agencies can take the help
institutions, organizations or individuals,  which are collected of PDAs when required.
confidential.
8. Government or Judical court or Government Departments, There is no need for such
Corporations, Panchayat and other Governmental, Educational, provision.
Social institutions a semi governmental institutions can engage
the services of private detective agency
 if their machinery
fails in finding out a truth on contract basis.
Name of the Agency : Dynamic Security and Detective Agency Private Limited,
Andheri East, Mumbai.
12 3
1. I am an Ex-Serviceman from the Indian Navy Noted
(Police Branch) and the promoter Chairman and
Managing Director of this company and we
are in the business of providing Security,
Investigation, Detection and Allied Services
 to
our clients both in Public and Private Sectors.
2. I have carefully studied the provisions of the said Noted
bill and would like to offer the following
comments/suggestions for your valuable
consideration.
3. It is indeed happy and heartening news that at Noted
least in the 60th year
 of our independence, the
Government of India has realised the need to
recognize and regulate the working of the
Detective Agencies in the country.
4. Before this, in 2005 the Parliament had passed Noted
the Private Security Agencies (Regulation)
Act, 2005 (29 of 2005), which has since been
notified and the concerned authorities of the
State Governments are in the process of
scrutinising
 the License Applications of the
Security Agencies.
5. In this connection,  I wish to point out that The Private Security Agencies (Regulation)
Security, Investigation and Detection are related Act, 2005 came into effect from 15
functions and most of the operators are in the March, 2006. The present Private
business of providing integ rated Services and Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill,
since Private Security Agencies (Regulation) 2007 intends to make a separate law to

93
12 3
Act, 2005 is already in place, in my opinion, regulate the functioning of Private
there is absolutely no need for a separate Detective Agencies so that they run
legislation for Private Detective Agencies. Even within the legal parameters and are
the Service Tax legislation recognizes and  gives accountable to a regulatory authority.
credence to this argument. The objectives of both the areas are
different and therefore, there is need for
Instead, the Private Security Agencies separate laws. Since the nature of work
(Regulation) Act, 2005 should  be amended and of security guards and detectives are
important provisions of the proposed Bill different, separate law is needed to
incorporated in the 2005 Act. We can go into regulate detective agencies.
the specifics once the basic suggestion is
accepted.
The new combined Act can be called The
Private Security and Detective Agencies
(Regulation) Act. The same regulatory authority
of the State Governments
 could function as the
Licensing/Regulatory Authority.
This would eliminate the  need of setting up
separate central and state Boards under  the new
Act and thus save the Exchequer and the
Agencies of unnecessary expenses and
administrative hassles.
You may be aware
 that the Government
of Maharashtra has constituted  a Security Guards
Board under Maharashtra Private Security Guards
(Regulation) Act, 1981, which has created more
problems for the Principal Employers as well as
for security industry than it has solved. It has
created multiplicity
 of Unions and has not
benefited the Security Guards or the Principal
Employers at all. All that it has achieved is chaos
and confusion and such a lot
 of litigation.  With
this experience, the prospects  of dealing with
two more Boards as proposed in the Bill under
reference is rather
 frightening to say the least.
If you go ahead with the proposed
legislation, I feel that it would create a lot of
confusion because those who are in Security
and Detection business will have to obtain
multiple licenses and also deal with multiple
authorities which can easily be avoided by
combining two legislations into one under one
common authority. By doing so the desired
objectives will
 be achieved  and at the same time
the working of agencies  will be smooth, well
controlled and well regulated.

94
12 3
I would therefore recommend that the
authors of the Bill have a relook and incorporate
the above mentioned suggestions which will
serve the interests of all parties concerned.
Name of the Agency : Security Association of Maharashtra (SAM), Navi Mumbai.
1. Our association has strong objection for The constitution of Central Board is given
including any Private Association/Business in the clause 3(1) & (2) of the Bill. We
Chambers in the constitution of a Central Board have proposed in the Bill that not more
at the Central level and State Boards at State than two to three persons from the
level. recognized chamber of trade and
commerce and the private detective
agency to be nominated by the Central
Government on the Central Private
Detective Regulatory' Board. The.
provisions seems reasonable.
2. The constitution of the board shall
 be on the line –Do–
of Private Security Agencies (Regulation)
Act, 2005 and should be under the control of
Home Department involving Central and State
Government officials/Police officials only.
3. Private Detective Agencies or Security Agency The Central/State Governments will
owners or their relatives shall not be included nominate suitable persons on the Board.
as a member of any board or controlling
authority, to
 avoid the influence of vested
interest.
Name of the person : Shri A.P. Sharma, Ex-Editor, Rajya Sabha
12 3
1. With reference to  the advertisement in Noted.
HINDUSTAN TIMES, dated October 11, 2007
inviting views/suggestions on the working of
the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation)
Bill, 2007, I give hereunder few suggestions.
Afterwards, I will also append a
 memorandum
in this connection. If approved,  I may be
called for giving oral evidence before the
Committee.
2. Suggestions: Actually Bill is in a right place, yet It is wrong to generalize the local Police
it is suggested that private detectives may not as well as Private Detective as dishonest.
work honestly, as in
 the case of local police,
hence, there is no necessity of private detectives.

95
12 3
3. All powers be vested in Central Board.  When For a country of India’s size, it would
need arises, States may be given financial be difficult to vest all powers on the
assistance to tackle the menace of terrorists Central Board. It is our considered view
and other hardened criminals. that State Boards are a necessity.
4. So  far as licence is concerned, power to give Power to grant licence to applicants is
it, eligibility or  non-eligibility renewal, given to Central Board as well as State
conditions, exhibition, cancellations, suspension, Boards as per the Bill.
appeals, identify cards be conferred on Central
Board or Authority.
5. Regarding finance, accounts and audit, it Prov isions under clauses 21 and 22 are
suggested that grants by Central
 Government, adequate and reasonable.
approved by both Houses of Parliament,  to
Central Board as well as State Governments be
provided, as per requirements.
6. With regard to audit of Central Board, no No comments.
comments on auditing by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.
7. Concerning offences and penalties,
 strict Provisions made in the Bill are adequate.
penalties be awarded to offenders and the
matter be given to the police. If necessary,
information be passed to courts to decide the
fate. It is also suggested that private companies
be debarred in intervening in such matters.
8. Legal proceedings for damage control against Noted.
Central Board or its any
 officer or an officer
of State Government be carried out in
accordance with the law of the land.
9. For making rules, power of Central Government As per clause 31 of the Bill, the Central
be notified in the official Gazette. State Government may by notification in the
Governments may also be informed about it. official gazette make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Act.
10. Central Government may direct
 the Central Board The power to give directions in writing
under this Bill for compliance. to the Central Board and other State
Boards is given in clause 34 of the Bill.
11. Regarding power to remove difficulties may be No comments.
ratified by Lower House of Parliament.
12. Private detectives are unviable and incompatible Suitable provisions have already been
in the present atmosphere, where terrorism and made in the Bill.
extremism, if not impossible, cannot be curbed
with full force. Establishment of Central Board
is essential. Powers may also be bestowed on
State Governments in the present context. The
power of licencing be provided, to the Central

96
12 3
Board. According to requirements, finances be
provided to the Central Board as well as State
Governments, duly ratified by the Parliament.
Audit of the finances provided be carried out by
Comptroller and Auditor
 General of India, as
mentioned in the Bill. Offences and penalties be
decided by the Courts of Law, according
 to the
law of the country. Power  of framing rules
conferred in the Central Government in
consultation with the State Governments.
Whatever is
 contained in this Bill should not  be
derogatory to other law. Direction under this
Bill may be given to Central
 Board  by the
Central Government.  For removal  of difficulties,
it should be by the Parliament of India. Finances
be provided for the enacting of the Bill,
 including
salary of the officers and staff, in this
connection as well as location of office and
accommodation be arranged
 by Central
Government and State Governments. It should
be provided by Parliament and State Assemblies.
Name of the Agency : People’s Media Initiative, Mumbai.
12 3
1. Peoples Media Initiative is a body established in Noted.
the year, 2000 as registered society of Journalist
and social human rights activists.
2. Kuldeep Nayar, V eteran Journalist, is its first Noted.
President and Dr. Mallika Sarabhai, renowned
cultural activist, is its
 Vice-President and
undersigned is the Chairman of the society.
3. We have basic objections  to give recognition There is no privacy law in the country.
and legitimacy to Private Detectives as not only In the absence of any privacy law,
they encroaches right of citizens for privacy  as protection of privacy of persons is covered
they scoope into affairs of the citizens of India under the Constitution of India.
which is a subject of law enforcing authorities
and judiciary.
4. It is also observed that industrial houses hire T ill date activities of Detective Agencies
detective agencies to keep eye on Trade Union and their Agents are not regulated by
Activists and harass the workers. It is also any law.
observed that Private Detectives are used to
blackmail purpose and
 extract the confidential
information of the company by rival companies.

97
12 3
5. Today, the law of the land has given authority The Private Detective Agencies will
to any citizen of India to probe any issue and render their service to those who seek
seek any information about Government policies it. The private detective agencies shall
and public affairs, by licencing the Detective act in a lawful manner and for lawful
Agencies, the impression, it gives is that they objective.
are authorised body to undertake such activities.
6. There is provision to have private members in The Government would ensure that
Central and State Boards which will pay way suitable persons are nominated on the
to use the position to deny the license to Detective Board.
Company which private members may have
hostility or rivalry and it can lead to corruption
and misuse of power and
 there will be effort
to monopolize the business, which private
members will ensure that license is given to
companies which they are close or have
association one way or the other.
7. India is open and democratic
 country and Presently the Bill is before Hon’ble
developing the concept of private  detectives Parliamentary Committee for consideration.
will be undemocratic practice as Private
Detectives will enjoy legitimacy which they do
not have today so please do not go ahead with
the Act and drop it.
Name of the person : Shri R.C. Madan, Hill View Apartments, V asant Vihar, New Delhi.
12 3
1. You are requested to bring the under mentioned Noted.
information to the notice of Respected Madam
Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P.:—
1. I am 74 years of an age. I am the founding
father and pioneer of private detective profession
of India.
 I am practising private detective since
1958, i.e.  49 years. A Bill entitled, Private
Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007 has
been introduced in Rajya Sabha.
2. If this Bill
 is passed as it is, it will prove to be Remarks are general in nature. No
suicidal for thousands of private detectives and comments.
their employees in India and will be deprived  of
their livelihood. The Bill required serious
rethinking and certain deletion, amendments,
alternations, additions and modifications failing
which thousands of persons and their families
would endlessly suffer and curse the
 Government
for axing their necks and closing their source
of income and livelihood.

98
12 3
3. There exists  a ‘Mafia’ in this profession consisting Remarks are general in nature. No
of a few ‘Big Sharks’, i.e. very big Detective comments.
agencies who have  lobbied politicians and got
the Bill drafted in such  a manner that almost
all small, medium and big Private Detective
Agencies will close down.
 The Mafia has an  eye
on all the Government business which still come
to them after this Bill is passed, as it is. Your
announcement in newspapers have given a sigh
of relief to almost all in this
 profession, honestly,
they are all praying for your good health  and
long life.
4. A few people (I  know their names, but would Remarks are general in nature. No
not like to mention) are claiming that they comments.
represented the profession as a whole,  but It
is one hundred per cent wrong.  They really met
the Minister concerned, nobody knows the truth?
There is Big ? mark.
To respected Madam ji, please consider suggestions
of people in this Trade,
 received by you in
response to your Public Notice. Please call them
to listen personally.
 I am sure you will realise
that the Bill in question needs changes. Such a
Bill is a need of the Time, but not
 in the shape
it is in the present form.
Name of the Agency : Tiger Detectives, Panchkula Haryana.
12 3
1. Suggestions on the Bill: The State Private The provisions made in the B ill are
Regulatory Board:—  The State  Private Detective adequ ate and do not need any modification
Regulatory Board should function direct under in this regard.
the Central Private Detective Regulatory Board
as Boards State Administrative Body with no
separate powers vested in it as defined in sub-
section (1)(a) to (d) of Section 6 of the Bill
with no interference by the State Governments
concerned and follow the policies/rules framed
by the Central Private
 Detective Regulatory
Board under consultation with Central
Government.
Being Central and State Governments, two
independent different authorities, controlling
functions of private detective agencies, the
policies/rules framed by both
 the Governments
could possibly struck to each other and may

99
12 3
create differences  of opinion resulting in the
bottlenecks at some lateral stage. Further, more,
private detective profession is not limited to a
particular place/State and State Detective Agencies/
Detective Agents once on taking up the cases
have to cross over many a States
 thoughout the
Republic of India, shadowing criminals  as this
professional is a mobile one and not limited to
a specific place and State unlike Security Guards,
Private Security Agencies (Regulations) Bill, 2007
who are to stay and perform duties at the
stationary place appointed to them and as such
detective agencies/detective
 agents may face  the
difficulties in carrying out private detective work
assigned to them by their parent State equipped
with State Detective Agency identity card, may
face difficulties in carrying out their job in other
States.
2. Application for grant of licence: At page No.5 The licence fee may not be lowered to
sub-section 3(1) and (b) of Section 10 should Rs.5000/- for grant of All India Private
be substituted with as ... “Every Application Detective Licence. The r esult would be
under sub section (1)
 shall be accompanied by mushroom growth of such agencies and
a Token Registration fee of Rs.5000/-  only defeat the very purpose of the legislation
(Rupees five thousand only) for grant  of All to regulate their growth.
India Private Detective Licence  for operating
throughout the Republic of India and in addition
The Private Detective Agencies shall have to be
continued to pay 10% (ten per cent) of their
income (Net profit out of their earnings by
deducting Service Tax, Salary of employees and
other Adminitrative Expenses) as professional
tax quarterly by depositing the amount in anyone
of Nationalised Bank in the Code allotted to the
Board and return thereto be sent to the authorities
appointed by the
 Central Private Detective
(Regulatory) Board.
Being Private  Detective Profession is a life
risky one and creators of enemies around the
detectives, even the persons with adequate
professional talent avoid falling
 into the profession
(except the few with daredevil  and adventurous
nature) and accept the same under forced
financial circumstances and hence, a
 sum of
Rs.50,000 and three lakhs (very  few could
afford this) as one time registration  fee for
acquiring licence  may create mental disturbances
to them and hurdle in carrying  out professional

100
12 3
work because of, they  are to be supposed to
seek/take loan  from the  banks is uncertainity
whether they would be — the  successful, private
detective or not, besides, denial of licence to
unemployed talented applicants,
 already in debt
or not interested/risked more loan.  In the light
of the aforesaid justifications, our suggestions
paying ten per cent professional tax to the Board
as mentioned above, in our opinion could very
appropriately be suited to both the Central
Government
 and the applicant Detective Agencies.
3. Section 13, page 6 :  Eligibility to be a Private Eligib ility of Agency/Agent have been
Detective Agent be modified  to read as Eligibility provided separately in clause 9 and
to be  a Private Detective Agency/Private Detective clause 13 respectively.
Agent.
4. Section 13(1)(f) suggested to be modified Conditions under clause 13(1)(f) will be
incorporating the  conditions  as “Existed Private p rescribed under the Rules.
Detective Agencies  shall have to essentially
place the details of  at least three cases of
different nature solved by them independently,
each pertaining to the Central/State Government,
Public, and Private
 Sector Undertakings before
the Board so as to enable the Board to access
their Professional Talents/Gutts
 and investigative
and intelligence qualities. Likewise persons
applying afresh for All India Private Detective
Licence shall have to solve also three cases of
different nature lying pending with the various
police headquarters unsolved, just to enable them
to get exposed their investigative qualities though
they failed to solved the cases.”
For granting All
 India Private Detective
License, the applicants should  have professional
gutts, dare devil qualities and to risk lives for
the profession. Granting of private detective
licence to incompetent persons not having essential
professional qualities cited above, merely on
payment of Registration fee tuning Rs.50,000
and Rs.3 lakhs shown in sub-section (3)(a) and
(b) of Section
 10 of the Bill could cause the
concern of the National  Security at any lateral
stages. The applicant Detective Agency/Agencies
with Excellent, Very Good
 and Good Investigative
Talents, reflected in the cases solve by them,
cited above, should only be considered for
 grant
of All India Private Detective Licence and their

101
12 3
Area/Educational Qualifications should  not be
considered a bar towards denial of licence to
them.
5. Suggestion No.5: Section 16 : Cancellation and The provisions under clause 16(1)(k) is
suspension of Licence: Sub-section (1)(k) of adequate and does not need any modi-
section 16 is suggested to be modified fication.
incorporating that a licence holder should also
not refuse the directions  of the Central Government
through the Board as and when made to ask for
to penetrate with or without his Detective Agents
into the Dacoits/Terrorists  infested areas/public
gatherings of any kind at any place  at any time,
be it a Railway Station platform, religious  fares
or political rallies, etc.  for intelligence cause
required by the Central/State Investigating
Agencies/Police on suitable remuneration, decided
by the Board from time to time on case to case
basis for National cause and in the interest  of
National Security even  at the risk of his/their
life (lives). It is added that in case he/they get
killed during the course of such duties, he/
they should be considered as Martyr for
Pensionary/financial benefits to their next of
kin at par with those of police personnel  (status
of licence holders and agents on such duties at
par with police ranks to be decided by the
Central Govemment.
6. General suggestions to be incorporated in the Bill.
(a) The private detective agencies/agents should We do not agree.
get a DDR registered with the police station of
the area within which they are operating so as
to make the SHO  of the station aware of presence
of Private Detective in  his area  and seek police
help as and when needed for which the police
help should not be denied.
(b) All India Private Detective Licence holders We do not agree.
should liberally be allowed All India  Small Arms
Licence/Revolvers on Ex-Factory-Subsidy  rates
decided by the Central Government.
(c) Copies of the outcome/results of the cases We do not agree.
solved/not perfectly solved and not solved  even
after hard performance by the Detective Agencies,
should be forwarded to the  Central Private
Detective Regulatory Board as  these could be
some time may very helpful  for getting catch
hold of criminals  by the Government Investigating/
Police agencies.

102
Name of the Agency : Security Association of India, Mumbai (Shri O.P. Bakshi).
12 3
1. I, Lt Cdr OP Bakshi (Retd) was working in Indian Noted
Navy and offered meritorious service to Navy
and retired. Presently I am working as Chairman
of the Security Association of India. I am also
working as Training Officer of Police
Establishment of Indian Navy and I am Chief
Organizer of the training school.
2. The main purpose of writing this letter is to Noted
mention about management of security and my
views on it. I would like to mention the name
of some leading  security agencies offering
services in the country:—
(i) M/s Bombey Intelligence Security Ltd., 101
Omega House, Hiranandani Garden, Navi Mumbai
(ii) M/s Inves.
3. The above said security agencies are also involved Since both activities are different therefore,
in the other works also, for which there is a separate laws for regulations are required.
Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act,  2005.
Now separate licence would be needed for
detective work. So why two types of rules are
required for this type of Establishments who  are
doing security and other related work. I would
like to say that clause 1 of the Private Security
Agency (Regulatory) Act may be amended to
provide for detective work.
4. The definition of private security agencies: The provisions made in the B ill are
Amendment to section 2(g) of Private Security adequate.
Act may be made to make it clear that private
security agency is a private establishment and
not a Government institution or establishment
who will offer services of security and also
function as detective.
5. The meaning of private security agency that it The two activities are different and
is an agency to provide private security and therefore, separate laws are required.
private detective service combined together.
6. Private Security and Detectives are both sides Combining of Security and detectives
of the same coins and are complementary to work under a single law is not suggested.
each other. Without suitable security, Intelligence
service has no meaning. In the business of
detectives cannot perform duty properly without
security work. If they maintain distance no definite
result will come out. For example, the Police does
both the work. Security employees must be given
training of private detectives.

103
Name of the Agency ; Golden Eagle Detective Ltd., New Mahabir Nagar, New Delhi.
12 3
1. In clause 3 of the Bill condition for constitution
of Central Board is mentioned. Similarly, in
clause 5 conditions for constitution of State
Board is mentioned. In clause 3 of the Bill it is
stated that out of 5 members of the Central
Board not more than 2 and in case of 7
members of the Board not more than 3
members will be nominated by Central
Government from the recognized chamber of
trade and commerce and private detective
agencies. Similarly in clause 5 it is stated that
out of 3 members not more than out of 5
members not more than 2 shall be from the
recognized chamber of trade and commerce and
private detective agencies to be nominated by
the State Government. In clause 3 and 5 there
is no mention about their qualification and other
requirement and who are to be nominated on the
Board. As per nomination of members that the
requirement of ways arid other requirement
should be mentioned in the Bill.
2. In the interest of private detective agencies,
there should be provision in the Bill that after
discussion with association of detectives
Government will nominated person on the
Board. The Government should nominate person
on the Board come out of the list given by the
detective agencies associations.
3. It is mentioned in clause 17 of the Bill that an
affected person can appeal against the order of
the Central Board to the Central Government.
Similarly he can also appeal to State
Government against order of the State Board.
Beside filing appeal before the Government a
person should also be allowed to approach a
High Court if the matter relates to State
Government and in Supreme Court if the matter
relates to Central Government. Also against
order of High Court one can file appeal in the
Supreme Court.
In clause 10 (1) it is mentioned that detective
agencies may be given licence for working in
one or two states. It is confusing and matter
consideration that detective. agencies are
required to go to other state in connection with
the detection work. If one detective agency is
The Constitution of Central Board is
given in clause 3 of the Bill and that of
State Board in clause 5 of the Bill. The
terms and conditions will be provided in
the rules.
Government will nominate suitable
persons on the board as per the
provisions of the Bill and the rules to be
prescribed.
The provision of appeals is given in
clause 17 of the Bill. One can approach
High Court/Supreme Court as per the
provisions of the Constitution of India.
For working in a State licence can be
obtained from State Board. For Norking
in more than one State Central Board
will be issuing licence.

104
given licence to work in one state and he is
required to go to other state in the connection
with detective work in that case which licence
is to be given. Therefore, in the Bill they should
be clear provision regarding working of
detective agencies in one or more than one
State.
5. In clause 10 (3) of the Bill there is provision
that an applicant agency has to pay licence fee
to Rs. 50,000/- and Rs. 3 lakh for working in
more than two state for small detective
company or individual detective agent this is an
exorbitant fee. Because of higher licence fee
they will have to close their business hence
licence fee should be reduced and it may be as
per the size and nature of the company in the
name of licence fee charging huge fee for 5
years is a burden on detective agencies and
agents. If after depositing the fee a company is
required to close or the company fails then the
fees paid by it as licence fee is a loss.
Therefore, the licence fee may be reduced and
the detective agencies may be given alternative
of depositing fee within one year. In the Bill
there is no provision for security and safety of
detective agencies. Who are doing detective
work in their personal capacity but their work
and finance unlimited. If the Bill is passed in the
present form it will create major problem for
small detectives.
6. In the clause 13 of the Bill the eligibility to
become private detective agent is mentioned. In
clause 13  sub clause (d) it is stated that a
private detective agency shall engage a person
who has completed the prescribed detective
training successfully and he has also to fulfill
other conditions. This would be painful
experience for a detective because in India such
education and training institutions are limited. In
the Bill the other situation have not been made
clear. In the Bill such condition and clauses
should be cleared so that detective agencies do
not face any problem in engaging any private
detective agent.
7. The clause 19 and clause 25 of the Bill are
contradictory. In clause 19 it is capable that
only Police Inspector or an officer higher than
12 3 Keeping in view the object to
discourage mushroom growth of PDAs,
the provisions in the Bill seem
reasonable.
Rules will be framed regarding training.
As per the clause 19 of the Bill, the
Board or any other officer authorized by
it in this behalf, not below the rank of

105
12 3
him who will be authorized by the Board go to
any private detective agency office/premises and
examine its record accounts and other
documents and take photocopy of it whereas in
clause 25 is capable that the private detective
agency shall not divulge any information which
the agency might have received in the course of
the inquiry. If the police reaches the office of
detective agency and take a away some secret
information and gives to other person than the
company will be in difficulty. The inspecting
officer can also harass the company. Therefore,
there should be provision for security and safety
of the agency. In clause 19 also the right to
privacy is violated.
8. At the time of financial crises there is no
provision in the Bill regarding security, safety
and assistance. If detective agency is facing
problem, there should be provision in the Bill
for his welfare.
Inspector of Police, may at any
reasonable time, enter the premises of
the private detective agency and inspect
and examine the place of business,
equipments used in providing detective
services, the records, accounts and
other documents connected with the
licence and may take copy of any
document  thereof. As per clause 25(1)
the private detective agency shall furnish
such information, which is relevant to
the Issue under inquiry and which
relates to the lawful objective for which
the enquiry was undertaken, only to the
client or to his authorized representative.
As per the above provisions of the Bill,
inspection of licence is to be carried out
by the Central Board or State Board
through an authorized police officer of
the rank of Inspector of Police. The
inspection will be done under the
supervision and authorization of the
respective Board and therefore, the
interest of PDAs will be duly taken care
of.
We do not agree.
Name of the person : Shri Anil Kumar, AG Missing Detective Bureau, Jalandhar (Punjab)
12 3
1. I am Anil Kumar of Mujaffarpur village of
Jalandhar and working in A.G . Missing Detective
Bureau (Regd.) a private detective and security
agency. Sir I have got the agency registered and
intend to do LIC job. Please guide me as to
what I have to do. I have members in my
agency from Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab. I
want members from all India level and I want
help from the Police. When news of any
missing person comes in the newspaper, based
on the advertisement, we contact the family
over the phone number and then lodge
This letter of Shri Anil Kumar does not
convey any views about PDA Bill. But it
makes clear that such private detective
agencies are working to find missing
persons. We have no comments to
offer.

106
complaint of missing person with the police.
Then we take the missing person's photo and
talk to the person and then we verify details of
missing person, obtain address of his relatives
and send photo to his relatives. My effort is that
missing person must be traced as early as
possible. It would be possible if we have all
India membership. It happens that when a
person becomes missing his family members
become sad and all others only convey regrets.
We have to help people and I am sending a list
of members I have got. I have got registration
of the agency done from West Bengal, Kolkata.
I want helo in my work.
12 3
Name of the person : Shri Virender Kumar Goel, Private Detective, Jalandhar City (Punjab)
12 3
1. I have read over the complete Bill and decided
to request you for making some corrections as
explained under:—
Going through the page number 4 of the
bill para No. 9(2) a company, firm or an
association of persons should be considered for
issue of License under this Act purely having
the Prop., Partners, members only the citizens
of India.
2. Vide para No.10(3), the fee for operating in one
State and more than two states is indicated too
high. I think it should be Rs. 5000/- for one
State and Rs. 10000/- for two or more States.
The amendment in fee schedule is requested.
The network of private detectives is spread all
over the country and imposing the heavy fee
will remain useless. To avoid the financial loss
to Government in shape of fee it is better to
reconsider the license fee.
3. Vide para number 11 (1) for renewal of license
the late fee can be imposed in case of delay in
renewal of license. The period limitation before
120 days for applying the renewal is requested
to remove and late fee imposing system will
remain effective.
The provision of clause 9(2) has been
included after due consideration and
does not require any change.
Application fee for licence is Rs.50,000
if the private detective agency is to
operate in one State and Rs.3 lakhs if
the agency is to operate in two or more
States. The objective of the Bill is to
regulate the functioning of the private
detective agencies so that detective
agencies of dubious nature close down
their business. This cannot be achieved
by lowering licence fee.
An application for renewal of licence
shall be made to the Board, not less
than 120 days before the expiry of
period of validity. As per clause 32(c),
the State Government shall make rules
regarding the form of an application and
fee for renewal of licence. Late fee
system can be prescribed in the rules.

107
4. The person(s) already carrying on the business
of private detective since decades and have
already the team of qualified Agents, should not
be bonded to comply the section 13 (e). There
should not be prescribed physical standards to
recognize him like police people bearing Red
shoes-Khaki socks, Short hairs etc.
5. Vide section 16(h) should have the right to
refuse to render the services agreed to any
person on some legal ground.
6. Vide Section 18(c) and (d) the information
should remain top Secret.
7. Inspection of records Section 19. The Officer
should not be below the rank of DSP. Vide
section 19 the dress code is needed to be
imposed for social gatherings/meetings etc.
8. Vide section 21-22 the members from private
detective agencies should be taken in the Central
Board and should be paid like other members.
9. Vide section 28 rights of individual privacy
needs details in this Bills.
10. Vide Chapter VII section 30, “the right to legal
proceeding shall be given to Private detective
Agency(ies). There is no part found to give/have
the powers to Private detective after getting the
Licence from Government of India based
12 3
As per clause 13(e) of the Bill, the
private detective agent shall employ a
person who fulfills such physical
standards as may be prescribed. It will
be prescribed under the rules.
The Board may as per clause 16(h) of
the Bill cancel/suspend licence if the
licence holder willfully failed or refused
to render the services agreed to any
person.
As per clause 18 of the Bill, the private
detective ageny is required to maintain a
register containing the names and
addresses of the persons whom it had
provided private detective agents and
gist of the services provided, and such
other particulars as may be prescribed.
The Board may call for such
information as it considers necessary.
The Board, or any other officer
authorized by it in this behalf, not below
the rank of Inspector of Police inspect
the premises of the agency. The dress.
code can be adopted by the agency but
it should not match uniform of police/
army/para-military forces.
There is already provision in the Bill for
making a person belonging to a private
detective agency a member of the
Central Board. Central Board will meet
expenses of salary, allowances and
other remunerations of the members,
officers of the Central Board.
There is no privacy law in the country.
Protection of privacy of a person is
covered under the constitution of India.
Clause 28 has been specifically provided
to take care of it.
The provision under clause 30 of the
Bill is regarding indemnity to the
Central/State Boards and seems
reasonable.

108
Central boards or State Boards. It is needed to
be explained in the Bill.
12 3
Name of the person : Shri Parag Shah, A1/16, Asmita Jyoti, CHSL, Marve Road, Malad(W) Mumbai
1. We wish to submit as follows:—
Regulation and licensing of Recovery
Agents to be governed by the above law.
We are sure that, this will help the industry
to regularize, as well as very helpful in
recovering and safeguard of Public Money.
No comments.
Name of the person : Shri Ramji Singh, Village Akhtiyarpur, P.O. Chandva, Distt. Bhojpur.
1. Shri Ramji Singh of Bhojpur has applied for
becoming a detective agent. He is stated to be
having matric qualification and has experience of
13 years of working in a NGO. He has applied
to become a private detective.
We are not considering to engage any
person for private detective work. The
PDA Bill is under examination by
Parliamentary Committee.
Name of the petitioner : Shri Lav Kumar Sinha, Salimpur Ahra, Lane No.2, Patna.
12 3
1. Kindly ponder over the following facts done by
me : I investigated being president of labour
Union of “Nav Bharat Prakashan, Buniadi
Sanitya Mandir”, Patna about illegal work and
exploitation of employees therein. The said firm
closed over an year and all employees
dismissed. A case was filed in labour Court but
due to bribary done by employer total cases
came to an end.
2. I investigated a Banking company “Media India
Ltd.” Patna being Branch Manager of Danapur,
Patna and wrote to the Inspector General of
Police, Crime Research Department, Patna in
my letter No.OM/BP/CRP/3/97, dated 28.4.97
about illegal and anti-social work done by the
Managing Director. As a result said Company
closed but no action has been taken against the
Managing Director because his father-in-law
was an important officer in the office of the
Chief Minister.
3. Besides above, the facts mentioned above I have
researched on the statement of former Chief
No comments.
No comments.
No comments.

109
12 3
Justice of Supreme Court Shri P.N. Bhagawati
of which five researches have been published in
Hindi newspaper. I have also written poems and
articles and other things for Bihar police.
4. Therefore, you are requested kindly to take
justified decision seeing my work for the benefit
in checking crime and for this I shall be much
obliged.
We are not considering to engage any
person for private detective work. The
PDA Bill is presently under examination
by Parliamentary Committee.

110
COMMENTS OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS ON THE LETTER
OF SHRI S.S. AHLUWALIA, HON’BLE M.P. (RAJYA SABHA)
12 3
1. I suggest that the hon’ble Committee may
request the Government to provide clarification
to the following points in respect of the subject
Bill under examination:
2. In the written reply to the query raised in the
sitting of the Committee on 13 June 2008 as to
whether an information procured through private
detective service provider would be admissible
as evidence in the Court, Government have
replied (Ref: Annexure VII, para 6 at P/2) that
it is left to the concerned court of law in the
country to decide its evidential value and treat
as an exhibit’. WHEREAS the parameters of
admissibility of evidence has to be invariably
governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Cr.P.C.) which leaves no room for exercise of
discretion by the judicial officer in the Court of
law. If so, what is the rationale behind this
statement in the reply of Government Whether
the Evidence Act is being contemplated to be
amended to accommodate the above view?
3. Clause 26(1) of the Bill envisages the private
detective to be duty bound to report to the
police forthwith if he notices any cognizable
offence having been committed. This again is a
matter which falls under the purview of the
Evidence Act. Under what provision of law the
police authority would be eligible to take
cognizance and record such information when
provided by a private detective service provider
since the existing, Code denies admissibility of
evidences like confessional statements etc. when
obtained by Police itself? Whether Government
are contemplating amendment of Cr.P.C. in
order to accommodate the provision of clause
26(1)?
The comments of Ministry of Home
Affairs on the points raised by Hon’ble
M.P. are as under:—
It is clarified that the evidentiary value
of the information collected by PDA
shall be regulated by the different
provisions of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 in the same way as the court
(Criminal and Civil) deals with the
evidence adduced before it by the
prosecution/defence and parties to the
civil litigation. No amendment in
Evidence Act is contemplated with
reference to the present Bill.
The clause 26(1) of the Bill
relating to cognizable offence is
reproduced below:—
“26(1) if the commission of any
cognizable offence is noticed by any
private detective agent during the course
of discharge of his duties, he shall bring
it to the notice of his superior
immediately who in turn shall forthwith
inform the police either through his
employer or agency or on his own.”
As far as specifying the
offences to be covered under this
Clause, no such exercise has been
carried out since the intent was to cast
a duty upon the detective agencies. The
present law vide Section 39 of Cr.P.C.
also enjoins on any member of the
public the duty of giving information in
respect of offences listed therein. Any
suggestion/advice of the Committee in
this regard, in so far as detective
agencies are concerned will be duly

111
4. Clause 35 of the Bill seeks 19 provide
discretionary authority to Government to relax
the requirements for grant of private detective
operator licence to any individual or to a private
detective service provider company etc.,
whereas clause 9(1) and (2) categorically
stipulate the conditions in absence of which
persons and companies, firm etc. respectively
“shall not” be granted licence. The reasons for
incorporating the ‘relaxation’ provisions in
clause 35 even though it contradict with those
of clause 9 (1) and (2)?
5. Responding to the observations of the
Committee as listed by Government as
Annexure A, it is stated that “a view would be
formed by the Ministry after due consultation
with the Ministry of Law” (Ref: Annexure VII
at p/3). Whether the said ‘due’ consultation with
the Ministry of Law and Justice was not held in
course of the passage of the Bill? If so, what
were the opinion rendered by the Law Ministry
in respect of the above mentioned clauses of the
Bill?
6. As per the Bill virtually any subject under the
sky are sought to be kept opened to be ventured
into by private detective service providers
whereas in countries with much older private
detective laws e.g. , Canada, Singapore,
California etc. the sphere of activities of private
detective service providers have been specified
where private detectives can undertake
assignments. As is highlighted by Government
of Puducherry (Annexure III at p/8), why not
the subject of activities for private detectives are
clearly defined in clause 2 (1) (g) in the Bill
itself?
12 3
considered. With reference to the
procedural aspects, no amendment in
Cr.P.C. is contemplated.
The clause 9 contains grounds on which
person shall not be considered for issue
or renewal of licence to carry on the
business of private detective work. In
the clause 35 of the Bill it is mentioned
that the Central Government may relax
the requirement of qualifications for
employing or engaging any person as
private detective agent or the
requirement of licensing for performing
private detective work in certain cases,
for the reasons to be recorded in
writing, in respect of a private detective
agent or a private detective agency, if
such agent or agency is recognized or
registered under the law of any country.
This is only an enabling provision for
any contingency. The Central
Government will use this provision with
due care.
The Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department were consulted
on the draft Private Detective Agencies
(Regulation) Bill, 2007. However to
frame replies on the 11 policy issues/
observations the Ministry of Law was
also consulted by MHA in the meetings
held in the Ministry.
Issue had been examined even
when the Bill was formulated and the
view had been taken that it would not
be practicable and feasible to enumerate
all the activities that can be carried out
by the Private Detective Agencies.
Further, it was felt that since no legal
right or legal immunity is envisaged for
private detective agencies/agents, there
is no need to specify all the activities.
Section 2(g) specifies that the private
detective agencies shall act in a lawful
manner and for a lawful objective, and
it is felt that this should be sufficient.

112
7. Furthermore, it is observed that countries with
much older private detective laws, e.g. Canada,
Singapore, California, etc. have a common law
to govern both the private security service and
private detective service whereas in India we
have enacted a separate law for private security
services and a separate law is proposed for
private detective services. The rationale behind
not having a common law for the both?
8. Lastly, as I had pointed out to the Union Home
Secretary during the sitting on 13 June, 2008,
the private detective services are provided by
the service provider individual and/or by
companies registered either under the companies
Act or under partnership Deed etc., to their
clients as per mutually agreed terms and
conditions and that breach: of agreement by any
party should be covered under the Consumer
Protection Act and other civil code. The
rationale behind not treating the private detective
service as consumer affair and denying the
consumers of private detective services the
protection available under the consumer
protection, laws needs to be explained.
12 3
Unlike some foreign countries who have
common law to govern security and
detective services, the Private Security
Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (29 of
2005) was first made in our country.
Now the proposal is to make a separate
law to regulate the activities of
Detective Agencies. We are not in
favour of combined law as the work of
security guards and detective agents are
different.
The main objective of the
Bill is to regulate the functioning of
PDAs, and towards that end providing
the licensing regime which inter alia
would enable a check on antecedents of
companies/persons engaged in private
detective work, as also on their
activities. All this would have a
relationship with security and related
matters. Merely because this involves
the rendering of a service to consumers
would not make the subject come under
the purview of the Department of
Consumer Affairs the activities of which
are generic in nature.

123
Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.