 
 
PARLIAMENT 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT 
STANDING 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIFTH 
THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA 
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA 
(PRESENTED TO RAJ 
ON THE TABLE OF 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA,  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
SABHA 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIFTH  REPORT 
ON  
THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION) 
SECOND BILL, 2010  
THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA  SABHA ON 3
RD   
NOVEMBE 
THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA  ON 3
RD   
NOVEMBE 
O RAJ YA SABHA ON 23
RD 
,  NOVEMBER, 20 
ABLE OF  LOK SABHA ON 22
ND 
,  NOVEMBER, 20 
SECRETARIAT 
2011/KARTIKA,  1933 (SAKA)  
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
AFFAIRS  
REPORT 
VALIDATION) 
NOVEMBE R, 2011) 
NOVEMBE R, 2011)  
NOVEMBER, 20 11)  (LAID 
NOVEMBER, 20 11)  
155  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in  

C.S.(H.A.)-301  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION) 
SECOND BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3 RD NOVEMBER, 2011) 
(FORWARDED  TO  THE  SPEAKER,  LOK  SABHA  ON  3 RD   NOVEMBER, 2011) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA  ON  23 RD  NOVEMBER,  2011) 
(LAID  ON  THE  TABLE  OF  LOK  SABHA ON  22 ND   NOVEMBER, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER,  2011/KARTIKA,  1933 (SAKA) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES  
 
1. C OMPOSITION   OF   THE  COMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(iv) 
 
2. P REFACE  ................................................................................................................................. (v)-(vi) 
3. R EPORT  .................................................................................................................................. 1—43 
CHAPTER   I :   Introduction ................................ ............................................................ 1—6 
CHAPTER    II   :    Presentation  of  the  Ministry  of  Home Affairs ................................ 7—14 
CHAPTER    III :    Views  of  the  State  Governments  on  the Bill .................................. 15—24 
CHAPTER    IV  :    Views  of  the  Stakehonders  and  replies  of  the   Government 
thereon ..................................................................................................... 25—36 
CHAPTER    V   :    Clause  by  clause  Consideration  of  the Bill ...................................... 37—41 
CHAPTER    VI  :    Observations/Conclusions  and  Recommendations  of  the    Committee 
at  a Glance ...................................... ...................................................... 42—43 
4. RELEVANT   MINUTES   OF   THE   MEETINGS   OF   THE   COMMITTEE ............................................ 45—89  
5. A NNEXURES  ............................................................................................................................ 91—162 
I. The  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  &  Validation)   Second  Bill,  2010 ................ 93—106 
II. Press  Communique  dated  15 th    February,  2011  on  the Bill .................................. 107 
III.  Press  Communique  dated  8 th   April,  2011  on  the  Bill .......................................... 108 
I V . Gist  of  views/suggestions  of  individuals/organisations  on  the  Bill  and comments 
of  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  thereon ........................................................ ......... 109—127 
V . Gist  of  views/suggestions  of  States/UTs  on  the  Bill  and  comments  of    the 
Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  thereon ................................................................. ............ 128—139 
V I . Comments of  the  Legislative  Department,  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice  on  
the  applicability  of  the  Sanad  Taluqdari  in  view  of  the  enforcement  of    the 
provisions  of  the  Constitution  of  India ......................................................... ............ 140—162 

 

COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE  ON  HOME  AFFAIRS  
(re -constituted  w.e.f.  31 st  August,  2010)  
1.  Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman  
RAJYA  SABHA  
Shri  Rishang  Keishing 
Dr.  N.  Janardhana  Reddy 
 
2.  
3.  
 
4. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia 
5. Shri  Naresh  Chandra  Agrawal 
6. Shri  Prasanta  Chatterjee 
7. Shri  Javed  Akhtar 1 
8. Shri  Tariq Anwar 
9. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
10. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri  L.K. Advani 
12. Dr.  Rattan  Singh Ajnala 
13. Dr.  Kakoli  Ghosh  Dastidar 
14. Shri  Ramen  Deka 
15. Shri  L.  Raja  Gopal 
16. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
17. Shri  Naveen  Jindal 
18. Shri  Jitender  Singh  Malik 
19. Shri  Lalubhai  Babubhai Patel 
20. Shri  Natubhai  Gomanbhai  Patel 
21. Dr.  Nilesh  N.  Rane 
22. Shri  Bishnu  Pada  Ray 
23. Adv.  A.  Sampath 
24. Shri  Hamdullah Sayeed 
25. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
26. Dr.  Raghuvansh  Prasad  Singh 
27. Shri  Ravneet  Singh 
28. Shrimati  Seema  Upadhyay 
29. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
30. Shri  Bhausaheb  Rajaram  Wakchaure 
31. Shri  Dinesh  Chandra  Yadav 
 
 
1 Shri Javed Akhtar nominated w.e.f. 21 September, 2010 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva, who has resigned from the Membership of the 
DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.r. 13 th  September,  2010. 
 
(i) 

 
 
COMPOSITION  OF  THE   SUB-COMMITTEE 
(As  constituted  on  27 th   April,  2011) 
 
1. Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia –  Convenor  
3. Shri  Naresh  Chandra  Agrawal 
4. Shri  D.  Raja 
5. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
 
LOK SABHA  
6. Dr.  Rattan  Singh Ajnala 
7. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
8. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
9. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE  ON  HOME  AFFAIRS  
(re -constituted  w.e.f.  31 st  August,  2011)  
1.  Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
Shri  Rishang  Keishing 
Dr.  N.  Janardhana  Reddy 
2.  
3.  
 
4. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia 
5. Shri  Naresh  Chandra  Agrawal 
6. Shri  Prasanta  Chatterjee 
7. Shri  Tariq Anwar 
8. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
9. Shri  D.  Raja 
10. Shri  Javed  Akhtar 
 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri  L.K. Advani 
12. Shri  Sansuma  Khunggur  Bwiswmuthiary 
13. Shri  Khagen  Das 
14. Dr.  Kakali  Ghosh  Dastidar 
15. Shri  Ramen  Deka 
16. Shri  Lagadapati  Raja  Gopal 
17. Shri  Mohammad  Asrarul  Haque 
18. Shri  Naveen  Jindal 
19. Shri  Jitender  Singh  Malik 
20. Shri  Babulal Marandi 
21. Shri  Baijayant  Panda 
22. Shri  Lalubhai  B. Patel 
23. Shri  Natubhai  Gomanbhai  Patel 
24. Dr.  Nilesh  N.  Rane 
25. Shri  Bishnu  Pada  Ray 
26. Shri  Adhi Sankar 
27. Shri  Hamdullah Sayeed 
28. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
29. Shri  Ravneet  Singh 
30. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
31. Shri  Dinesh  Chandra  Yadav 
 
(iii) 

(10 
) 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.  Ramacharyulu,  Joint  Secretary  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,  Committee  Officer  

 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the  Department-related  Parliam entary  Standing  Committee  on  Home  
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to  submit  the  Report  on  its  behalf,  do  hereby  
present this One Hundred and Fifty Fifth Report on the Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation)  
Second   Bill,   2010   (Annexure I).  
2.0 In pursuance of the rules relating to the Depar tment-related  Parliamentary  Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred ♣ the Enemy Property (Amendment &  Validation) 
Second Bill, 2010 (Annexure-I) as  introduced  in  the  Lok  Sabha  on  15 th  November,  2010,  and 
pending  therein,  to  the  Committee  on  30 th  December,  2010,  for  examination  and  report,  b y   
15 th   February,  2011.  The  Committee  sought  further  extension  of  time  four  times  for  presentation     
of  the  Report  on  the  Bill,  the  last  extension  being  granted  upto  30 th    October,     2011. 
3.0 The Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Sec ond Bill,  2010  seeks  to  amend  certain 
Sections  of  the  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968.  Th e  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968  was  enacted  on  t he  
20 th August, 1968  to  provide  for  the  continued  ves ting  of  enemy  property  vested  in  the  Custodi an  
of Enemy Property for India under the Defence of In dia Rules, 1962  and  for  matters  connected  
therewith. 
4.0     The Committee heard the official presentati on of the Home Secretary on 2 
nd   February, 2011.     
Since the provisions of the Enemy Property (Amendme nt and  Validation)  Second  Bill  have  far  
reaching consequences in terms of settlement of dis putes of enemy properties in the country, the 
Committee in the said sitting decided to seek writt en  Memoranda  from  public/stakeholders 
interested in the subject matter of the Bill. Follo wing this decision, a Press Communique (Annexure 
II) was issued seeking  written  memoranda  from  p ublic/stakeholders,  latest  by  15 th  March,  2011,  
which was subsequently extended upto 15 th April, 2011 requests received  from  Members  of  
Parliament so that a large cross-section of the soc iety, affected parties and the general public, coul d          
get an opportunity to submit their views/comments o n  the  said  Bill  (Annexure  III) .  In  response  
thereto around ninety memoranda were received by th e Committee. After scrutiny, relevant 
memoranda  were  forwarded  to  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  for  their  comments  (Annexure     IV) . 
5.0   The  Department-related  Parliamentary  Stand ing  Committee  on  Home  Affairs  in  its  sitting    
held on 25 th April, 2011, decided to constitute a Sub-Committee on the Enemy  Property 
(Amendment & Validation) Second Bill, 2010 to exami ne various provisions of  the  Bill  and  submit 
report thereon to it. The  Chairman  of  the  Commi ttee,  accordingly,  constituted  a  sub-Committee  on  
27 th  April,  2011.  The  Sub-Committee  held  five  sitt ings  on  11 th  and  20 th  May,  19 th  &  27 th   July  and 
10 th    August,  2011  to  consider  the  Bill. 
6.0      In its sitting held on 11 th   May, 2011, the Sub-Committee decided to seek writte n comments           
of  State  Governments,  wherever  enemy  propertie s  are  located,  and  also  to  hear  Chief  Secre taries   
of some of the States after obtaining permission fr om the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya  Sabha.  
Accordingly, after obtaining the permission of Hon’ ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha all the State/UT 
Governments were requested to send their  comments  on  the  provisions  of  the  Bill.  In  response  
thereto only six States/UTs have sent their comment s. So far as, comments from remaining State 
Government is concerned  the  matter  was  pursued  with  them  through  reminders  including  the  la st  
one wherein it was informed that in case, comments were not received by 30 th   June, 2011, it would 
 
 
♣    Vide  Rajya  Sabha  Parliamentary  Bulletin  Part-II  No.  47645  dated  1 st    September,  2010. 
 
(v) 

(6)  
 
be presumed that the State  Government  had  no  co mments  to  offer.  Out  of  all  the  comments  
received, the comments  received  from  the  State  of  Uttar  Pradesh  and  NCT  of  Delhi  were  sen t  to  
the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  for  their  written  comments   (Annexure     V).  
7.0    The  Sub-Committee  heard  the  Home  Secret ary  and  the  Custodian  of  the  Enemy  Property     
in India on the Bill in its sitting held on 20 th   May, 2011. The Sub-Committee also took oral evidenc e         
of the Chief Secretary  of  the  States  of  Goa, W est  Bengal,  UP and  NCT of  Delhi  in  its  sitti ngs  held 
on  19 th  and  27 th   July  2011.  The  Sub-Committee  also  had  the  be nefit  of  expert  views  of  Shri  Lal   
Ji Tandon, Member, Lok Sabha from Lucknow, UP. Alon gwith him  some  private  witnesses  also  
appeared  in  its  sitting  held  on  10 th   August,   2011. 
8.0     The  tenure  of  the  Committee  had  ended   on  31 st   August,  2011.  The  Sub-Committee  ceased  
to exist with the expiration of the term of the Com mittee and after reconstitution of the Committee             
on 15 th September, 2011, the Bill was considered  by  the  Main  Committee  itself.  The  Main 
Committee had the expert opinion of Shri Ram Jethma lani, Member, Rajya Sabha  and  an  eminent  
lawyer and also heard Shri Mohammad Amir Mohammad K han, the erstwhile Raja of 
Mehmoodabad, on the Bill, in its sittings held on 3 0 th   September and 10 th   October, 2011 respectively.    
The Committee  also  further  heard  the  views  of   Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  NCT  of  Delhi   in  
its  sitting  held  on  10 th     October. 
9.0  The  Committee  held  internal  discussion  on   the  Bill  in  its  sitting  held  on  14 th  and  24 th   
October, 2011 and decided not to take up the Clause -by-clause  consideration  of  the  Bill  and 
recommend the Government to bring  forward  a  fres h  Bill  incorporating  the  views  of  the  Member s  
and  observations  of  the   Committee. 
10.0  The  Committee  in  its  sitting  held  on  2 4 
th  October,  2011  considered  and  adopted  this  Rep ort 
and authorized its Chairman to present the  same  t o  the  Chairman,  Rajya  Sabha  when  the  House  
would  not  be  in   Session. 
11.0 As per practice, the Secretaries and senior of ficers of the Legislative  Department  and  the  
Department of Legal Affairs were also present in al l the sittings to respond to the  queries  of  the  
Members. 
12.0 For facility of reference and convenience, obs ervations and  recommendations  of the 
Committee  have  been  printed  in  bold  letters  in  the  body  of  the     Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU 
NEW   DELHI ; Chairman,  
24 th    October,  2011  Department-related   Parliamentary 
Standing   Committee   on   Home Affairs.  

 
1  
 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 The  Bill  
 The Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Second Bill, 2010 as introduced on 15 th November,  
2010  seeks  to  amend  certain  Sections  of  the  Enemy  Property  Act,       1968. 
 The Enemy Property Act, 1968 was enacted on the 20 th August, 1968 to  provide  for  the  continued 
vesting  of  enemy  property  vested  in  the  Cust odian  of  Enemy  Property  for  India  under  the Defence 
of  India  Rules,  1962  and  for  matters  connected  therewith.  There  have  been  a  number  of judgements 
by various courts that have adversely affected the powers of the Custodian and the Government of India   as  
provided  under  the  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968.  According  to  the  Ministry  of Home Affairs, the  
amendments to  the  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968,  a re  intended,  inter  alia ,  to  clarify various matters 
connected with enemy properties, which are vested i n the Custodian so that Custodian  is  able  to  fu nction  
more    effectively. 
 
 Historical   Background  
 According to background note as furnished by Minist ry of  Home  Affairs,  consequent  on  Chinese 
aggression in 1962, immovable properties,  cash  ba lances  and  firms  belonging  to  the  Chinese nat ionals 
were vested in the Custodian of  Enemy  Property  f or  India  under  the  Defence  of India Rules, 196 2. In 
the same way consequent to the aggression by Pakist an in 1965 and 1971,  immovable and some  specified   
movable  Pakistani  properties  in  India  were  ve sted  in  the  Custodian  of Enemy Property for  In dia  
under  the  powers  derived  from  the  Defence  of  India  Rules,  1962/  1971. 
 The principal Act called “the Enemy Property Act,  1968”  was  enacted  on  the  20th  August, 1968 for 
the administration and management of  the  Chinese  and  Pakistani  enemy  properties  which  were alr eady 
vested in the Custodian of Enemy  Property  for  In dia.  It  provides  for  the  continued  vesting of  enemy  
property  vested  in  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  for  India  under  the  Defence of India Rules, 1962 
and for matters connected  therewith.  The  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968  was amended  in  1977  to  gi ve  
effect  to  the  Standing  Order  No.  5511  dated  18 th    December,      1971. 
 
Role  and  Functions  of  Custodian  of  Enemy     Property  
 Explaining about the  role  of  custodian  the  Min istry  stated  that  the  powers  of  the  Custodia n in 
respect of enemy property vested in him is  given  under  Section  8  of  the  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968,   
which   reads   as under:- 
■ With respect to the property vested in the custodia n under this Act, the Custodian may     
take or authorise the  taking  of  such  measures  as  he  considers  necessary  or  expedient  
for preserving such property and where such propert y belongs to an individual  enemy 
subject, may incur such expenditure out of the prop erty as he considers necessary or 
expedient  for  the  maintenance  of  that  individual  or  of  his  family  in    India. 
■ Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoin g provision, the  Custodian  or  such  
person  as  may  be  specifically  authorized  by  him  in  this  behalf,  may  for  the  said 

2  
 
purpose, carry on the business  of  the  enemy;  make  action  for  recovering  any  money  
due  to  the  enemy; 
■ make any contract  and  execute  any  document  in  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  the 
enemy; 
■ institute, defend or continue any suit or other leg al proceeding, refer any dispute to  
arbitration  and  compromise  any  debts,  claims  or   liabilities; 
■ raise  on  the  security  of  the  property  such  loans  as  may  be       necessary; 
 
■ incur out of the property any expenditure including  the  payment  of  any  taxes,  duties, 
cesses and rates to Government or to any local auth ority and of any wages, salaries,  
pensions, provident fund contributions  to,  or  in   respect  of,  any  employee  of  the  
enemy and the repayment of any  debts  due  by  the   enemy  to  persons  other  than  
enemies; 
■ transfer by way of sale, mortgage or lease or  othe rwise  dispose  of  any  of  the  
properties; 
■ invest any moneys held by  him  on  behalf  of  ene mies  for  the  purchase  of  Treasury  
Bills or such other Government securities as may be  approved by the Central 
Government   for   the  purpose; 
■ make  payments  to  the  enemy  and  his    depende nts; 
 
■ make payments on  behalf  of  the  enemy  to  perso ns  other  than  those  who  are  enemies, 
of  dues  outstanding  on  the  25th  October,  196 2  [or  on  the  3rd  December,  1971];    
and 
■ make such other payments out of the funds of the en emy as  may  be  directed  by  the  
Central   Government. 
 The Ministry also stated that he is also being given more powers by adding following new provisions in  
the Enemy Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  S econd  Bill,  2010  in  Section  8  of  the  Enemy  
Property  Act,   1968: 
■ Secton 8 (2) (ia) “Fix and  collect  the  rent,  st andard  rent,  lease  rent,  licence  fee  or  
usage  charges,  as  the  case  may  be,  in  respect  of  enemy  property”;       and 
■ Section 8 (2) (iva)  “Secure  vacant  possession  o f  the  enemy  property  by  evicting  from 
the unauthorized or illegal occupant or trespasser and remove unauthorized or illegal 
constructions,   if  any.” 
 
Reasons   for  Amendments   in   Principal  Act  
 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs mentioned that in the  initial  stages,  the  Courts  were  supportive of  
the Government’s action and upheld the automatic ve sting of these properties in the Custodian of Enemy  
Property  (CEP)  and  restrained  themselves  from  interfering  in  the  orders passed by the Custodi an. Of  
late,  however,  there  have  been  various  judgments  by  various  High  Courts and the Supreme Cour t that 
had adversely affected the  powers  of  the  CEP  a nd  the Government of India under the Act. In  view   of  
such  interpretation  by  the  courts,  the  CEP  w as  finding it extremely difficult to sustain his a ctions 
which, inter  alia,  include  vesting  of  the  properties,  removal  of   unauthorized  encroachments  etc.,  in  
the  face  of  these       judgments. 

3  
 
Important   Decisions   of Courts  
According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, interpre tation of the  courts  about  various  
provisions of the Act  does  not  appear  to  be  i n  consonance  with  the  objects  of  the Act.  Th e  details 
of  some  of  the  important  decisions  of  courts  are  as      under: 
 Union  of  India  Vs  Raja  MAM  Khan  (Civil  Appeal  No.  2501  of    2002)  
The  Supreme  Court  has  held  in  this  case    that: 
(i) On the death of an “Enemy”, the property devolves i n  succession  and  ceases  to  be  
“Enemy  Property”  if  the  successor  is  a  citizen  of     India. 
(ii) The Enemy subject has the power  to  sell  the  pro perty  by  virtue  of  section  6  of  the  
Act. 
(iii) The Custodian has no right  or  title  in  the  pro perty  and  the  Enemy  continues  to  have 
the  right,  title  and  interest  in  the    property. 
(iv) Natural legal  heirs  and  successors,  who  are  “ Citizens  of  India”  would  be  entitled  to  
the  property  under  the  “Law  of     Succession”. 
(v) The Central Government  does  not  have  absolute  power  for  divesting  under  section-18 
of the Act and the power of the Court is not taken away to pass an appropriate order              
in a case where the property which vested  in  the  Custodian  ceases  to  be  Enemy  
Property. 
(vi) On divestment of the property,  the  divestee  woul d  be  entitled  to  the  actual  mesne  
profits  by  filing  a  suit,  if  so   advised. 
(vii) The Custodian’s power is limited to managing, prese rvation  and  control  of  Enemy  
Property  for  a  limited  purpose  and  for  a  temporary  period     only. 
 The Ministry further  informed  that  the  above  d ecision  was  given  on  21 st  October,  2005  by  the 
Supreme Court in the Special Leave Petition (Civil  Appeal)  filed  by  the  Union  of  India.  The  r eview 
petition filed by Union of India was also dismissed  on 16th December, 2005. Consequently,          the   
judgment  has  been  implemented. 
 Rameshwar Dayal  and  Ors  Vs.  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  for  India  &  Othe rs (Civil 
Misc. Writ  Petition  No.  4490  of  1976  connecte d  with  Civil  Misc.  Writ  Petition  No.4484 of  
1976.  
 In this case, the Allahabad High Court had held tha t there  is  no  provision  in  the  Act  or  Defen ce of 
India Rules, which empower the Custodian  of  Enemy   Property  to,  in  a  case  where  someone disput es 
that a particular property is an enemy property, ad judicate or to give  a  determinative finding on th e 
point in controversy. Likewise, there  is  no  prov ision  in  the Act  or  the Rules which empowers  t he  
Custodian  to  take  forcible  possession  of  any  property  which  he  claims  to have vested in  hi m  as  
enemy  property.  Whenever  such  controversy  is  raised,  it  has  to  be  resolved  by  raising  th e  issue  in  
appropriate  civil    proceedings. 
 In  this  case  no  appeal  was  filed  and  the  judgment  has  become     final. 
 Chandra  Madhab  Sen  and  Ors  Vs  Union  of  India  and  Ors.,  (Writ  Petition     No.15217  
(W)   of  2007  
 In this case, the Calcutta High  Court  had  held  that  it  is  evident  from  the  provisions  of  s ection 6 
of the Act that the exchange could be declared void   only  by  the  Central  Government  by making  an   
order  according  to  provisions  of  section  6  and  not  otherwise.  The  Assistant    Custodian 

4  
 
of Enemy Property, Government  of  India,  is  not  the  authority  to  declare  the  exchange  void.  Only  
the  Central  Government  is  competent  to  make  an  order  for  the      purpose. 
 In  this  case  no  appeal  was  filed  and  the  judgment  has  become     final. 
Ambu  Trikam  Parmar  Vs.  Union  of  India  &  Others  (Writ  Petition  No.  843  of      2009  
 In  this  case,  the  Bombay  High  Court  had  held  that  under  the  provisions  of  the  Act,  there  is no 
power in the CEP to evict  a  person  in  unauthori zed  occupation,  without  following  due procedure  
which is by instituting legal proceeding  or  such  steps  for  recovery  which  may  be available  in  law. 
 This case was decided on 5 th   February, 2010 and a review petition filed by the G overnment            is  
pending  and  the  decision  has  not  been   implemented. 
 Jeelani Begum and Others Vs. Union of  India  and  Others  (Writ  Petition  No.2 3835  of  1999  
and  Writ  Petition  No.8168  of    2006.  
 In  this  case,  the  High  Court  of  Andhra  Pradesh  had  held  as    under: 
( i ) In the light of the ratio laid down by the Supreme  Court  in  Raja  Mohd. Amir  Mohd. 
Khan’s case, it is  clear  that  the  vesting  in  the  Custodian  does  not  divest  the  right  of 
the enemy and what  was  contemplated  under  the  Act  was  only  temporary  vesting  in  
the Custodian which is limited  to  the  extent  of   possession,  management  and  control  
over the enemy property temporarily. Section 18 of the Act provides for divesting the 
Custodian of  such  property.  The  Central  Govern ment  is  empowered  to  make  such  
order   under   Section 18. 
( i i ) In the case on hand, it is apparent that the Centra l Government had failed to exercise        
such discretion conferred  under  Section  18  of  the  Act.  The  impugned  order  is  not  
only cryptic but also without application of  mind  to  any  of  the  relevant  factors.  The  
only reason assigned in the impugned order that the  property being the enemy properly  
cannot  be  divested  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  is  contrary  to  the  scope  and  object  
of Section 18 read with the other provisions of  th e  Act  as  explained  by  the  Supreme 
Court in Raja Mohd. Amir Khan’s case. Hence the  im pugned  order  is  liable  to  be  set 
aside  on  that  ground   alone. 
( i i i ) Accordingly the Central Government is directed to c onsider the representation of the 
petitioners afresh and pass appropriate orders in a ccordance with law in terms of  the  
decision of the Supreme Court in Raja Mohd. Amir Mo hd Khan’s case as expeditiously        
as possible preferably within a period of three mon ths from the date of receipt of this       
order after affording due opportunity  to  the  pet itioners  to  substantiate  their  right,  title 
and  interest  in  respect  of  the  property  in     question. 
 In this case, Central  Government  has  decided  in   July,  2008  to  divest  the  property  to  the  legal 
heirs of Mrs. Jeelani Begum. However, the  actual  divestment  of  the  property  has  yet  to  take p lace  as  
the  matter  regarding  production  of  succession  certificate  by  the  legal  heirs  is     sub-judice . 
 
 The  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Ordinance,      2010  
 The Ministry while giving justification for issuing  the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) 
Ordinance, 2010 stated that in the above explained  circumstances,  it  had  become  necessary to amen d 
the  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968,  with  retrospective  effect  to,  inter  alia,  clarify  the legislative intention. 
The Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordin ance, 2010 was promulgated  on  the  2 nd    day  of  
July,  2010,    providing:- 

5  
 
➢ That the enemy property  shall  continue  to  vest  in  the  Custodian  till  it  is  divested  by 
the Central Government, even if the enemy subject o r enemy firm ceases to be enemy        
due to death, extinction, winding up  of  business  or  change  of  nationality  or  that  the  
legal heir or successor is a citizen of India or a citizen  of  a  country  which  is  not  an 
enemy; 
➢ To authorise the Custodian,  after  making  such  e nquiry  as  he  deems  necessary,  to  
declare that  the  property  of  the  enemy  or  th e  enemy  subject  or  the  enemy  firm  vest  
in him under the aforesaid Act and issue a certific ate to that effect  which  would  be  
evidence  of  the  facts  stated    therein; 
➢ That the  transfer  of  any  enemy  property  shall   not  include  any  transfer,  or  any  claim  
of transfer, made through oral will or oral gift, o r, by concealment  of enemy  
nationality, or, in case the transfer of such  prop erty  requires  the  permission  of  the  
Reserve Bank of India or any other competent author ity, any transfer without such 
permission,  or,  without  the  permission  of  the     Custodian; 
➢ That no court shall have jurisdiction to order dive stment  from  the  Custodian  of  the  
Enemy Property vested in him under the aforesaid Ac t or direct the Central 
Government to divest such property from the Custodi an, but the court  shall  have  
jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  whether  the  propert y  claimed  to  be  vested  in  the  Custodian  
is  an  enemy  property  or   not; 
➢ To authorise  the  Central  Government  to  direct  that  any  or  all  enemy  property  vested  
in the Custodian  under  the  aforesaid  Act  shall   be  sold  or  disposed  of  in  such  manner 
as   may   be prescribed; 
➢ That any transfer or any other  action  taken  cont rary  to  the  provisions  of  the  aforesaid 
Act,  as  amended  by  the  proposed  legislation,  would  be  null  and     void. 
 In order to have speedy and effective eviction of u nauthorised occupants  from  the  enemy  property 
under the Custodian, the Public  Premises  (Evictio n  of  Unauthorised  Occupants)  Act,  1971 was  al so  
amended  by  the  aforesaid  Ordinance  so  as  to  declare  the  Custodian,  Deputy  Custodian  and Assistant 
Custodian of  enemy  property  appointed  under  th e  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968  as  “Estate  Office r”  in  
respect  of  the  enemy     properties. 
 The Enemy Property (Amendment And Validation) Bill,  2010 And  The  Enemy Property   
(Amendment  And   Validation)   Second   Bill, 2010 
 The Enemy Property (Amendment and  Validation)  Bill,  2010  was  introduced  in  the  Lok  Sabha on 
the 2nd August, 2010  to  replace  the  Ordinance.  This  Bill  was  not  passed  by  the  House  and 
consequently the ordinance lapsed on 6th September,  2010. In the circumstances,  the  Government 
withdrew the aforesaid Bill and  introduced  the  S econd  Bill.  The  Ministry  explaining  about the 
circumstances that led to the introduction of the E nemy  Property  (Amendment  and Validation) Second 
Bill, 2010 stated that the Second Bill inter alia, provides for  the  following,  in  addition  to  th e  provisions  
mentioned  in  paragraphs  1.6.1  and  1.6.2  above,      namely:- 
➢ That the enemy  property  will  be  divested  only  to  the  owner  or,  if  the  owner  is  dead, 
to any lawful heir and that the claimant shall have  to establish, in accordance with the      
law,  that  he  is  the  lawful   heir; 
➢ That any enemy property divested from the Custodian  to any person  under  the  
provisions of the Enemy Property Act, 1968, as it  stood  immediately  before  2nd  July, 
2010, shall stand transferred to and vest or contin ue to vest, free from all 
encumbrances,  in  the  Custodian.  If,  however,  the  enemy  property  had  been      divested 

6  
 
from the  Custodian  by  a  valid  order  made  und er  section  18  prior  to  2nd  July,  2010  
or where the  property  had  been  returned  to  th e  owner  or  his  lawful  heir  by  an  order 
of a  court  and  the  Government  is  satisfied  t hat  the  property  was  returned  to  the 
owner or the lawful heir, such enemy property would  continue to remain  with  such  
persons; 
➢ That nothing contained in this Act  shall  affect  the  claim  made  by  any  person  before  
any court or other authority against  the  owner  o r  his  lawful  heir  to  whom  the  
property was or may be returned under this Act and such claim shall be decided in 
accordance  with  law  by  the  court  or  other  authority,  as  the  case       be; 
➢ To empower  the  Central  Government  to  issue  ap propriate  orders,  within  a  period  of  
six months from the date on which the proposed legi slation receives the assent of the 
President, to remove  any  difficulty  which  may  arise  in  giving  effect  to  the  provisions 
of the Act during the period beginning on the date on which the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010 ceased t o operate and ending 
immediately before the date on which the Enemy Prop erty (Amendment and Validation) 
Second  Bill,  2010  receives  the  assent  of  the  President;     and 
➢ To provide that anything  done  or  any  action  ta ken  under  the  Enemy  Property  Act,  
1968, or the Public Premises (Eviction of  Unauthor ised  Occupants)  Act,  1971,  as  
amended by the proposed legislation,  shall  be  de emed  to  have  been  done  or  taken  
under the corresponding provisions of those Acts, a s amended by the proposed  
legislation. 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs further stated that these proposed amendments will have retrospective  
effect  and  come  into  force  from  the  2nd  day  of  July,  2010  unless  otherwise provided. 

 
7  
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
PRESENTATION OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME  AFFAIRS  
 
 Oral   Evidence   of   Home Secretary  
 The Committee in its meeting held on 2 nd February, 2011 heard the presentation of the Home S ecretary 
on the Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Seco nd Bill, 2010.  The  Custodian  of Enemy Property 
was also present in the sittings. Besides, the Law  Secretary  and  the  Legislative  Secretary also attended the 
meetings to clarify the legal and legislative queries, respectively, of the Members. 
 The Custodian of Enemy Property, Mumbai made a pres entation before the Committee. He elaborated 
on the Laws/Rules/Notifications governing enemy pro perties; definition of enemy national      for  the   
purpose  of  enemy  properties  and  what  constitu ted  enemy  property;  constraints/issues  in   fin al 
settlement  of  enemy  property;  duties  and  powe rs  of  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  of  In dia; 
various decisions/judgments  of  Courts  on  the  i ssue  and  difficulties  faced  in  the  management  of   
enemy  properties. 
 The CEP reiterated the objectives sought to be achieved by the proposed Bill  which  were  provided  by  
the  Ministry  in  the  Background  Note,  already  detailed  in  Chapter-I  of  the      report. 
 
 Views  of  the  Union  Home    Secretary  
 Explaining about the reasons for introduction of th e Second Bill, the Home Secretary, during      his 
evidence tendered before the committee  on  2  February,  2011  stated  that  there  were  a  large  n umber of 
lacunae in the original Enemy Property Bill as it did not have various provisions which       would enable the 
Custodian of Enemy Property to have title and  to  dispose  of  the  properties.  Subsequent to that,  the  
Supreme  Court  judgment  also  held,  that  even  though  the  property  is  vested in the Government ,  as  
soon  as  the  enemy  died,  the  enemy’s  son  is  no  longer  an  enemy.  That  is,  in one sense, the Supreme  
Court  said  that  the  enemy’s  son  cannot  be  treated  as  an  enemy  and  he has his own legal rights under 
the Constitution. The Home Secretary  went  on  to  read  the  salient  features  of  the  Supreme  Co urt    
judgment: 
■ On the death of an ‘Enemy’, the property devolves  in  succession  and  ceases  to  be  
“Enemy  Property”  if  the  successor  is  a  citizen  of     India. 
■ The Enemy subject has the power  to  sell  the  pro perty  by  virtue  of  Section  6  of  the  
Act. 
■ The Custodian has no right  or  title  in  the  pro perty  and  the  Enemy  continues  to  have 
the  right,  title  and  interest  in  the    property. 
■ Natural legal heirs and successors who are “Citizen s of India” would be entitled to the 
property   under   the   “Law   of Succession”. 
■ The Central Government  does  not  have  absolute  power  for  divesting  under  Section  18 
of the Act and the power of the Court is not taken away to pass an appropriate order              
in a case where the property which vested  in  the  Custodian  ceases  to  be  Enemy  
Property. 
 
7 

8  
 
■ On divestment of the property,  the  divestee  would  be  entitled  to  the  actual  mesne  
profits  by  filing  a  suit,  if  so   advised. 
■ And, lastly, the Custodian’s power is limited to managing, preservation and Control of 
Enemy  Property  for  a  limited  purpose  and  for  a  temporary  period     only. 
 The Home Secretary further stated that it was in vi ew of this and the related High Court  judgements 
which also said that  there  is  no  provision  in  the  Act  or  the  Defence  of  India  Rules  whic h empowers 
the Custodian of Enemy Property in  a  case  where  someone  disputes  that  a  particular property is  an 
enemy property or not,  to  adjudicate  or  give  a  determined  finding  on  that issue. The courts also felt that 
there is no provision  in  the  Act  or  Rules  whi ch  empowers  the Custodian  to  take  forcible  po ssession  
of  any  property  which  he  claims  to  have  vested  in  him  as   an  Enemy  Property. 
 The Home Secretary, during his further evidence ten dered before the Committee on 20 May,   2011, 
stated that it would be no exaggeration  to  say  that  this  subject  of  enemy  property  has  been given a  low  
priority  in  the  Ministry.  On  a  question  as  to  why  was  this  earlier  with  the  Ministry  o f Commerce 
and how come it was transferred in 2007 to the Mini stry of Home Affairs, the Home Secretary stated tha t 
there  was  a  custodian  of  Enemy  Firms,  and  a lso  a  Custodian  of  Enemy  Trading. Therefore, i n the 
earlier orders, it was not only the Custodian of En emy Property but also             he had an additio nal charge 
of  Custodian  of  Enemy  Firms  and  the  Custodia n  of  Enemy  Trading.  Now, with the enactment of the 
Act and the Defence of India Rules not being in  force,  he  is  the Custodian   of   Enemy Property. 
 The Home Secretary went on to say that  there  was  nothing  in  it  to  be  dealt  by  the Commerce 
Ministry, because Commerce Ministry was  dealing  w ith  trade.  It  was  found  that  there  were a la rge 
number of properties all over India and the  Commer ce  Ministry  felt  that  the  Home  Ministry deals  with 
the State Governments and, therefore, Home Ministry  would be much  more  competent to deal with this 
issue. That is why the  proposal  was  made  and  d iscussed  in  the Committee of Secretaries.  The  
Committee  of  Secretaries  agreed  and  then  the  Rules  of  Business  were amended in the Government  of  
India,  transferring  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Pr operty Act,  from the  Commerce  Ministry  to  the  Home  
Ministry  and  then  the  files  were  transferred  in      2007. 
 The Home Secretary agreed that the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  was  still  getting  a  very  low  
priority.  It  was  partly  because  the  office  was  located  in  Mumbai.  It  is  an  office  where   there  is just 
one officer and one Assistant Custodian of Enemy Pr operty based at Kolkata  and  the  rest  consisting  of 
two Superintendents and clerks. So, basically,  it  is  a  two-officer  establishment.  One  officer  is  in  
Mumbai  and  one  is  in   Kolkata. 
 He also felt that looking at all issues and  the  i nformation  that  has  come  out  as  a  result  -  partly 
because of Committee’s examination of the Bill -  t here  is  a  vacuum  in  the  entire  system  in wh ich the 
Custodian of  Enemy  Property  acts.  One  is  the  staffing  pattern,  which  is  abysmally  low. He informed 
the Committee  that  they  are  taking  steps  to  fill  up  the  vacancies,  create  posts,  and  tak e  the  
prolonged  contract  appointments.  He  was  also  of  the  opinion  that  for  getting  the  details  of the 
properties, writing  to  the  State  Governments,  is  not  going  to  work.  They  will  have  to  ap point, 
perhaps,  Tehsildars,  Revenue  Inspectors,  villag e  officers  and  constitute  special  teams  in  e ach of the 
State.  They  would  look  at  the  concerned  revenue  records,  etc.,  because  in  the  districts all the officers 
are busy doing their routine work; and, asking them  to give some information about        what  was  d one  
years  ago,  is  not,  again,  the  State  Government’s      priority. 
 Explaining about the actions taken in Pakistan and  China,  the  Home  Secretary  stated  that  unlike  
with reference to Pakistan, where it seized  proper ties  of  Indians  there  and  sold  them,  China n ever  
seized  any  property  of  any  Indian  in  China;  and,  a  policy  decision  will  have  to  be       taken 

9  
 
whether in the light of the fact that post-1962, th ey did not seize any property of Indians, whether             
we  need  to  seize  the  properties  of  Chinese.  Those  are  policy  issues  that  we  will  have  to  examine. 
 In  regard  to  some  issues  raised  by  the  Members,  the  Home  Secretary  stated  as       under: 
“whether the Custodian of the enemy property be the re in perpetuity; whether the Custodian         
of the enemy property should not have a finite  exi stence;  it  takes  into  account  the  
properties, decides whether the properties have to be given to somebody, and rest of  the  
properties are sold, the money is put into a Trust,  decides that 75 per cent of what was due           
to those who  came  from  Pakistan  and  were  give n  only  25  per  cent  of  their  losses,  subject   
to ceiling, look at it and pay  them  75  per  cent;  then,  the  balance,  which  is  there,   maybe,  
goes  back  into  the  Consolidated  Fund  and,  th en,  close  this  office  once  and  for  all.”  
 When the Chairman sought the view of Secretary, Dep artment of Legal Affairs, on the apprehension of 
the Committee  as  to  whether  the  Bill  would  w ithstand  the  judicial  review  or  not,  the  Sec retary  
opined  as   under: 
“all the orders passed by the administrative author ities are  subject  to  judicial  review.  The  
power of the High Courts and the Supreme Court cann ot be taken away  by  any  statute.  
Therefore, every order passed by any authority, whe ther  in  the  Central  Government  or  the  
State Government, are subject  to  judicial  review .  Whatever  orders  are  passed,  all  of  them  
can be scrutinized by the court in exercising the p owers under articles 226 and 227,  and  
sometimes wherever the Fundamental Rights are infri nged, the Supreme Court can also take 
cognizance under article 32 of the Constitution.  S o  far  as  appeal  is  concerned,  it  is  a  
statutory remedy. Unless a statute provides for an appeal,  appeal  cannot  lie  to  the  higher  
court.  But  for  writ  jurisdiction  or  the  power  of  court  to  take  judicial  review  under  articles  
226 and 227, this cannot be taken away. This is the  basic  structure  of  the  Constitution.  
Therefore,   it   cannot   be infringed.”  
 On a query by the  Convenor  of  Sub-Committee  as  to  how  long  it  would  take  to  complete  the 
processing of cases, the Custodian of Enemy Propert y  stated  that  1,230  are  pending  as  process c ases, 
which are under  inquiry.  Reiterating  what  the  Home  Secretary  stated  the  Custodian  of Enemy 
Property agreed that there  are  infrastructure  an d  manpower  problems.  He  went  on  to  add  that , 
presently, no designated officer is in place in Mum bai Office of Custodian, who can give an opportunit y of 
hearing to the concerned people. They  had  expecte d  that  the  District  officials  would work for t hem but, 
unfortunately, the result was not  that  encouragin g.  The  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  further  s tated  
that,  now,  in  principle,  a  post  of  Deputy  Custodian  has  been  created,  who  is expected to pursue these  
matters  quickly  to  get  the  desired  reports  f rom  the  District  Authorities and take a decision on this. He, 
therefore, informed the Committee that this process  may take three            to  four  years,  becaus e  they  
have  to  provide  opportunities  to  the  concerned        persons. 
 The Home Secretary  further  added  that  they  were  going  to  increase  the  manpower  strength of the 
Custodian of Enemy Property. The proposal  is  with   the  Ministry  of  Finance.  For  the  time  bein g, they 
have asked them that they may take  some  people  o n  contract  basis.  By  September,  the Home Secre tary 
hoped  to  have  all  the  people  in  position  an d  thereafter  they  would  begin  the process  of  issuing  
notices,  hearing  the  parties,      etc. 
 The process of determining whether a property is En emy Property is stated  to  have  been  expedited 
during 2009-10 and 2010-11 culminating  into  identification  and  vesting  of  149  properties. The M inistry 
was asked about the time  when  the  process  has  been  carried  out  and  the  modus  operandi  thereof,  the  
Ministry  replied  as   under: 
“The process of verification  and  identification  of  the  enemy  properties  is  going  on  for  a  
long period due to absence of conclusive reports fr om the district authorities. The custodian  

1
0 
 
 
has expedited the matter in recent years  by  issui ng  notices  in  some  cases  directly  where  
partial reports/representations were made and order s were passed by him after affording 
opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  concerned    parties.”  
 The Home Secretary felt that  the  Courts  have  ta ken  the  word  ‘custodian’  to  mean  that  he  wa s 
only keeping custody and the property belongs  to  somebody  else.  The  Home  Ministry,  according to  
Home Secretary, says that once it is an enemy prope rty, it belongs to the  Central  Government. The Ce ntral 
Government will then  auction  it  off  and  distribute  it  to  the  people  who  have otherwise suffered by the 
enemy  action.  The  Home  Secretary  added  that  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  is,  actually,   the  
owner  of  the  enemy  property  and,  therefore,  they  do  not  want    the enemy property to be giv en back 
to other people, because  then,  there  is  no  way ,  one  can compensate the people  who  have  other wise  
suffered,  the  Indians  who  have  suffered  as  e nemy,  whose properties have been taken over. He fu rther  
stated  that  it  was  not  to  give  benefit  to  any  specific individual or otherwise. It  is  with  reference  to  a  
particular  Supreme  Court  Judgment  which had bee n made earlier. It was  suggested  to  make  this  Act  
retrospective  and  not  affect  those  who  have a lready complied with the decision of the Supreme Co urt. 
Subject to final  verification,  the  Custodian say s that wherever they  have  taken  a  decision  tha t  the  
property  is  not  an  enemy property,  those  prop erties  have  been  returned;  but  wherever  they  have  
taken  a  decision  that  it  is   an  enemy  property,  those  properties  continue  to  remain  with      them. 
 On a query as to whether rents were being received and people were staying in the enemy properties, 
the Custodian of Enemy Property informed the Commit tee that the  properties  are  immovable properties . 
Particularly,  in  immovable  properties,  there  m ust  have  been  some  resident  even before the ve sting 
took place.  So  most  of  the  premises  are  tena nted  even  before  the  vesting  took  place,  and ,  as  such,  
the  tenants  and  occupants  are  only  paying  at  the  old  rates  of  rentals.    He further stated that  where  it  
could  have  been  possible,  nominal  increases  have  been  made  in  rents. 
 According to Custodian of Enemy Property, most of t he properties  with  the  Custodian  are  mainly of  
Pakistan. He felt that it was Government of India’s  reprisal action. When Pakistan took  properties of   
Indians,  in  reprisal  thereto,  Government  of  I ndia  issued  a  notification  and  issued orders t o take 
control of properties. He further stated  that  whe n  Defence  of  India  Rules  expired,  Enemy   Pro perty  
Act   was  made. 
 The Convenor referring to the  background  note  an d  pointing  out  to  the  words  ‘till  a  decisio n is 
taken for  extinguishment  of  the  Act’,  queried  as  to  whether  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs would  
foresee  a  time-frame  of  extinguishment  of  the  Act.  The  Home  Secretary  replied  that it might take five 
years’ time. If it is done in three or four years time when all the properties are      disposed  of  and  nothing  
is  left,  then  the  office  should  be     abolished. 
 The Convenor asked that if it may take two to  four   years  just  to  identify  whether  it  is  an en emy 
property or not, and  if  they  identify  that  the   properties  are  enemy  properties,  then  what  would  
happen?  The  Home  Secretary  stated  that  a  pol icy  decision  will  be  taken  as  to  what  is  t o   be  done  
with   this. 
 When asked as to whether there was any cash in custody, the Custodian of Enemy Property     stated that 
presently, approximately  Rs.270  crore  had  been  collected  by  way  of  income  in  cash.  They we re 
investing it in Treasury Bills and  were  in  the  process  of  identifying  Government securities  wh ere  
they  can  invest    it. 
 
 Application  of  Land  Reforms  Laws,  Land  Ceiling  Acts  etc.  to  the        Divestee  
 The written replies received from the Ministry on s ome of the queries are given in succeeding    paras .  
One  of   the  Members  asked  the  Home  Secretary   as   to   whether  other  laws,  i.e. ,       Land 

11   
 
Reforms Laws, Land Ceiling Act etc.  shall  apply  to  the  divestee  after  divestment  of  the  prop erty.  
The  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  in  the  written  reply  stated  as    under: 
“The enemy properties vested in the Custodian are n ot being subject to other laws of  the  
respective State Governments. However, as and when it is divested from the Custodian  and 
returned to the owner or his legal heir, all laws a pplicable to such  properties  shall  apply.  
Ministry  of  Law  has  been  requested  to  confirm  this     fact.”  
 Further the Ministry of Home Affairs  also  drew  a ttention  to  the  Section  22  of  Enemy  Property   
Act,  1968,  which  deals  with  the  effect  of  l aws  inconsistent  with  the  Act  as  under:- 
“The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwi thstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained  in  any  other  law  for  the  time  being  in     force.”  
 The Law Ministry was requested to furnish  its  com ments  on  the  case  of  conflict  between  State  
Acts  and  the  Central  Act.  They  replied  as    under:- 
“Under the Constitution of India, it  is  well-sett led  fact  that  where  there  is  overlapping  
between the Union List and  the  State  List,  the  Union  List  will  have  predominance.  Article  
246 (1) and (3) leave  no  manner  of  doubt  on  t his  account.  In  case  of  overlapping  between 
the Union  List  and  the  Concurrent  List,  again   the  Union  List  must  be  preferred.  In  short ,  
if any matter falls under an Entry in List I  and  also  in  List  II,  the  Entry  in  List  I  shall   
prevail. This is called the principle of federal su premacy. The federation has pre-dominant 
legislative  power.  The  State  and  Concurrent  List  are  subordinate  to    it.”  
 The Ministry in its written reply to a query asked by a Member about the effect of the new amendments  
on  the  properties  of  Shri  M.A.M.  Khan,  stated  as      under:- 
“By virtue of provision in Section  26  (1)  (b)  o f  the  proposed  Enemy  Property  (Amendment 
and Validation) Second Bill,  after  it  is  passed ,  Shri  M.A.M  Khan  will  be  able  to  apply  to   
the Central  Government  for  release  of  the  pro perties  in  his  favour  by  producing  evidence  
of his being legal heir. It may also be noted that  the  validity  of  the  Enemy  Property  
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010  and  ac tion  of  re-vesting  of  the  properties  in  
the Custodian, has been challenged  by  Shri  M.A.M   Khan  before  Delhi  High  Court  in  W.P.  
No.  5288/2010.  The  matter  is    sub-judice.”  
 When the Ministry was asked  about  the  impact  of   the  proposed  amendments  on  the  cases,  the 
Ministry stated that in the past a number of enemy  properties  were  divested  by  Central Government  in 
terms of the orders of the Supreme Court/High Court s and by  virtue  of  the  Enemy Property (Amendmen t 
and Validation)  Ordinance,  2010,  which  is  prop osed  to  be  replaced  by  the  Bill in question,  all  these  
properties  stand  re-vested  in  the  Custodian.  The  Ministry  has  further  stated that a provisio n is being 
made in the Bill that claims of owner or their lega l  heirs  may  be considered  by  the  Government  by  
virtue  of  the  proviso  made  under  Section       26(1)(b). 
 The Ministry also mentioned that a number of cases are on-going before various courts and    issues 
raised are  regarding  the  status  of  the  proper ty  or  divestment  of  the  property  on  the  ana logy of the 
Supreme  Court  judgement  in  Shri  M.A.M.  Khan  case  and  the  proposed  amendments  will  have 
impact on these cases as they may become infructuou s to the extent  law  has  been  amended.  Besides,  a 
number of claims have been made before the Central  Government  or  the  Custodian  for release of the  
properties based on the court judgements. Such  req uests  will  be  dealt  with  in accordance   with   the   
amended  provisions. 
 The Ministry was also asked whether the Bill is an  outcome  of  the  Supreme  Court  judgement in 
Raja Mehmoodabad case and how many people  are  going  to  be  affected  by  its enactment,  the  Mini stry  
replied  as    follows:- 

1
2 
 
 
“The properties of  Shri  M.A.M  Khan  had  been  d ivested  back  in  2005  pursuant  to  the 
orders  of  the  Supreme  Court.  The  Bill  is  an   outcome  of  various  complexities  created  over   
a period of time including the judgements of variou s courts  including  that  of  the  Supreme  
Court. The role of the Custodian had been diluted c onsiderably  and  it  defeated  the  very  
purpose, for which the properties were vested in hi m in 1965 . The amendment to the Enemy 
Property Act, 1968 is necessitated to overcome  these  difficulties  as  also  to  enable  and 
empower the Central Government to divest properties  in certain cases and order for disposal  
where  there  are  no  claimants.”  
 
 Effect   of   Proposed   Amendments   on Tenants/Occupants  
 
 The Ministry was asked about the protection of the rights of tenants/occupants in case the  properties   
are  divested  and  returned  to  the  owners  or  legal  heirs,  the  Ministry  drew  the  attention  of the 
Committee to the following Specific provisions to t his effect Section  26  (2)  proposed  to  be inser ted  in  
the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,   2010:- 
“Nothing contained in  this Act  shall  affect  any   claim  made  by  any  person  before  any  court 
or other authority  against  the  owner  or  his  l awful  heir  to  whom  the  property  was  or  may 
be returned under this Act and such claim  shall  b e  decided  in  accordance  with  law  by  the 
court  or  other  authority,  as  the  case  may    be.”  
 The Ministry further stated that  the  Supreme  Cou rt  had  appointed  Justice  D.P.  Wadhwa,  retired  
Judge of the  Supreme  Court  to  consider  the  cl aims  of  the  tenants  out  of  the  properties,  which were 
earlier  divested  in  favour  of  Shri  M.A.M.  Kh an.  Justice  Wadhwa  submitted  his  report  in th e 
Supreme Court upholding  the  claim  of  the  tenan ts  except  in  two  cases.  Shri  M.A.M.  Khan  ha s  
challenged  the  report  in  the  Supreme  Court  and  the  matter  is      sub-judice . 
 The Ministry was also asked about the legal remedies in case the property,  which  is  to  be divested   is  
under  adverse  possession,  the  Ministry  opined  as     under:- 
“In the Bill under consideration, powers of  Estate   Officer  under  the  Public  Premises  
(Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 are proposed to be delegated to the  
Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant Custodian  to remove unauthorised 
encroachments.”  
 
 Double  Compensation  
 
 Late Raja MA Ahmad Khan, father of MAM Khan,  migra ted  to  Pakistan  after  partition.  In 1965, 
war with Pakistan made all such properties  left  b y  the  migrants  declared  as  “Enemy  Property”. It was 
also mentioned that the erstwhile Raja of Mehmoodab ad was reported to be made       High  Commissioner   
in  London,  where  he  died  in    1973. 
 The Ministry was asked to furnish information regar ding whether father of Shri MAM Khan       was 
compensated by Pakistani Government  in  return  fo r  the  properties  he  left  in  India.  The Minis try  
replied  as  under:- 
“If a person has got compensation from the Governme nt of enemy  country,  for  the  
properties vested  in  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  P roperty  for  India,  no  divestment  and  return  
of the properties vested  in  the  Custodian  may  be  permissible  However,  it  is  submitted  that  
the Government of India has no information  or  com munication  regarding  any  compensation 
paid by the enemy country to  erstwhile  Raja  of  Mehmoodabad,  his  wife  and  Shri  M.A.M  
Khan. Ministry of External Affairs has been request ed to confirm this fact from Government          
of   Pakistan   through   Diplomatic   channels also.”  

13   
 
 The Ministry earlier informed that Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs  has  responded  back  that  no report   
has  been  received  in  this    regard. 
 
 Definition   of  Successor  
 The Ministry was asked whether it is only son or da ughter or it is  upto  grandson  and  grand daughte r 
or  is  it  includes  generations  also  as  succes sors,  the  Ministry  stated  that  for  the  purpo ses  of a claim 
by legal heir, following provision has been made in the Section 18 in the Enemy Property (Amendment  and  
Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010:- 
“The Central Government may, by general or special order,  direct that any enemy property  
vested in the Custodian under  this  Act  and  rema ining  with  him  shall  be  divested  from  him 
and be returned, in such manner, as may be prescrib ed, to the owner thereof or,  if  the  owner       
is dead, to any lawful heir of the  owner  in  acco rdance  with  the  law  of  succession 
applicable to that owner, as may be specified in the direction, and thereupon  such property       
shall  cease  to  vest  in  the  Custodian  and  shall  re-vest  in  such  owner  or     heir.”  
“Provided that any person, claiming to be the lawfu l heir of the  owner,  shall  obtain  a  
succession certificate or a declaration to the  eff ect  that  he  is  the  lawful  heir  of  the  owne r 
from a court of competent  jurisdiction  in  a  civ il  proceeding  instituted  for  that  purpose  and  
the Central Government shall ordinarily accept  suc h  certificate  or  declaration,  as  the  case  
may  be.”  
 
 Jurisdiction   of  Courts  
 The judicial review is the basic feature of the Constitution which has been entrusted to the constitutional 
courts, namely, the Supreme  Court  and  the  High  Courts  under  Art.  32  and  Arts.  226 and 227 o f the 
Constitution respectively. It is the constitutional  duty and responsibility of  the constitutional cou rts, as 
assigned  under  the  Constitution,  to  maintain  the  balance  of  power  between the  legislative,  the  
executive  and  the   judiciary. 
 By  inserting  new  section,  Section  18B,  Govern ment  desires  to  put  bar  on  the  jurisdiction  of 
courts in the matter of divesting to the effect  th at  no  court  shall  have  jurisdiction  to  order   divestment 
from the CEP. The  Committee  in  this  background  asked  whether  this  would  not  be  against  the   basic  
structure  of  the     Constitution. 
 The Ministry maintained that the insertion of new s ection in the Act is within  the constitutional 
framework and  is  in  consonance  with  the  objec ts  of  the  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968.  In the E nemy 
Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 20 10 it has been provided that the   courts shall hav e 
jurisdiction to adjudicate whether the  property  c laimed  to  be  vested  in  the Custodian is an ene my 
property or not. However, the courts shall have  no   jurisdiction  to  order  divestment from the  Cus todian  
of  enemy  property  vested  in  him  or  direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  property  from  the     
Custodian. 
 The opinion of Law Ministry was sought on the  issue,  they  furnished  their  comments  as  under:- 
“The Supreme Court in the case  of  L.  Chandra  Ku mar  Vs.  UoI,  AIR  1997  SC  1125,  held  
that the power of judicial review  over  legislativ e  action  vested  in  the  High  Court  under  
article 226 and in Supreme Court under Article 32 and the power vested in the High Court            
to exercise judicial superintendence over the decis ion of all courts and tribunals within their 
jurisdiction form an integral and essential feature  and basic structure of the Constitution. 
Ordinarily, the power of Supreme Court and High Cou rt  to  test  the  constitutional  validity  
cannot be ousted. The Court held “we hold that clau se 2(d) of Art. 323-A and Clause 3 (d)  

1
4 
 
 
of Art. 323-B, to the extent they exclude the juris diction of the high courts and the Supreme      
Court  under  Arts.  226,  227  and  32  of  the  Constitution,  are      unconstitutional”.  
 The Law Ministry further added that though  Art.  2 27  is  identified  as  a  part  of  basic structur e of 
the Constitution. The subordinate judiciary or Trib unals created under  ordinary  legislations cannot 
exercise the power of judicial review of legislativ e action to the exclusion of the      High  Courts  and  the  
Supreme  Court,  there  is  no  constitutional  pro hibition  against  their  performing  a supplementa l- as 
opposed to a substitutional role in this respect. T hat such  a  situation  is  contemplated within the  
constitutional scheme becomes evident  when  one  analyses  clause  (3)  of  Article  32  of  the  Constitution  
which  reads  as    under:- 
“Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the S upreme Court by  clause  1  and  2,  
Parliament may by law empower any other Court to ex ercise within the local limits of its 
jurisdiction  all  or  any  of  the  powers  exercisable  by  the  Supreme  Court  under  clause     (2) ” 
 After giving  abovementioned  explanations,  the  Law  Ministry  maintained  that  judicial  review is  an  
essential  feature  of  the  Constitution  and  cannot  be  restricted  by  constitutional       amendment. 

 
15   
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE  GOVERNMENTS ON THE   BILL  
 
 Background  
 The sub-Committee on  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendm ent  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010 at its 
first sitting held on 11 th May, 2011 decided to seek written comments  of  all   the  State  Governments, 
wherever enemy properties are situated in the first  instance and  also,  if felt  necessary, to hear t he 
Chief Secretaries, Home Secretaries and other  conc erned  officials  of  the concerned  State  Governm ents  
on  the    Bill. 
 The Chief Secretaries concerned were accordingly re quested to send comments on  the provisions of 
the Bill latest by 10 
th June, 2011, and also reminded on 22 nd June, 2011 to send their  comments latest by 30 th 
June, 2011. Only five States sent their views on th e Bill. Thereafter the sub-Committee in its sitting  held on 
19 th   July, 2011 heard the Chief Secretary, Goa and on 27 th   July,    2011,  the  Chief  Secretaries  of  Delhi,   
West  Bengal  and  Uttar  Pradesh.  The  Chief  Sec retary,  NCT   of Delhi was again heard on 10 th October, 
2011. The views  of  the  State/UT  Governments  are  as  follows:- 
 
Views  of  Government  of  UT  of  Daman  and    Diu  
 The Government of UT of Daman and Diu in its writte n comments stated  that  it  had  no  objection  to   
the  proposed  amendments  in  the   Bill. 
 
Views  of  Government  of  UT  of  Andaman  and  Nicobar    Islands  
 The UT Government in its  written  comments  stated   that  there  is  one  case  pertaining  to  House  
Property No. 83 at Aberdeen Bazar, Port Blair  whic h  is  being  contested  by  the  interested  perso n in the 
District Court. The UT Government expressed its agr eement with the  proposed amendments in the Bill 
and stated that the Administration initiated action  to adopt instructions issued       by the Governme nt of 
India and the Deputy  Secretary  (Rev.),  A&N  Admi nistration  has  been appointed  Liaison  Officer  for  
all  matters  related  to  Enemy     Property. 
 
Views   of   Government   of Meghalaya  
 The State Government stated that it has  no  object ion  to  the  proposed  amendment  of  the  Enemy 
Property Act, 1968 and  the  Central  Public  Premi ses  (Eviction  of  Unauthorized  Occupants)  Act,  1971  
proposed  in  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,     2010. 
 
Views  of  Government  of  West    Bengal  
 The State Government in its written  comments  stat ed  that  it  is  in  agreement  with  the proposed  
amendments to the Enemy Property Act, 1968 and the Public Premises (Eviction  of  Unauthorized 
Occupants) Act, 1971 proposed in the Enemy Property (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010. 
 The Sub-Committee in its sitting held on 27 th July,  2011,  heard  the  Chief  Secretary,  West  Bengal  on  
the Bill. 
 
15 

16   
 
 The Chief Secretary, West  Bengal while endorsing t he major provisions of the proposed Bill,   made   
the   following submissions:- 
■ West Bengal has 377 enemy properties spread over  1 3  districts  and  Kolkata.  In  
Kolkata, the number of enemy properties is 121 and in 13 districts taking together, the 
number of enemy properties is 256. Out  of  these,  the  income  receiving  properties  are 
165; the number of  declared  cases  is  19;  the  number  of  processed  cases  is  119  and  
the  number  of  court  cases  is    74. 
■ The District  Magistrates  are  the  Deputy  Custod ians  of  Enemy  Properties  and  they  
work  under  the  supervision  of  the  Custodian  of  Enemy      Property. 
■ Not much attention has been paid to this subject of  Enemy Property by the State  
Government, but now the matter is being reviewed  w ith  the  District  Magistrates.  The 
State Government has formed a Committee comprising Home Secretary, Land 
Commissioner  and  Inspector  General  of  Registration  to  review  the      issue. 
■ In  many  cases  rents  are  in  arrears.  The  Dis trict  Magistrates  have  been  instructed  to  
act in accordance with the guidelines  issued  by  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  as  
well as the Ministry of Home  Affairs,  that  there   should  not  be  any  registration  in  
respect  of  the  enemy  properties.  The  records  must  be  in  the  name  of  the  Custodian  
of   Enemy  Property. 
■ The State Government requires a little more  time  to  make  a  detailed  survey  of  the  
enemy properties in  the  State,  their  present  s tatus,  the  present  occupants  the  condition 
of   the   properties,  etc. 
■ The State  Government  is  in  agreement  with  var ious  provisions  of  the  Bill.  However,  
in Sections 20 (1) and 20 (2) of the original Act, there is no mention of the quantum              
of fine that can  be  imposed.  Therefore  the  qua ntum  of  punishment  and  fine  that  may 
be  imposed  for  violation  may  be  specified  in  the  proposed    legislation. 
■ Regarding explanation to Section 6  dealing  with  transfers  there  is  no  need  for  putting 
this explanatory clause because in Section 3, there   is  already  an  explanatory  clause  
saying, “It shall not include transfers through ora l will  or  oral  gift.”  This  will  alone  
render  all  the  transfers   invalid. 
 
Views  of  Government  of  Uttar    Pradesh  
 In its sitting held  on  27 th  July,  2011,  the  sub-Committee  heard  the  Chief   Secretary,  U.P.  on the 
Bill. The Chief Secretary, Uttar Pradesh suggested some modifications and made following  submissions   
before   the  sub-Committee:- 
■ The amendments proposed in the  Bill  in  Section  18  and  26  by  insertion  of  Section  
26(1) and provisos in Section  18,  lay  down  that   if  the  owner  of  the  enemy  property  
had been a citizen of this  country  since  birth  or  his  heir  had  been  a  citizen  by  birth  
and the heir establishes through the due process th at he is the successor to the enemy 
property, then, in these two cases, the property wo uld  automatically  re-vest  with  the  
owner  or  the  heir,  as  the  case  may    be. 
■ The Government of Pakistan in 1971 had sold all ene my properties and they had  not 
followed any of these procedures.  If  we  were  to   follow  the  principle  of  reciprocity,  
then, there should be no such provision being incor porated  here.  In  1965  Pakistan  
declared Emergency and issued orders for temporary take-over of all enemy  
properties.  But  in  1971  when  Emergency  was  again  declared  on  account  of  the     war 

17   
 
between India and Pakistan, they reintroduced that provision, but it was a permanent take-
over  of  all  enemy  properties  and  subsequently  they  actually  sold  them      out. 
■ By  virtue  of  the  Town  Improvement  Act,  which   came  into  existence  in  1919,  a  lot  
of properties were given on grant,  there  were  te nancies  and  not  leases,  to  Talukdars.  
The  tenancies  were  asked  to  build  houses  in  those  areas  for  purposes  of  residences   
of British officers, who used to live in European  style  on  a  payment  of  nominal  rent. 
These are the residences which  are  now  the  resi dences  of  the  DM,  SP  and  such  
officers.  These  properties  were  never  under  t heir  ownership;  these  properties  were  
only   under  tenancies. 
■ A lot of land which is claimed as land  belonging  to  Shri  M.A.M.  Khan  is  non-  
occupancy tenancy for which they have no title. A l ot  of  this  land  was  acquired  under 
Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and there  was  a  chal lenge  before  the  Civil  Judge  on  
amount of  compensation  about  these  lands.  Ther e  is  no  proprietorship  that  goes  with  
it. 
■ Raja of Mahmoodabad filed a case before the Civil J udge in 1984 primarily for getting       
the   succession  certificate. 
■ The provisions of Oudh Estate Act are different fro m the provisions of Personal Law 
applicable to Raja Mehmoodabad  as  a  member  of  a  particular  community.  In  Shariat,  
all the members of the family, including girls, are  successors, while in the Oudh Estate    
Act, the principle of primogeniture was applicable.  The eldest son succeeded  to  
preclusion of all others. So, he specifically menti oned in  his  plaint  that  this  case  was 
being presented before the Civil Court under the Ou dh Estate  Act  to  which  the 
provisions  of  CrPC  did  not   apply. 
■ Oudh  Estate  Act  is  in  existence.  It  has  not  been    repealed. 
■ In 1980, the Union Cabinet decided that 25% of all enemy properties will be returned           
to the owners or the heirs.  This  could  not  be  actually  implemented.  Therefore,  the  
parties filed a case before the Civil Judge, Luckno w, in which  only  the  Custodian  of 
Enemy Property was made a party. Three other  parti es  were  the  mother,  the  other  
plaintiff and two sisters. On that basis, for a lis t of properties, the Civil Court declared 
succession. The  Government  of  U.P.  was  not  ma de  a  party  to  that.  Subsequently,  
when this matter came up  before  the  Supreme  Cou rt,  on  the  basis  of  that  succession, 
the  custodian  was  not  in  a  position  to  transfer  25%  of  the      land. 
■ Based on that, a case was  filed  in  the  Supreme  Court  and  an  affidavit  was  filed  
wherein  a  long  list  of  the  property  was  att ached.  It  transpires  that  the  list  attached    
in the Supreme Court was different from the list fo r which  the  succession  had  been  
granted by the Civil Court. Therefore, it was not c overed under the dispensation of 
succession. However, in that case, the Supreme Cour t passed certain  orders,  but  those 
orders  are  now  under  review  and  the  Supreme  Court  is      reviewing. 
■ The State  Government  recommended  amendments  in  Section  18  and  the  amendments  
in Section 26(1), especially with respect to the se cond proviso  which  comes  after  sub-
clause 26(1)(b), as this amendment is not in  the  interest  of  the  State,  and  it  takes away 
the properties which  are  vested  in  the  Custodi an  and  not  validly  re-vestible  in  the  
owners  or  the   heirs. 
■ The State Government is of the view that the provis ions of the Enemy  Property  
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010 are vali d provisions and they protect the 
interests  of  both  the  State  and  the    nation. 

18   
 
■ The proposed Bill seeks to take away the jurisdicti on of all courts completely and then          
it  says  that  in  respect  of  an  enemy  property  which  has  been  vested  in  the  Custodian, 
a owner or his heir can demonstrate that he is a ci tizen  by  birth,  and  that  he  is  a  
successor to the owner. Then, nothing  else  should   be  done  and  all  these  properties  
would  be  restored  to  the    owner. 
■ This Act will  make  many  Acts  like  celing  Act,   Tenency  Act,  Provision  and  Manuals  
of Land Revenue ineffective.  Zamindari  except  in   urban  areas  has  been  abolished  in  
UP.   In  urban  area,  Tenency  Act  is  in   vogue. 
 The State Government of Uttar Pradesh also furnishe d its written comments on the various provisions  
of  the  Bill,  which  are  discussed    below:– 
 
Clause   No.   1   (Retrospective   Effect   of   the Enactment)  
 The State Government of Uttar Pradesh proposed that the Bill should not have retrospective  effect. 
 The Ministry of  Home Affairs  replied  that  givin g  retrospective  effect  to  the Act  is  necessar y to 
give validity and continuity to the actions taken u nder the Enemy Property (Amendment  and  Validation )  
Ordinance,  2010. 
 
Clause  No.  2   (3)  
 The State Government suggested that inclusion of th e word “till it is divested by the Central 
Government,” in the proposed sub-section 3 of section 5, in the Act would result  in  a  lot  of  administrative   
problems. 
 The MHA has commented that the divesting of the property  from  the  Custodian  is  to  be  decided by  
the Central  Government  only  and  hence  the  above  said  provision  is  needed  to  provide  for  clarity  in  
the   matter. 
 
Clause   No.  9 
 The State Government of Uttar  Pradesh  felt  that  insertion  of  new  Sec.18  is  against  the inter est  of  
the  State  of  UP  and  public  at   large. 
 According to the State Government of Uttar Pradesh,  in Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) 
Ordinance, 2010, a new Section 18B was added with t he intention  to prevent  unnecessary interference 
of  Courts,  who  of  and  on  passed  orders  to  the  Custodian  to  divest  even  the State properties, without 
considering or analyzing revenue records and  brush ing  aside  the provisions of Para  A-124  of  UP  Land  
Record  Manual  as  well  as  UP  Tenancy  Act  193 9.  However, in the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation) Second Bill,  2010,  a  new  section  1 8  has  been added with a specific  facility  to  t he  heir  of  
the  enemy  property  by  introducing  an  addition  in  Section  18. 
The  U.P.  Government  vehemently  opposed  this  new  addition  due  to  reasons  given    below:– 
■ It  frustrates  the  basic  soul  of  the  Principal     Act. 
■ It latently  confers  the  right  of  ownership  on   the  enemy  and  sidelines  the  interest  of  
the  State. 
■ It also fails to  protect  the  interest  of  the  Nation  as  it  does  not  put  any  rider  that  i f  
the enemy’s heir has also enjoyed and inherited the  fruits and benefits of the property 

19   
 
situated in enemy country, then he  should  not  be  allowed  to  take  benefit  in  this  
country. 
■ Principles laid down in Tashkant Peace Treaty 1966,  are being violated in this newly 
substituted section 18 of Bill. The Government of U .P. suggested deletion of  modified 
Section  18  of  the  Enemy  Property  Act  as  mentioned  in  Clause  9  of  the    Bill. 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its comment on the suggestions stated that the Standing Committee 
may consider this  suggestion  of  the  State  Gove rnment.  The  Ministry  also  stated  that  if  the  Standing 
Committee is  inclined  to  accept  this  suggestion,  then  the  following  words  may  be  added  in  clause  9  
of  the  Bill  in  line  22,  after  the  words,  “in  such  manner”:  “and  in  such  cases   or  in  such  classes  of    
cases” 
 
Insertion  of  Section  18A  and  18B  to  the  Act  (Clause      11)  
 In lieu of section 18 of the Enemy Property Act, 1968, the State Government has suggested insertion  of  
the  following  as  Section  18A  and  18B  to  the    Act. 
“18A - Any income received in respect of any property whet her vested or managed by the 
Custodian shall not be divested to any individual p erson  or  any  claimant  rather  heir,  
successor or legal representative in any manner and  shall not be returned unless directed by       
the  Central  Government.”  
“18B- No court shall have jurisdiction to order div estment from  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  
property vested in him under this Act. No court sha ll have right  to  entertain  any  suit  
proceedings whatsoever in respect of any property v ested in the Custodian in respect of any 
person, representative claimant  on  the  basis  th at  he  be  declared  to  obtain  ownership  right  
in  the  property  as  heir  and  successor  of   enemy.”  
 Ministry of Home Affairs in its comments was not ag reed to the suggestion  of  the  Government of 
Uttar Pradesh because, according to the Ministry, w hat is sought  for  by  the  Government  of  U.P.  is  
already  adequately  provided  for  in  Section  18A  and  Section     18B. 
 
 Insertion  of  New  Section  26  (Clause  No.     14)  
 According to the State  Government  of  Uttar  Pradesh  proposed  provisions  to  new  section  26(1) (b) 
in the Enemy Property (Amendment and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010  are  against  the  interest of  the 
nation  as  well  as  the  State  because  it  has  been  added  for  giving  special  facility  to  t he  heir  of  the  
enemy.  The  State  Government,  therefore,  sugges ted  deletion  of  the  two  provisos    to  Sectio n  26(1)  
(b)  of  the   Bill. 
 The  State  Government  of  Uttar  Pradesh  made  the  following      submissions:– 
■ The spirit of Tashkent Peace Treaty 1966 is being v iolated and is not being kept under 
consideration. 
■ If an  heir  of  Enemy  is  allowed  to  re-occupy  the  property,  then  at  least  he  must  not  
be given rights superior to what was originally giv en to his ancestor  as  mentioned  in 
revenue  record  which  are  according  to  U.P.   Land  Record     Manual. 
■ There are many enemy properties where Government In stitutes, Government 
Industries,  Government  Colleges,  Government  Off ices,  Officer’s  and  Staff  residence   
are  situated.  Such  buildings  or  public  utilities  should  not  be  allowed  to  be   disturbed. 
■ During partition of India a large number of refugee s (persons displaced from Pakistan)    
were  given  land  for   rehabilitation.  This  lan d  was   duly  acquired  to   establish      and 

20   
 
rehabilitate the refugees, who are living at that p lace for more than six decades. 
Unfortunately, the land validly  acquired  and  lan d  which  was  validly  disposed  off  by  
the ancestor of the  heir  of  enemy  will  again  be  given  to  the  heir  of  enemy  who  has 
no  right  or  title  over  the   land. 
■ Introduction of the Enemy  Property  (Amendment  an d  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010  
may result in giving undue benefits to some individ uals. In 1984 Raja  Mahmudabad  
obtained decree by misleading the  Civil  Court  in   a  case  in  which  even  the  State  was 
not made a party. The Ancestor of Raja Mahmudabad a cquired Taluqdari in 1869 from 
British  Government  besides  title  of  Knight  Commander  of  Imperial    Empire. 
 The State Government of Uttar Pradesh has also enum erated historical  background  of  Taluqdari  
rights  of  Raja  of  Mahmudabad  as   under:– 
“In 1857 struggle for freedom which was named by Br itishers as “Mutiny” took place. This 
struggle was ruthlessly suppressed by East India Co mpany with the help of some individuals.     
The British confiscated the entire land and propose d that Taluqa should be given to the men     
who have  actively  aided  the  British.  The  Indi ans  loyal  to  the  British  executed  a  Bond  
known as “Sanad Kabooliyat” in  which  the  persons   who  had  actively  aided  the  British  
against the Indian freedom fighters and were desiro us of enjoying British patronage  and  to 
become Taluqdar. Those persons took vow which meant  that they shall  be  called  upon  to  
perform and of showing constant good faith, loyalty , zeal and attachment to the British  
Government and breach of anyone  of  which  at  any   time  shall  be  held  to  annual  the  right  
and title now conferred on the person and his  heir s.  Ancestor  of  Raja  Mohd.  Amir  Mohd.  
Khan, namely Raja Mohd. Amir Hasan Khan executed th is  sanad  and  acquired  Taluqdari  
Rights. His name is mentioned at serial No. 86 of L ist No.1 of Taluqdars. As father of Raja     
Mohd. Amir Mohd. Migrated to Pakistan and became ci tizen of Pakistan  so  much  so  he  
acquired property in the enemy country and committe d inimical acts towards Union of India.         
It is pertinent to mention that  by  virtue  of  In dependence  of  India  Act,  1947,  the  word  
“British Government” whereever occur in the Statute  is  substituted  by  the  word  “Union  of 
India or State”. Thus when father of Raja Mohd. Ami r Mohd. Khan became  enemy  to  the  
country, all rights in  the  Taluqdari  property  v ested  in  him  automatically  annulled  and  his  
son Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. Khan cannot get any prope rty in the Taluqdari property. Thus,        
Bill No. 124/2010 is ultra vires and against the pr ovision of law. The other important thing     
which has to be pointed out is  that  most  of  the   properties  proposed  to  be  handed  over  to  
Raja Mohd.  Amir  Mohd  Khan  is  recorded  in  the   name  of  State  of  UP  or  Union  of  India  
as owner and Raja Mohmudabad is mere non-occupancy tenant whose rights have already 
extinguished  long  back.  If  provisions  of  UP. Land  Record  Manual  especially  Para  A-124  
are ignored then thousands of acres of State land w ill slip away from the ownership of the        
State and thousands people  will  claim  ownership  over  State  land,  thus  State  of  UP  will  
suffer irreparable loss.  Raja  Mahmudabad  is  rec orded  as  lessee  and  non-occupancy  tenant  
in most of the land which was given to him for  dev elopment  of  township  for  providing  
residential facilities to civil servants  living  i n  European  Style.  Thus,  no  right  or  ownershi p 
can be conferred upon  him  by  way  of  provision  of  Section  18  and  26(i)(b)  (i)  (ii)  of  Bil l  
No. 124 of 2010. An  apologue  preposterous  and  i ncongruous  story  arose  from  a  Civil  Suit 
No.  219  of  1984  instituted  by  Raja  Mohd.  Am ir  Khan  without  arraying  State  Government  
of UP. as party. Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. Prayed for d eclaration over certain  properties  
mentioned in the list attached with plaint. This su it was decreed by the Court of Civil Judge 
Lucknow. Later on Raja Mohd.  Amir  Mohd.  Filed  a   writ  petition  No.  1524  of  1997  giving 
list of different properties. Raja Mohd.  Amir  Moh d.  furnished  a  wrong  affidavit  in  the 
Supreme Court in contempt petition No. 87  of 2006 settling to mislead the court and stated          
in  para  3  of  the  affidavit  that  “Ex.  A  or  Writ  Petition  is  identical  to  the  list  file d  in  

21   
 
regular suit No.  219  of  1984.  It  is  clear  th at  Raja  Mohd.  Amir  Mohd.  gave  false  affidavi t  
in the Supreme Court in order to grab the property so much so leading devious route made           
all attempts to  prove  that  he  is  owner  of  th e  properties  which  actually  belong  to  the  St ate 
of UP.  Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. raised claim over tho se properties too which were acquired          
by  the  State  for  rehabilitation  of  refugees  during  partition  of  the      country.  
 In the light of above mentioned historical background by the virtue of effect of Oudh Estate       Act  all 
the properties of person and  his  heirs  who  beco me  enemy  and  disloyal  to  the  Government have been 
vested in the State/Union of India, hence the propo sed Bill is totally ultra vires and unconstitutional. The 
State of  U.P.  strongly  opposed  this  Bill,  especially  insertion  of  new  section  5(3), 18 & 26(1) (b) (i) (ii) 
and suggested that the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)  Ordinance,   2010   be  restored. 
 Comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the vie ws/objections of the State Government         of 
Uttar Pradesh  were  sought  by  the  Committee  Se cretariat.  The  Ministry  in  its  written  commen t  has 
stated that the second proviso in the new Section  26  is  intended  to  deal  with  cases  where  the  enemy  
property  had  been  otherwise  divested  from  the      Custodian. 
(a) by  an  order  of  a  court;    or 
(b) without  any  direction  under  Section    18 
and  returned  to  the  owner  or  his  heir  before  2 nd   July,  2010.  The  Ministry  further  added  as under:– 
“This assumes that the order of the  court  is  a  valid  order  and  remains  valid  when  the  
present Bill becomes  a  law.  It  appears  that  t he  Government  of  U.P.,  has  a  particular  case   
in mind. In that case,  according  to  the  Governm ent  of  U.P.,  they  have  already  filed  a  
petition for  review  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  its  earlier  judgement.  If  the  earlier  judgeme nt  
is reviewed, then the order of the court would ceas e to remain a valid order.  Consequently,         
any divestment, pursuant to that order even for a f ew  days,  would  cease  to  be  valid  
divestment, and in such cases, the second  proviso  to  the  new  section  will  not  be  attracted. 
After a fresh claim is made by the owner or by his heir,  the Government of U.P.  is entitled            
to examine it on its merits. Hence, it does not app ear necessary  to  make  any  further  
modifications  to  Section  26  as  introduced.  Go vernment  of  U.P.  may  obtain  appropriate  
relief from the Supreme Court in the petition  file d  by  them  for  review  of  the  earlier  court  
order  in  that  case.”  
 
Views  of  Government  of   Goa  
 In its sitting held on 19 th July, 2011, the Sub-Committee heard the  Chief  Sec retary, Government of 
Goa on the Bill. The Chief Secretary, Goa while end orsing  the  provisions  of  the  proposed  Bill  m ade  
following  submissions:– 
■ There are 122 enemy properties located in the  Stat e  of  Goa.  Out  of  which,  112  
properties are situated in North Goa District  and  the  remaining  10  properties  are  in  
South   Goa  District. 
■ Out of 122 enemy  properties,  120  properties  have  been  vested  in  the  Custodian  and  
the  State  Government  is  verifying  remaining  2    properties. 
■ Out  of  120  vested  properties,  117  properties  have  been  put  under      mutation. 
 During the discussion a specific query cropped up  as  to  which  law  would  prevail  on  a  property  
vested in custodian which falls under the State Agr iculture Land Tenancy  Act.  The  Legislative  
Secretary  who  was  asked  to  comment  made  following      submission:– 

22   
 
“Under the scheme of the  Constitution,  as  the  h on.  Members  are  aware,  there  are  List  1,  
List 11 and List III — whenever a State legislation comes  in  conflict  w ith  the  Central  
legislation, the  State  legislation,  to  that  ef fect,  is  deemed  to  be  revoked,  and  the  Cent ral  
law prevails there. Now, even in  the  case  of  Go a,  my  feeling  is  that  the  same  situation  
should apply because I do not find any  special  pr ovision  as  such.  I  remember, about a few  
years ago,  we  amended  the  Income  Tax  Act  rel ating  to  Goa.  There  is  a  particular  system  
of Goa family,  just  like  we  have  the  Hindu  U ndivided  Family,  and  we  amended  the  law  
and gave effect to local traditions  of  taxation.  If  that  had  been  possible,  they  would  have  
done it by themselves. Taking cue from that, I am o f the view that the  Central  law  should 
prevail.”  
 
Views  of  Government  of  NCT  of    Delhi  
 The Sub-Committee heard the Chief Secretary, Government  of  NCT  of  Delhi,  in  its  sitting  held  on  
27 th    July  and  10 th    October,  2011  on  the   Bill. 
 The Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi at the  sitting  held  on  27 th  July,  2011  endorsed the 
major provisions of the  proposed  Bill.  He  also  suggested  some  minor  modifications  along  with   the  
following   submissions:– 
■ The State Government of Delhi is following the dire ctions of the Custodian of Enemy 
Property and registration of properties,  declared  as  Enemy  Property  by  the  Custodian,  
had  been  banned  because  there  were  some  cases  where  registration  had  taken     place. 
■ In  Delhi,  there  are  nine  districts  and  ADMs  have  been  declared  as  Deptuy Custodian. 
■ Out  of  the  nine  districts,  only  one  district  has  all  the  enemy      properties. 
■ As  regards  the  total  number  of  properties  in  Delhi,  the  owners  are  74  and  there    are 
12  income  dispute  cases  and  14  declared  court      cases. 
■ The NCT of Delhi is facing  many  problems  in  the   implementation  of  the Act.  One  is 
that  there  are  no  rules  at  the  moment  and  there  is  a  need  to  frame  rules.  Section-3  
of the Delhi Rent Control Act provides that this wi ll not apply to  the  Government  
properties. But the courts  are  entertaining  case s.  So,  there  should  be  a  provision  that  
the properties which were declared Enemy Properties  should be treated at par with 
Government  properties.  Otherwise,  there  will  b e  a  lot  of  litigations  in  the  courts  and  
a lot of time and energy is getting wasted in  this   process.  The  NCT  of  Delhi  
appreciates  the  empowerment  of  the  Deputy     Custodian. 
■ In Clause 5 of the Bill, the word “periodically” ma y  be  added  before  the  word  “and  
collect the rent” so that the rent could be revised  after every five years. The Supreme      
Court had also in various judgments accepted that t he rent could be revised 
periodically. 
■ With regard to Clause 6, the properties which are s old must be registered. Only sale 
certificate is not enough. There could be  a  provi sion  that  they  should  be  registered  
within ninety days and, for reasons  to  be  record ed,  the  Custodian  may  extend  the  
period   for   180 days. 
■ Under  section  20(3)  of  the  Act,  the  proposed   fine  of  Rs.  500/-  should  be  increased  
to  Rs.5,000/-. 
 As the Chief Secretary and his officials were not h aving updated information. He was again     heard o n 
10 th October, 2011. In  the  said  sitting,  he  made  some  suggestions  which  are  discussed  below. 

23   
 
 The word “receipt” in Section l0A (1) of the Bill m ay be substituted in  place  of  word  “certificate ”.  
The  Chief  Secretary  of  Delhi  stated  that  the   word  “receipt”  may  be  substituted  for  the w ord 
“certificate” to avoid the loss of revenue. A perio d of 90  days  must  be  given  to  get  the proper ty 
registered  in  the  office  of  Sub-registrar  and   the  purchaser  must  pay  the  stamp  duty  and  get the 
property registered in his/her own name. If the pro perty  does  not  get  registered  within  that per iod, an 
extension  of  another  90  days  should  be  given.  If  he  fails  to  register  within  this  perio d  of 180 days, 
he/she must again go to the Custodian of Property t o get permission. The whole idea                is  that  the  
stamp  duty,  which  is  one  of  the  revenues  of   the  State,  should  not  be  lost. 
 The  MHA  in  its  reply  has  clarified  that  the   word  “receipt”  has  been  used  with  reference  to the 
“receipt of sale proceeds”. On receipt of sale proc eeds  it  would  be  necessary  to  issue  a  certi ficate   of  
sale. 
 The Legislative Secretary during the meeting held on 10 
th  October,  2011  stated  that  under  Article 285 
of the Constitution of India, all the properties of the Union are exempted and the issue    whether st amp duty 
can be levied on a property which is vested with th e  Custodian  needs  to  be  examined. In response,   the  
Chief  Secretary,  NCT  of  Delhi  stated  that  St amp  duty  should  be  levied in case the Custodian  has  
arrived  at  a  decision  that  the  property  will   be  given  to  private  person,  who  in  turn  w ants  to  
register  that  property  in  his/her  own      name. 
 On the issue of levying stamp  duty  or  the  municipal  taxes  on  the  properties  during  the  peri od  in  
which  the  properties  were  vested  in  the  Cust odian  and  which  is  now  being  transferred   to  the 
claimant  or  the  purchaser.  The  Legislative  Se cretary  opined  that  once  it  was  in  the  cust ody  of the  
Custodian,  prima  facie  it  would  appear  that  it  was  in  the  custody  of  the  Government  and  the 
Government was the owner and  no  taxes  can  be  imposed  on  the  property  of  the  Union. However,   the  
matter  needs  to  be    examined. 
 Clause 3 of the Bill- After Section 5 of the principal  Act,  the  follow ing  section  shall  be  inserted  
and  deemed  to  have  been  inserted,    namely:- 
5A. The Custodian may, after making such inquiry  a s  he  deems  necessary,  by  an  order,   
declare  that  the  property  of  the  enemy  or  t he  enemy  subject  or  the  enemy  firm  described   
in the order, vests in him under this Act and  issu e  a  certificate  to  this  effect  and  such  
certificate  shall  be  the  evidence  of  the  facts  stated     therein.  
 The Chief Secretary, NCT of Delhi during his oral e vidence  before  the  Committee  suggested that 
the idea of a  certificate  is  already  there  in  Section  5.  However,  a  revised  format  needs  to  be  devised  
for  issuing  such    certificate. 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs  has  commented  that  format  of  certificate  to  be  issued  by  the 
Custodian would be worked out  while  framing  Rule s  under  the  Enemy  Property  Act  after  the  Bi ll  is  
passed. 
 Clause 5 of  the  Bill-  The  State  Government  has  suggested  that  Secti on  8(2)  (ia)  of  the  Act  
may  be  modified  as  under: 
“Periodically fix and collect the rent, standard re nt, lease rent, license fee or usage charges,         
as  the  case  may  be,  in  respect  of  enemy   property.”  
 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its reply has state d that it is not felt necessary to amend           the Bill 
at  this  stage  as  suggested  by  the  Government   of  NCT  of  Delhi.  However,  the  suggestion  o f  the  
State  Government  would  be  kept  in  view  while  framing  Rules  under  the     Act. 
 Clause 6 of the Bill- The State Government has  proposed  insertion  of f ollowing  additional  sub-
section  under  Section  10(1)  of  the  Enemy  Property  Act,      1968: 

24   
 
“Pursuant to the issue of such certificate as  ment ioned  at  Sub-section  (1)  above,  the  
purchaser shall, within 90 days of the date of issu e of the certificate,  get  such  immovable  
property registered in his  name  in  the  office  of  Competent  Registering  Authority  after  
paying the requisite stamp duty. The aforesaid peri od of 90 days shall be extendable by the 
Custodian of enemy property by another 90 days on s ubmission of reasonable cause to the 
satisfaction of the Custodian of Enemy  Property.  On  the  expiry  of  the  period  of  180  days  
from the date of the issue of certificate, in case the property has not been registered before           
the Competent Registering Authority, the certificat e shall  lapse  and  a  fresh  application  will 
have to be 4 moved by the  Purchaser  before  Custo dian  of  Enemy  Property  for  issue  of  a  
fresh  certificate  in  accordance  with  the  procedure  laid  down  in  Sub-section     1.” 
 The MHA in its written comments has stated that a n ew Sub-section proposed by State Government 
relates to procedure of registration  of  propertie s  by  the  purchaser  of  the  enemy  property aft er the 
same is sold by the Custodian and the appropriate p rocedure in this regard would            be incorpo rated in 
the Rules relating to disposal of immovable properties by the Custodian after the       Bill  is  pass ed  by  the  
Parliament. 
 Clause 8- In Section 17(1) of the Principal Act  the  word  “Ten  per  centum”  may  be  substituted  in  
place  of  “Five  per    centum”.  
 The Ministry feels that  “Five  per  cent”  provided  for  contribution  to  the  consolidated  fund for  
running  the  office  and  administrative  expenses  of  the  Custodian  is      adequate. 
 Clause 11 of the Bill-  The  Central  Government  may,  by  general  or  sp ecial  order,  direct  that  any  
or  all  enemy  property  vested  in  the  Custodian  under  this  Act  shall  be  sold  or  disposed   of  in  such  
manner  as  may  be     prescribed. 
 The Chief Secretary, NCT of Delhi suggested that th e “procedure and manner”  should  be  defined  so  
that  there  is  no  discretion  and  there  can  be  no  debate  on  this      issue. 
 Clause 12 of  the  Bill-  Section  20  of  the  Principal  Act  may  be  amen ded  by  substituting  the  
word   “Five  Hundred  Rupees”   with  the  word   “Ten   Thousand   Rupees”.  
 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, the amen dment proposed by the State Government  has  
already  been  incorporated  in  the   Bill. 

 
25   
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
VIEWS OF OTHER STAKEHONDERS AND EXPERTS 
AND REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT THEREON  
 
 Decision   for   inviting   memoranda   from public /stakeholders  
 As stated earlier, the Committee in its sitting hel d on  2 nd  February,  2011,  decided  to  seek  written 
memoranda from public/stakeholders  interested  in  the  subject  matter  of  the  Bill.  Following  t his  
decision,  a  Press  Release  was  issued  seeking  written  Memoranda  from  public/stakeholders,  la test by 
15th March, 2011 which was subsequently extended upto 15 th April, 2011 so that a large cross-section of the 
society, affected  parties  and  the  general  publ ic,  could  get  an  opportunity  to  submit their  
views/comments  on  the  said  Bill.  In  response,   several  memoranda  were  received  by  the Commi ttee. 
On scrutiny, some memoranda were found to be of individual  case,  which  were  forwarded to the Ministry 
for necessary action. However, the memoranda, wherein, several issues/ suggestions/comments that had been 
raised/made  by  the  individuals/organizations/stakeholders  were  sent for written comments of the Ministry 
of  Home  Affairs.  On  perusal,  the  Committee  n oted  that some issues such as jurisdiction of cour ts  and  
arbitrary  powers  to  Central  Government  were  a lso  raised  by  Members  of  the  Committee  and  State  
Governments.  Those  issues  have  been  dealt  wit h  in earlier chapters and mere repetition of the  same  
will  not  serve  any  purpose.  However,  followin g some of the additional major issues  raised  and  the  
responses  of  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  thereon,   are   enumerated   as below. 
 
 Retrospective effect of the Bill 
Views/Suggestions  
 Section 1 (2) of the Bill provides “Save as otherwi se provided in the Act, it shall be deemed          to 
have come into effect on the 2 nd July, 2010.”  Thus,  provisions  of  the  Bill  wou ld  have  retrospective  
effect.  The  Bill  should  not  have  retrospective      effect. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 Section 1(2) of the Bill provides “Save as otherwis e provided in the Act, it shall be deemed           to 
have come into effect on the  2 nd  July,  2010.”  Therefore,  provisions  of  the  Bil l  relating  to  procedural 
aspects would  have  prospective  effect and  other s  would  have  retrospective  effect.  There have been 
a number of judgements of various courts that have adversely affected the powers           of the 
Custodian/Central  Government  provided  in  the Ac t.  Because  of  such  interpretation  of  the Act by 
various courts, the Custodian has been finding it d ifficult to sustain his action  under  the  Act.  T herefore, 
some of the amendments to the Act mentioned in the Bill, as specified therein, have been     given  
retrospective  effect  to  clarify  the  legislative  intention  of  the     Act. 
 The Bill provides, inter alia , that if the  enemy  property  had  been  divested   from  the Custodian by 
a valid order  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  pr ior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where  the property had been 
returned to the owner or his  lawful  heir  by  an  order  of  a  Court  and  the Government is satisf ied that 
the property was returned to the owner or the lawful heir, such enemy   property  would  continue  to  remain  
with  such  persons.  In  the  Statement  of  Objec ts  and  Reasons    of the Bill, it has also been c larified 
that the provisions of the Bill shall not affect th e claim made 
 
25 

26   
 
by any person  before  any  court  or  other  autho rity  against  the  owner  or  his  lawful  heir  t o  whom  
the property was or may be returned  under  the  Ac t  and  such  claim  shall  be  decided  in  accord ance 
with  law  by  the  court  or  other  authority  as  the  case  may      be. 
 
 Limited Powers of Custodian 
Views/Suggestions  
 The Enemy Property Act, 1968 does not confer the ti tle of Enemy Properties on the Custodian/Central 
Government as the Act provides for preservation and   management  of  enemy  properties   by   the 
Custodian. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 While Section 8(1) of the Enemy Property Act, 1968  empowers  the  Custodian  to  preserve  enemy 
property,  the  Section  8(2)(vii)  of  the  Act  e mpowers  the  Custodian  to  transfer  by  way  of  sale or 
disposal of  any  of  the  enemy  properties.  Sinc e  powers  to  sell  enemy  properties  vested  in  him is 
already available to the Custodian under the Act, i nsertion of  sub-Section  5(3)  and  its Explanatio n 
provided in Enemy Property (Amendment and Validatio n) Second Bill, 2010 clarifies that    any  propert y  
vested  in  Custodian  includes  all  titles,  rights  and  interest  in  such      properties. 
 
 Wider powers to Custodian are not justified 
Views/Suggestions  
 The principal act empowers  the  Custodian  to  pre serve  enemy  property  and  to  transfer  by  way of 
sale or disposal of any of the enemy properties. Th e proposed  Enemy  Property  (Amendment and 
Validation) Second Bill, 2010 states that any property vested in Custodian includes        all  titles,  rights  and  
interests  in  such    properties. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 The powers similar to those being conferred on Cust odian  under  sub-Section  11(3)  of  the  Enemy 
Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 20 10 are available to many functionaries dealing with  
matters of enquiry/investigation/inspection etc. Su ch powers need to be conferred on Custodian  so  as   to  
enable  him  to  function  more     effectively. 
 
 Bill is unfair to Indian Muslims 
Views/Suggestions  
 The Bill is unfair and may create problems for the  people  of  Muslim  community.  The  Bill would  
take  away  the  properties  of  Muslims,  which  is     unfair. 
 Indian Muslims would be deprived of their  legal  r ights  to  seek  judicial  redressal  and  claim th eir  
properties  vested  in  the    Custodian. 
 The Bill does not take into consideration Muslim Personal Law where oral gift or Hiba is acceptable. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        are 
vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy propertie s with the Custodian is not linked to persons belon ging  
to  any  particular   community. 

27   
 
 The properties of Indian nationals belonging to Mus lim community are not vested with the Custodian  
and  will  not  be  vested  with  the  Custodian  even  after  the  amendments  to  the      Act. 
 The applicability of Muslim Personal Law with regard to transfer of enemy property or any     claim of  
transfer of enemy property through oral will or ora l gift would be examined in consultation      with  
Ministry  of  Law. 
 
 Rights of Legal Heirs 
Views/suggestions  
 Legal heirs should not be dispossessed of propertie s and they should be allowed to approach    courts   
for   redressal   of   their grievances. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 Section 18 of the Enemy Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010  provides that the 
enemy property vested in the  Custodian  could  be  divested  from  him  and  returned  to  the  owner or their 
legal heirs. It is further  clarified  that  the  p rovisions  of  the  Bill  shall  not  affect  the c laim made by any 
person before any court or other authority against the owner or his lawful heir               to whom the property 
was or may be returned under the Act and such claim  shall be  decided  in  accordance with the law by  the  
court  or  the  authority  as  the  case  may  be.  It  is  also  clarified  that the courts shall con tinue to have 
jurisdiction to adjudicate whether the property to be vested in the Custodian  in  an  enemy  property   or    
not. 
 
 The Bill nullifies the judgement of Supreme Court 
Views/Suggestions  
 The  Bill  nullifies  the  judgement  of  Supreme  Court  delivered  in   2005. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 The Bill provides, inter alia , that if the  enemy  property  had  been  divested   from  the Custodian by 
a valid order  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  pr ior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where  the property had been 
returned to the owner or his  lawful  heir  by  an  order  of  a  Court  and  the Government is satisf ied that 
the property was returned to the owner or the lawful heir, such enemy   property  would  continue  to  remain  
with  such  persons.  In  the  Statement  of  Objec ts  and  Reasons    of the Bill, it has also been c larified that 
the provisions of the Bill shall not affect the claim made               by any person  before  any  c ourt  or  other  
authority  against  the  owner  or  his  lawful  heir  to  whom  the property was or may be returned  under  the  
Act  and  such  claim  shall  be  decided  in  acco rdance with  law  by  the  court  or  other  author ity  as  the  
case  may      be. 
 
 Compensation to persons who migrated to India leaving behind their  properties  in  Pakistan  
Views/Suggestions  
 The 3/4 th claim for compensation of persons left,  who  left  behind  their  properties  in  Pakistan,  
have  not  yet  been    settled. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
The  ex-gratia  scheme  of  1971  was  to  provide  for  ad-hoc  compensation  to  Indian   nationals 

28   
 
who lost their properties in Pakistan. Government  may  take  a  decision  in  the  matter  at  approp riate 
time  for  final  settlement  of  the   issue. 
 
 Change in Section 26 of the Bill 
View/Suggestions  
 Delete the words ‘and returned to the owner or to h is  lawful  heir’  from  sub-section  (i)  of  seco nd 
proviso to Section 26(b) of the Bill for denying the enjoyment of rights accrued to  the  beneficiarie s  of  the  
Supreme  Court  decision  in  the  Raja  of  Mahmudabad     case. 
 Replace the words ‘in any other case’ in sub-section (ii) of second proviso to Section 26(b)            of the 
Bill with the  worlds  “in  cases  where  the  owne r  or  the  lawful  heir,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  not  a  
citizen  of   India.” 
 Section 26 (b) of the Bill be  suitably  modified  to  ensure  that  no  difference  is  made  in  rel ation  to  
the  method  of  divestment  of  the    property. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 
 Second proviso to Section 26  (b)  of  the  Bill  n eed  not  be  amended  as  existing  provisions  ha ve 
been incorporated so  as  to  ensure  that  where  the  enemy  property  had  been  divested  by  an  order of 
the  court  or  without  any  direction  under  Sec tion  18  of  the  Act  and  returned  to  the  own er or his 
lawful heir who are citizen of India by  birth,  su ch  properties  may  continue  to  vest  in  such o wner  or  
the  lawful  heir  subject  to  the  owner  or  his   lawful  heir  meeting  the  condition  stipulated   in sub-
Section (i)  of  Section  26(b).  As  this  amendme nt  is  proposed  to  honour  court  order  and  is   not 
intended either to deny or confer any rights on the  properties of any particular individual, the amend ments  
suggested  may  not  be  agreed    to. 
 
 Office of CEP in Delhi 
Views/Suggestions  
 The office location of Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  for  India  should  be  at  New  Delhi  instead   of  
Bombay. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 
 There is no proposal to shift the office of Custodian from Mumbai to Delhi. A branch office          o f the 
Custodian is functioning at Kolkata and a proposal to set up a branch office of the Custodian             at   
Lucknow   is   under consideration. 
 
 Sale of Property to the Kith and Kins of Migrated Persons 
Views/Suggestions  
 Suitable provisions should be inserted to enable the Custodian to sell the property to the co-   share r  or  
the  kith  and  kin  of  the  person,  who  migrated  to      Pakistan. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 
 As and when rules for disposal of enemy  properties   are  framed,  the  suggestion  of  the petitioner    
may   be considered. 

29   
 
 Return of properties to Hindus and Sikhs who migrated from Pakistan 
Views/Suggestions  
 In the Bill provision may be made for return of properties of Hindus and  Sikhs,  who  had  migrated  
from  Pakistan  to  India  after    independence. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 The Bill is not  intended  to  settle  issues  on  religious/communal  lines.  Its  object  is  to  settle  the  
issues  of  enemy  properties  vested  in  the     Custodian. 
 
 Disposal of Enemy Properties 
Views/Suggestions  
 The  preservation  and  management  of  enemy  property  does  not  serve  national       interest. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 The properties vested in  Custodian  must  be  preserved  by  the  Custodian  till  such  properties  are  
divested  from  him  and  either  returned  to  eligible  persons  or  disposed  off  by  the       Custodian. 
 
 Oudh Estates Act, 1869 
Views/Suggestions  
 Provisions  of  Oudh  Estates  Act,  1869  have  not  been  considered  in  the     Bill. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 The matters relating  to  the  Oudh  Estates  Act,  1869  are  within  the  purview  of  Government  of  
UP  and  cannot  be  part  of  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010 . 
 
 Bill Intended to Favour a Particular Individual 
Views/Suggestions  
 The Second Bill favours a particular individual  from  UP. Therefore,  the  Bill  should  be  identical  to  
Ordinance  promulgated  in  the  2 nd  July,   2011. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 The Bill is not intended either to deny or  confer  rights  to  property  of  any  particular  individ ual. 
The Enemy Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  B ill,  2010  to  replace  the  Ordinance  was  not  
passed  and  has  since  been     withdrawn. 
 
 Change in Section 18 
Views/Suggestions  
Explanation  to  Section  18  B  of  the  Bill  is   confusing. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
Explanation  to  Section  18B  of  the  Bill  is  t o  clarify  that  courts  would  continue  to  have  

30   
 
jurisdiction to adjudicate whether the property cla imed to be vested in the Custodian  in  an  Enemy 
Property  or  not.  Hence,  there  is  no  question  of  confusion  on  this      issue. 
 
 Change in Section 18C of the Bill 
Views/Suggestions  
 Modify  Section  18  C  of  the  Bill  as  it  provides  excessive  powers  to  Central      Government. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 Section 18 C of the Bill need not  be  amended  as  rules  for  disposal  of  Enemy  Properties  veste d  in  
the  Custodian  would  be  framed  after  the  Bill  is    passed. 
 
 Change in Section 26 
Views/Suggestions  
 Sub-section  (i)  of  the  second  proviso  to  Section  26(1)(b)  is  intended  to  benefit  persons like 
M.A.M.  Khan. 
 
Comments   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
 Sub-Section (i) of second  proviso  to  Sub-Section   26(1)(b)  is  intended  to  honour  court orders 
following  which  Enemy  Properties  have  been  divested  from  the  Custodian  and  returned  to  the owner 
or his lawful heir before  promulgation  of  the  O rdinance  on  02.07.2010  subject  to  the  owner o r his 
lawful heir meeting the condition stipulated  in  sub-Section  (i)  of  second  proviso  to  Section  26(1)(b)  of  
the   Bill. 
 
Oral   Evidence   of Individuals/Stakeholders  
 The Committee had the benefit of the views of Shri Lal Ji Tandon, MP, Lok  Sabha  from  Lucknow, UP, 
Shri Ram Jethmalani, MP, Rajya Sabha  &  an  eminen t  lawyer.  The  Committee  also  heard the 
stakeholders, including Shri Mohammad Amir Mohammad  Khan, the erstwhile Raja of Mehmoodabad on  
the  Bill.  These  witnesses  gave  valuable  sugge stions/comments  on  the  provisions  of  the  prop osed  
Bill,  which  are  discussed    below. 
 
Suggestions/views  of  Shri  Lal  Ji  Tandon,  MP,   Lok  Sabha  from  Lucknow,     UP  
 Shri Tandon came alongwith  representatives  from  his  constituency  of  Lucknow,  who  were  said to  
be affected by the provisions of the Bill in the  s itting  of  the  Sub-Committee  held  on  10 th  August,  2011.  
Shri  Tandon  made  the  following    points:- 
■ Out of the total  Enemy  Properties  located  in  U ttar  Pradesh,  roughtly  80%  is  claimed  
by one individual and the proposed Bill has  been  drafted  in  order  to  favour  that  
particular  individual. 
■ There were several inconsistencies in the judgments  given by the Courts in the context         
of settlement of disputes of enemy properties and t he Government promulgated  an  
ordinance to correct the  same.  The  above  ordina nce  was  tabled  in  the  Lok  Sabha  in  
the  form  of  a  Bill,  but  was    opposed. 
■ A present Cabinet Minister who had  represented  th e  Raja  of  Mahmoodabad  in  the  
courts is behind the present Bill in order  to  fav our  the  Raja  so  that  the  earlier 
ordinance   could   be   made defunct. 

31   
 
■ The Bill is a fraud on the Parliament as  it  tries   to  favour  an  individual  claiming  
properties   worth   Rs.20,000 crore. 
■ When, according to the treaty, the Raja had lost hi s claim on the property, how his  
successors can lay claim to the same.  Moreover,  a fter  partition,  properties  of  Migrants 
were declared as evacuee properties and were settle d by the Custodian. Migrants got 
equivalent property in the country they have migrat ed. Since the previous  Raja  had  
migrated to Pakistan and  took  active  part  in  f ormation  of  Pakistan,  he  lost  his  claim  
on  the  property  and,  therefore,  claims  of  his  successors  cannot        stand. 
■ Such Enemy  Properties  have  been  used  for  sett ing  up  of  refugee  colonies  like  those  
in Sitapur District in Uttar  Pradesh.  Similarly  Government  offices,  sugar  mills,  schools 
and colleges, administrative buildings have been  o pened  in  such  properties  which  are  
now  being  claimed  by  a  single  individual. 
■ Tenants on such properties also have rights which w ill be violated if the properties are 
evacuated. 
■ The provisions of the Bill will make Urban Land Cei ling Act and other State Laws 
ineffective. 
■ UP Government which is the main  affected  party  h as  not  been  made  a  party  in  the  
case. 
■ If the enemy property claimed by Raja  Mahmoodabad  is  returned  to  him  which  
amounts to roughly 80% of the enemy property,  ther e  is  no  point  in  keeping  a  
Custodian for the rest of the 20%  and  same  shoul d  also  be  returned  to  the  remaining 
poor   claimants. 
■ The issue is not an issue  of  minority  vs .  majority  as  the  affected  people  are  poor  
people belonging to all the communities. Moreover, there are properties like 
Imambadas, Mosques and  natural  water  bodies  whi ch  belong  to  communities  and  not  
to individuals. 
■ The Government has invested crores of  rupees  in  properties  which  are  now  being  
claimed by the Raja. Five Districts of UP Lucknow, Sitapur, Hardoi, Barabanki  and  
Pilibheet  and  Nainital  in  Uttarakhand  are  affected  by  the  provisions  of  the   Bill. 
■ The change of ownership will severely affect people  who  have  migrated  from 
Pakistan,  and  after  a  long  struggle,  have  been  able  to  establish     themselves. 
■ The earlier ordinance was more in consonance with p rinciple of justice rather than the 
present  Bill  which  is  before  the   Committee. 
The  other  members  of  the  delegation  expressed  the  following      views/points:- 
 
■ The provisions of earlier ordinance dated 2 July, 2 010 which was drafted after careful 
consideration  in  national  interest,  should  be  incorporated  in  the    Bill. 
■ All the facts  relevant  to  the  case  were  not  presented  to  the  courts  like  the  description 
of  the  properties  and  the  number  of  the  families  likely  to  be     displaced. 
■ The ordinance dated 2 July, 2010 was promulgated in  order to meet the extra ordinary 
situation created by the order passed by the Suprem e Court in October, 2006 whereby             
a  spate  of  cases  were  filed  in  the  courts  claiming  enemy      properties. 

32   
 
■ Before 1965 the tenants were paying the rent to  th e  Raja  or  his  representative.  
However, after 11 September 1965, declaring propert ies as enemy properties under the 
Defence  of  India  rules,  the  rent  is  being  paid  to  Custodian  of  Enemy      Property. 
■ There are 54  tenancies  in  Lucknow,  3-4  bungalo ws  in  Sitapur,  a  refugee  colony 
known as Sindhi Colony in which  the  properties  h ad  been  sold  by  the  late  Raja  to  
those people who were staying there under registere d deeds. Such properties are also  
affected by the Supreme Court order and  such  owne rs  are  also  being  asked  to  
vacate. 
■ The tenants enjoy  protection  under  the  Rent  Co ntrol  Act.  They  pay  rent  decided  by  
the  Custodian  which  is  increased  by  10%  every  three     years. 
■ The tenants were asked to vacate the properties on the basis of contempt proceedings.      
The tenants then  approached  the  courts  and  got   a  stay  order  on  the  basis  of  the 
record and rent receipts  of  the  past  years.  Th e  Justice  Goswami  Committee  appointed 
by the  Supreme  Court  then  declared  that  99%  of  people  in  possession  of  property  
were   unauthorized. 
■ The tenants then approached the Supreme Court  cont ending  that  an  ex-parte  order  has 
been passed.  Thereafter,  the  Supreme  Court  con stituted  another  Committee  by  the 
name Justice Wadhwa Committee which gave its orders  on the basis  of  the  
documents.  The  Committee  said  that  whoever  wa s  in  possession  of  properties  prior    
to 1965  will  not  be  evicted  and  whoever  was  in  possession  of  properties  post-1965  
had  to  be  evicted. 
■ 95% of the people who were affected are below the p overty line and cannot approach         
the  courts  and  the   legislature. 
 
Suggestions/Views  of  Shri  Ram  Jethmalani  MP,   Rajya     Sabha  
 
 The Committee in its sitting  held  on  30 th  September,  2011  had  the  benefit  of  the  exper t  views of 
Shri Ram Jethmalani, MP,  Rajya  Sabha  and  an  eminent  Lawyer  on  the  provisions  of  the Bill. 
The  gist  of  the  views/suggestions  of  Shri  Jethmalani  is  as      under:- 
• A heir can only get  what  the  propositus  had.  W hen  a  person  is  dead,  his  heir  gets  
what   he  owned. 
• Raja of Mahmudabad, who was an  Indian  citizen,  o wning  vast  properties,  mainly  in  
Uttar Pradesh,  migrated  to  Pakistan  alongwith  his  minor  son,  soon  after  the  partition  
of India and acquired the citizenship of Pakistan. After a long stay in Pakistan, he was      
also an ambassador of Pakistan in  London.  He  set tled  in  London  and  died  there  in  
1973.  He  died  as  citizen  of   Pakistan. 
• All his properties naturally  came  to  vest  in  t he  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property,  under  
the provisions of the Enemy Property Act, 1968. It is  a  well  known  piece  of  
legislation, which comes into operation at a time w henever there is a war between the      
two countries. All enemy properties vest  in  the  Government.  His  property  which  runs 
into  thousands  of  crores,  became  the  property  of  the  Indian       Nation. 
• After he became a  major,  he  managed  to  obtain  passports,  first  in  Lucknow,  the 
second  in  Teheran,  the  third  in  Baghdad  and  the  later  one  from     London. 

33   
 
• His mother, knowing fully well that the property ha d ceased to be the property of the  
family,  applied  for  a  job  to  the  Custodian  for  taking  care  of  the     property. 
• Then, after many years, the son in  India  conteste d  elections  in  UP  and  became  a  
Member of the  Legislative  Assembly.  A  question  was  raised  in  the  Assembly  that  he  
is  not  an  Indian  citizen. 
• After many years, he started a litigation in India saying that he was an Indian national,        
the  property  now  belonged  to  him  and  that  he  had  inherited     it. 
• The result was that a decree was passed,  which  wa s  sustained  by  the  Supreme  Court. 
Even the ruling Congress Government realized that  all  this  was  wholly  wrong.  They,  
then  issued  an  ordinance  under  our     compulsion. 
• That Ordinance displays  the  honesty  of  the  Gov ernment  of  India  for  the  first  time.  
That ordinance records that  there  is  a  Supreme  Court  judgement  but  we  wish  to  
prevent  the  property  from  getting  into  the  hands  of  those  who  are  not  entitled  to    it. 
• This Ordinance was intended to nullify the Supreme Court decision and to prevent the 
property from getting into the hands of  those  who   are  not  entitled  to  it,  which  is  the 
right of the Parliament to do.  This  was  the  mos t  polite  way  of  saying  that  the  
Supreme  Court  has  delivered  a  fraudulent    judgement. 
• It was, therefore, proposed to bring about amendmen ts to the  Enemy  Property  Act  to 
clarify the legislative intent and strengthen the h ands of the Custodian and the Central 
Government and also to prevent the courts from  iss uing  any  orders  for  divestment  of 
these   properties. 
• That ordinance was to be replaced by a Bill. The En emy Property (Amendment &  
Validation) Bill, 2010 was brought before the Parli ament. This  Bill,  when  presented,  
would  have  passed  in  both  the  Houses  of  Parliament.  However,  it  didn’t      happen. 
• I wrote a  big  article  in  which  I  attacked  th e  amendment  which  is  sought  to  be  made 
in the Bill. I regret to say that the amendment pro posed in  the  Enemy  Property  
(Amendment & Validation) Second Bill, 2010 was made  by Shri  Chidambaram  who  had  
moved  the  original  Bill  with  the  original   preamble. 
• He quoted from his article published in a newspaper   “The Ordinance is a belated act          
of justice to  the  Indian  people.  The  entire  C ongress  party  saw  the  wisdom  of  it.  All  
the law officers of the Government and the entire C abinet must have approved of the 
Ordinance before the hon.  President  promulgated  it.  Certainly,  it  brought  jubilation  to 
the occupants of the property and  the  nation  bec ame  richer  by  thousands  of  crores,  
even Mr. Chidambaram’s statement modestly mentions hundreds of crores. Now, starts 
another  scam” . 
• Shri Chidambaram in the company of  advocate  and  Minister Shri   Salman  Khursheed  
have persuaded the  Prime  Minister  to  abandon  t he  Bill  and  thereby  ensure  the  lapsing 
of the wholesome Ordinance. Shri Khursheed was the advocate for the junior Raja 
supporting the eviction of tenants, a clear case of  conflict of interest. Shri 
Chidambaram  is  a  signatory  to  the  explanatory  statement  justifying  the     Ordinance. 
• The Prime Minister owes an explanation to the natio n. How does he propose to justify        
this kind of plain immorality and betrayal of the p eople’s trust? I hope he will not 
permanently damage his reputation for fiscal integr ity. Shri  Chidambaram has moved an 
amendment to the Bill completely going back upon his earlier statement to Parliament. 

34   
 
• The latest amendment that Shri  Chidambaram  has  m oved  means  that  a  custodian  has  
the power to return the property to the  heirs  and   all  that  the  heir  has  to  do  is  to  
produce a  succession  certificate.  If  he  proves  that  he  is  an  heir,  he  gets  the  property.  
It  is  a  plain  fraud. 
 
Suggestions/Views   of   Shri   M.A.M. Khan  
 The Committee in its sitting held on 10 th   October, 2011 heard the views of Shri Mohammad     Amir  
Mohammad  Khan,  the  erstwhile  Raja  of  Mehmooda bad,  who  is  the  main  party  in  the  case  of 
Enemy Properties, which was dealt by Hon’ble Suprem e  Court  of  India.  Initially,  he  gave  backgro und  
of  his  case  which  is  as     follows:- 
■ I  was  born  in  India.  Both  my  parents  were  born  in  India.  My  mother  was  opposed  
to the idea of partition.  She  translated  this  o pposition  by  never  even  contemplating  
going  to  Pakistan.  She  remained  a  citizen  of  India  to  her  dying  days  in  April,   1991. 
■ My father, in a very honourable and  amicable  way,   lived  a  separate  life  from  my  
mother. My mother  brought  me  up  in  India.  I  travelled  on  my  mother’s  passport  
which  was  an  Indian  passport.  I  got  my  own  passport  in  1959  as  an  Indian  citizen   
in  Lucknow  where  I  was    resident. 
■ My father died in London in 1973. He was not the am bassador of Pakistan as people       
have said. He was the Director-General of Islamic C entre in London, of which all the 
ambassadors of the Muslim countries – Saudi Arabia,  Egypt, Iran and others – were 
members. 
■ My father did not get any property  against  the  p roperty  left  in  India.  Property  in  
Pakistan was purchased by my mother before partitio n, which was  also  declared  as  
evacuee  property. 
■ I have always been domiciled  in  Lucknow  and  hav e  been  a  resident  of  India.  Since  
that point of time till date, I have never applied nor  contemplated  nor  taken  any 
nationality. 
■ On the basis of this, I applied to the Custodian of  Enemy Property to release my late    
father’s properties because I  was  an  Indian  cit izen.  In  1980,  the  late  Mrs.  Indira 
Gandhi took a  decision  to  release  the  properti es  of  my  late  father  to  his  legal  heirs  
and  successors  who  are  Indians.  Then,  I  was  given  an  opportunity  to  prove  that  I  
was the  Indian  heir  of  my  father.  In  1986,  the  Civil  Court  of  Lucknow  in  which  I  
had impleaded the Custodian of Enemy Property and t he Union of India as one party,       
gave  its  judgment  that  I  was  the  sole  heir  of  my  father  under  the  Oudh  Estate  Act  
of 1869. That judgment became final because it was not challenged and,  therefore,  it 
became res judicata. I again pleaded with the Government of India to  re lease  the  
properties  with  no  effect.  I  got  letters  from  various  Prime       Ministers. 
■ Mr. Rajiv Gandhi nominated me as the  Congress  (I)   candidate  and  I  won  the  election 
with a historic majority. All  kinds  of  charges  were  levelled  against  me  that  I  was  not 
an Indian, etc. But, those didn’t hold water. In 19 89, I was re-nominated by Mr.  Rajiv  
Gandhi and I won again although during  the  scruti ny  of  the  papers,  objections  were  
made  that  I  was  not  an  Indian  citizen.  But,  they  were      rejected. 
■ The State Government of UP did not appoint any Comm ittee on my citizenship. It sent       
the matter to  the  Governor  and  the  Governor  s ent  it  to  the  Election  Commission,  
which  did  not  dispute  my   citizenship. 

35   
 
■ In 1995, Mr. P. Chidambaram met me and my wife. He was then the  Minister  of  
Commerce. The Enemy Property at that time came unde r the purview  of the  
Commerce Ministry. We  were  assured  that  a  deci sion  would  be  taken.  The  general  
view was that this property should be released or a  part of it should be released. That         
was   the   Government’s  decision. 
■ There were two reasons behind  filing  case  in  Bo mbay  High  Court.  Number  one,  
because  we  felt  that  there  were  so  many  cro ss  currents  in  U.P.  that  there  could  be   
an attempt at some kind of convolution. The other r eason was the large number of 
correspondence between  the  Custodian  and  my  mother,  my  family  and  1.  We  felt  that 
it would be easier for us to obviate the position  where  the  Custodian  would  make  an 
excuse to say, “I have not got  papers  and  I  hav e  to  go  back  to  Bombay  and  get  
them.”, and this would  lead  to  unnecessary  prol onged  delay  because  litigation  takes  
huge  amount  of   time. 
■ Property  came  through  the  sanad  or  talukdari.  I  don’t  have  the  copy  of  the  sanad.     
I  have  the  Lord  Canning’s  Proclamation.  But,  as  far  as  sanad  is  concerned,  I  doubt  
if anyone has that. The  kabooliyat,  as  it  is  called,  is  vanished.  In  my  grand-f ather’s  
will, it was accepted as talukdari property. In the Oudh  Estates  Act,  there  are  
schedules. In this schedule,  the  names,  both  of   my  father’s  and  of  my  mother’s  
family are there. The 1869 Oudh Estates Act was  st udied  by  the  civil  court  in  
Lucknow  and  all  this  property  was  deemed  to  be   talukdari     property. 
■ I impleaded my mother, my two sisters, my uncle, my  two  aunts  —  my  father’s  real 
sisters; and, none of  them  contested  —  and,  th e  custodian.  I  won  the  case  in  2001  
from the Bombay High Court. The  judgment  goes  in   detail.  In  para  8  and  in  other  
paras, the court categorically says that the Govern ment admitted that I  was  an  Indian 
citizen. After winning this case, an appeal was fil ed by  the  Union  of  India  in  the  
Supreme Court. When this appeal was admitted before  Justice Lahoti, there was an 
intervention application and an order was given tha t it should be taken up at the final   
disposal of the case. At the final hearing, it was dismissed as withdrawn by the Bench           
of  the  Supreme  Court.  Shri  Chidambaram  appeared  initially  on  behalf  of  other   party. 
■ The State Government of UP made every attempt to be come  a  party  in  the  Supreme  
Court. They filed half a dozen applications. I neve r made them a party because  the  
properties were under the  Custodian  of  the  Gove rnment  of  India,  not  of  the  State.  
They had themselves sought to be made a  party,  wh ich  was  good  enough.  The  
Supreme  Court  heard  them,  but  did  not  accept     them. 
■ The 1869 Oudh Estates Act was studied by the civil court  in  Lucknow  and  all  this  
property was deemed to be talukdari  property.  The  succession  certificate  was  got 
through the Civil Procedure Code. The permission fo r maintenance was given by the 
Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  with  the  permission  of  the  Ministry  of      Commerce. 
■ I have not mentioned about displacement  of  tenent s  in  my  appeal  in  Supreme  Court.  
The Supreme  Court  divided  the  occupied  propert y  in  two  parts.  One  part  was  in  
which Government officers  were  living  at  a  pit tance.  The  rent  was  Rs.160  for  19  
acres. 873 properties are wakf-alallalah. The cases   are  going  on  in  the  court.  These  
wakfs do not benefit me; they benefit the  communit y.  There  are  three  wakfs.  Out  of  
these three wakfs,  two  are  major  wakfs.  I  am  mutawalli  of  that.  In  all  these  years,  
my mother and I sold whatever  we  could  to  maint ain  and  keep  the  tradition  of  the  
wakf alive. Out of 873 properties, 400 will go in  ceiling.  It  can  happen  today  or  
tomorrow   or   any   other day. 

36   
 
■ There are some urban properties. In the urban prope rties, there are two categories. One 
pertains to Government officials. The Supreme  Cour t  gave  its  order  on  that.  Its  order 
was implemented through the contempt of court proce edings. As far as the  rest  of  
occupants, non-government people, are concerned, th e Supreme Court ordered that two 
categories should be made. This is the  judgement  of  the  Supreme  Court.  Those  who  
were staying there, since  1965  as  tenants  of  m y  father  will  continue  to  be  tenants. To 
do this, they appointed a commission  called  the  Goswami  Commission.  He  gave  a  
report. That report was not acceptable to about ten  tenants. There are five  properties  
involved in that. Out of those five, two are in Haz ratganj and three are in old Lucknow. 
■ As far  as  poor  tenants  are  concerned,  they  a re  those  people  who  cannot  afford  to  
have top lawyers such as Mr. Ram Jethmalani,  or,  Mr.  Arun  Jaitley,  or,  Mr.  Harish  
Salve, or, Mr. Rohtagi,  or,  Mr.  Venugopal,  or,  Mr.  Shanti  Bhushan  as  their  advocates. 
As  far  as  rest  of  the  occupants  are  concerned,  I  have  given  them  an  undertaking  and 
I can give an undertaking to this  Committee  or  t o  any  other  forum  that  I  cannot  in  
good conscience  dislodge  them  because  I  will  be  answerable  not  just  to  you  but  to  
the  God  as  well. 
 Then, he gave his  suggestions/comments  on  the  Bill.  The  gist  of  the  views/suggestions  of  Shri  
Khan  is  as  follows:- 
■ The Enemy Property Act  was  enacted  in  1968.  Si nce  then  till  2010,  this  Act  has 
served well its purpose. There have been various Go vernments.  They  have  looked  at  
enemy property and all  its  problems  in  great  d etails.  None  of  them  found  any  reason 
for  bringing  in  an  amendment  or  a  Bill. 
■ The Bill is based on the ordinance which was promul gated on the 2nd July, 2010. This 
ordinance was brought a few  weeks  before  the  Pa rliament  was  to  convene.  The  
reason that was given by the Government for bringin g in this ordinance does not make    
much  sense. 
■ A question arises why this Bill  was  brought  abou t.  The  reason  given  by  the  Ministry 
was  that  there  was  a  spate  of  legislations  which  made  it  difficult  for  the  Custodian  
to   manage  properties. 
■ This proposed Bill is an unfair and unjust Bill. Th e provisions of this Bill will or may          
be  deemed  as  ultra  vires  by  the    courts. 
■ One of the things, which are very alarming, in this   Bill  is  that  it,  to  some  extent,  
bypasses the judiciary  and,  in  fact,  limits  th e  judiciary,  or,  in  fact,  overturns  or  tries   
to overturn and nullify some  very  important  deci sions  that  were  taken  in  the  past  by  
the  High  Courts. 
■ Giving a retrospective effect to this Bill is a ver y draconian and unfair decision.  
Retrospective effect can be given in certain circum stances when the need and urgency is 
there. For nearly over 40 years, there was no need to give any kind of retrospective effect      
to this Bill to nullify the judgments of courts. Th ere should be no retrospective action. 
■ If the Parliament so chooses, it can ensure  and  s trengthen  the  rights  of  those  whose  
rights  ought  to  be  protected  under  the  Civil  Procedure     Code. 
■ Sanctity of the judgements which have become final,  should be  upheld.  The  judiciary 
should  not  be  diminished  and   belittled. 
■ Powers that have been given to the Custodian are ju dicial powers and are  beyond  the 
purview of courts. This is unthinkable in our count ry. Parliament is the main pillar and       
the  Executive  and  the  Judiciary  are  the  supporting  pillars  of  our      democracy. 

 
37   
 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AND 
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE  CONSIDERATION  OF THE BILL  
 
 The Committee has noted that the Enemy Property (Am endment & Validation)  Ordinance,  2010 was 
promulgated on 2 July, 2010 to amend the Enemy  Pro perty  Act,  1968  in  view  of  the several court 
judgements, which, according to the Ministry of Hom e Affairs, have impacted the functioning of 
Custodian of Enemy Property and defeated the purpos e for which the Act was  established. Thereafter, 
the  Enemy Property (Amendment &  Validation)  Bill , 2010 was  introduced   in Lok Sabha on 2 August, 
2010 to  replace the  Ordinance. However,  the  Bil l could not  be  passed  and, consequently, the 
Ordinance lapsed.  Thereafter,  the  Bill  was  wit hdrawn  on  15  November,  2010 and a new Bill, i.e. , 
the Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Second Bill, 2010  (hereinafter called ‘Second Bill’) was 
introduced on the same day, which is now  before  t he  Committee. 
 The Committee has also  noted  that  in  the  Second  Bill,  certain  major  changes  have  been  made by 
the Government as compared  to  the  Ordinance  and   the  First  Bill.  These  changes  are contrary t o the 
aims and objectives of the ordinance and the first Bill. In view of the far-reaching consequences of t he 
Second Bill referred  to  it,  the  Committee  has  taken  the  views  of  the  public,  State  Govern ments  and  
other  stakeholders,  including  the  expert  opinion  of  Shri  Ram      Jethmalani. 
 The Committee has also  noted  from  the  material  available  on  record  before  it  that  the Secon d 
Bill before it, take away the jurisdiction of all t he Courts completely and then in the matter           of 
divesting of enemy property, the enemy property will  be  divested  only  to  the  owner  or,  if  the   owner is 
dead, to  any  lawful  heir  and  that  the  claima nt  shall  have  to  establish,  in  accordance  wi th the law,  
that  he  is  the  lawful  heir. According  to  the   Chief  Secretary,  Uttar  Pradesh,  the  Bill  is   not in the 
interest of the State and it takes away the propert ies, which are vested in the Custodian and       wh ich are 
not validly reversible in the owner or the heirs. A ccording  to  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Government, this  Bill 
may  result  in  giving  undue  benefit  to  some  individuals.  The  Committee,  in  this connection,  would 
like  to  mention  that  the  majority  of  the  en emy  properties  are  situated  in  Uttar Pradesh a nd out of 
them, majority of the properties pertain to  one  s ingle  case.  The  Chief  Secretary, Uttar Pradesh is on 
record to say that the  ‘Sanad  Kabooliyat’  under  which  many  of  the enemy properties were g iven by the 
British  Government,  after  First  War  of  Indepe ndence  in  1857,  says that as long as they  had  showed  
constantly  good  faith,  loyalty,  zeal  and  atta chment  to  the  British Government, the Sanad Kabooliyat  
would  remain  in  force;  otherwise,  it  will  an nul  the  right and title conferred upon such perso n  and  his  
heirs.  The  Chief  Secretary  was  also  on  recor d  to  say that with the India Independence Act, 19 47, the 
British Government came to be replaced by the Gover nment  of  India  and,  therefore,  the  act  of  g ood  
faith  and  allegiance  was  to  the  Government  o f India and if anyone breaches that or join the ene my, all 
the land would revert to the Government            as  per  the   Sanad   Kabooliyat.  
 
Applicability  of  the  Sanad   Taluqdari  
 
 In regard to the Sanad Taluqdari,  the  Committee  sought  the  comments  of  Ministry  of  Law and 
Justice on the issue of applicability of the Sanad Taluqdari in view of the enforcement  of  the provi sions  of  
the  Constitution  of   India. 
 
37 

38   
 
 According to the Department of Legal Affairs, Artic les  294  and  295  of  the  Constitution  of India  
deal with succession to property, assets, rights an d obligations. As per Articles 294 and  295, proper ties and 
assets which vested in His Majesty for  the  purpos es  of  the  Government  of  the Dominion of India shall, 
under this  Constitution,  vest  in  the  Union.  P roperties  and  assets  which  vested in His  Majes ty  for  the  
purposes  of  the  Government  of  each  Governor’s   province  shall  vest  in the corresponding State . 
These Articles make provision for succession by the  present  Government of the Union and the States 
to property, rights, liabilities and obligations vested in the    former  Governments. 
 The Department of Legal Affairs further opined that  Article  363  (1)  bars  all  courts  from  having any 
jurisdiction in any dispute arising of a pre-consti tution treaty, agreement,  covenant,  engagement or   sanad  
executed  between  a  Ruler  of  an  Indian  State  and  the  Government  of  India,  or in  any  disp ute  in  
respect  of  any  right  accruing  under  or  any  liability  or  obligation  arising  out  of any of the provisions 
of the Constitution relating to any such treaty etc . However, there are two conditions for the applica tion of 
the Article 363 (1). Number one, the covenant with the Ruler must       have been entered into before the 
coming  into  force  of  the  Constitution,  and  s econd,  the  covenant  must  continue  in  force  a fter  the  
commencement  of  the  Indian       Constitution. 
 Summing up the above opinion, the Department of Legal  Affairs  maintained  that  in  general sanad is 
valid as per the provision under Article 363 of the  Constitution of India. However,  while examining t he 
status of “sanad taluqdari” in any particular indiv idual case, the provisions of Articles 
294  and  295  of  the  Constitution  may  also  be  kept  in    view. 
 In this connection, the Committee also would like to note that Legislative Department of the Ministry of 
Law had furnished extracts of the debated of the Constituent Assembly which is at  Annexure-V. 
 The Committee also feels that  the  opinion  of  bo th  the  Departments  of  the  Ministry  of  Law an d  
Justice  also  need  to  be    considered. 
 The Committee also takes  note  of  the  opinion  o f  State  Government  of  Uttar  Pradesh  that  Bil l is 
ultra virus and unconstitutional. The opinion expressed by  Uttar  Pradesh  Government  is  as  under:- 
“The view of the State Government is that in the li ght  of  above  mentioned  historical  
background by the virtue of effect of Oudh  Estate  Act  all  the  properties  of  person  and  his 
heirs who become enemy and disloyal to  the  Govern ment  have  been  vested  in  the  State/  
Union of India hence the proposed Bill is totally u ltra virus and unconstitutional. The State           
of  UP.   strongly  opposes  this  Bill,  especially  insertion  of  new  section  5(3),  18  &  26(1)   (b)  
(i) (ii) and is in favour of restoring the Enemy Proper ty  (Amendment  and  Validation) 
Ordinance, 2010 to  its  original  shape.  State  G overnment  has,  therefore,  suggested  deletion  
of  two  proviso  to  Section  26(1)  (b)  of  the     Bill.”  
 The Committee feels that this is  a  serious  observation  and  needs  to  be  thoroughly  looked  into. 
 The Committee also flagged the issue with the then  Home  Secretary  whether  the  revised  Second Bill 
has been brought to favour some individuals. He inf ormed the Committee that it is not            to gi ve the 
benefit to any specific individual or  otherwise  b ut  this  is  not  convincing  to  the  Committee. It is with 
reference to a  particular  Supreme  Court  judgeme nt,  which  had  been  made  earlier. However, on 
repeated questions put by the  Committee  to  the  Home  Secretary  as  to  the  specific reasons due to 
which the revised Second Bill has been  brought  in   the  Parliament,  the Committee could not get 
convincing  answer.  In  fact,  the  Home  Secretar y  could  not  answer  as  to  what  happened  afte r  the  
lapse  of  the  Ordinance  and  before  bringing  the  Second     Bill. 

39   
 
 The Committee, in this connection,  also  would  li ke  to  refer  to  the  remarks  made  by  Shri  Ra m 
Jethmalani on both  the  Ordinance  and  the  Secon d  Bill.  He  felt  that  the  Ordinance  displayed   the 
honesty of the Government of India. He also referred to Para 4 of  the  Statement  made  by  the Minis ter of 
Home Affairs in Lok Sabha explaining the circumstan ces,  which  necessitated  the immediate  legislati on  
by  proclamation  of  the  Ordinance.  The  relevant  extract  is  as     under: 
“The Government decided that if immediate remedial measures are not taken, the prime  
objective of  the  Act  would  be  defeated  and  i mmovable  enemy  properties  worth  hundreds  
of crore of rupees would fall in the hands of the p ersons, who do not have any legitimate       
claim over these enemy properties. It was, therefor e, proposed to bring about amendments         
to the Enemy  Property Act,  1968  to  clarify  the  legislative  intent  and  strengt hen  the  hands 
of the Custodian and the Central Government and als o to prevent the courts from issuing        
any  orders  for  divestment  of  the  enemy    properties.”  
 The Committee also notes that the noted jurist Shri Ram Jethmalani has also stated that this        wa s the 
finding of the Government itself, which was present ed  in  the  Ordinance  to  clarify  the legislativ e intent 
and strengthen  the  hands  of  the  Custodian  and   the  Central  Government  to  prevent the  Courts   from  
issuing  any  orders  for  divestment  of  these       properties. 
 The  Committee  also  takes  note  of  the  opinion   expressed  by  Shri  Ram  Jethmalani that  an  
heir  can  only  get  what  the  propositus  had.  When  a  person  is  dead,  his  heir  gets  what  he  
owned.  Even  if  he  is  an  Indian  national  and   the  heir  of  his  father,  he  gets  what   the  father 
had, but if  the  father  did  not  have  the  property,  the  property  belonged  to  the Indian   na tion,   
he   gets zero.  
 The  Committee  therefore  strongly  feels  that  the  enemy  properties  worth  crores  of  rupees    in any 
case, should not go in the hands of those, who do n ot have any legitimate claim over these        enem y 
properties. The Committee would like to  stress  that  an  heir  should  get  only  what  the proposit us  had. 
 The Committee also takes note of the submissions made by the Chief  Secretary,  State  Government  of  
Uttar  Pradesh  that  the  list  attached  in  the  Supreme  Court  was  different  from  the  list fo r which the 
succession had been granted by the civil court, and , therefore, not covered under            the dispo sition of 
succession. The Committee does not understand  why  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property did not take 
cognizance of this and act accordingly. This matter needs to  be  thoroughly  examined. 
 The Committee also takes cognizance of the matter, as stated by  the  officers  of  the  Uttar  Prades h 
Government that he applied for  succession  in  his   plaint  before  the  civil  court,  Lucknow  unde r  the  
Oudh  Estate  Act  instead  of  under  Personal  La w.  It  was  later  on  confirmed  by  Shri 
M.A.M. Khan that he sought declaration of successio n under Oudh Estate Act instead of Cr.PC Act.       
The Committee also takes note  of  the  fact  that  in  the  succession  case,  Uttar  Pradesh  Govern ment  
was not made a party. Subsequently, the matter was mysteriously taken up in Mumbai High Court,   
instead of the High Court  in  Uttar  Pradesh,  tho ugh  the  properties  are  situated  in  Uttar  Pra desh.  
When  asked,  Shri  M.A.M.  Khan  replied  as   und er:- 
“Yes,  I am telling the exact truth to you. There w ere two reasons. Number one, because we         
felt that there were so many  cross  currents  in  U.P.  that  there  could  be  an  attempt  at  some  
kind of convolution. ... ... ... The other  reason  was  the  large  number  of  cor respondence  
between the Custodian and my mother, my  family  an d  I.  My  real  uncle  was  acting  as  
attorney. I have only one real uncle.  Somehow,  an   impression  has  been  given  that  I  have  
three real uncles. I have one real uncle and two st ep-uncles. My real uncle was a Barrister         
and he died in 1991. But,  I  filed  this  because  all  the  correspond ence,  all  the  papers  were  
with  the  Custodian  and  we  felt  that  it  would  be  easier  for  us  to  obviate  the  position where  

40   
 
the Custodian would make an excuse to say, “I have not got papers and I have to go back              
to Bombay and get them ”, and this would lead  to  unnecessary  prolonged  de lay  because  
litigation takes huge amount of time.  The  matter  was  argued  about  jurisdiction.  The  matter 
was  admitted”.  
 Besides, these arguments, the  Committee  notes  a  peculiar  situation,  wherein,  it  appears,  that  the 
whole issue has been messed up. The Ordinance and t he First Bill, at least, met the expectation          and 
satisfaction  of  some  group  of  the  interested  people  and  even  the  Government  strongly  felt   it  the 
right  course  at  one  time.  However,  the  Secon d  Bill  fails  on  all  counts  so  far  as  satis faction  and 
expectations of interested people is concerned. Dis agreement from the group, which supported Ordinance  
and the First Bill, is understandable, but strangel y, the Bill has also disapproval, in strong words, by the 
very individual, who was the main party  in  the  S upreme  Court.  The  Committee,  therefore,  fails  to  
understand  what  the  Government  wants  to  achieve  by  bringing  this  Second   Bill. 
 The Committee, in its meeting held on 24 October,  2011,  had  a  detailed  discussion  on  the report   
circulated  and  on  the  question  of  considering   the  Bill,  clause  by  clause.  The  Members  of   the 
Committee  unanimously  felt  that  it  was  not  c onvinced  by  the  spirit  behind  the  provisions  of  the 
Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Second Bill , 2010. The Members also  felt constrained to 
note that  the  Home  Secretary  could  not  explai n  the  reasons  as  to  why  the  Second  Bill was  brought 
before the Parliament replacing the earlier Bill. The Home Secretary could not give           a convincing reply 
to the  Committee  on  some  provisions  of  the  Second  Bill.  The  Committee  could not  get  a  convincing  
reply  as  to  what  necessitated  the  government  to  go  back  on  the  statement  and what prompte d  to  
bring  the  second  Bill  which  is  contrary  to  the  objective  of  the  First  Bill.  The Members of the 
Committee unanimously felt that there is a need  on   the  part  of  the Government to bring forward a 
fresh Bill in the Parliament in place of  the  Enem y  Property (Amendment & Validation) Second Bill, 
2010. The Members  also  unanimously  felt  and  ag reed  that there was no need  to  go  ahead  with  the  
clause-by-clause  consideration  of  the  Bill  and   decided  that the  Committee  should  recommend  to  the  
Government  to  bring  forward  a  fresh  Bill  inc orporating  the views of the Members, observations of the 
Committee made in the preceding paragraphs. The  Me mbers, however, unanimously decided that the 
Committee may make recommendations for improvement of the  office  of  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  
Property  and  also  to  complete  the  process  and  verification  of  enemy  properties  at  the    earliest. 
 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Gov ernment  may  withdraw  the present 
Bill, i.e. , Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010  and  bring  forward a 
fresh Bill incorporating the views and observations of the Committee and of the  Statement made by 
the Minister of Home Affairs explaining the circums tances which necessitated the  immediate  
legislation  by  proclamation  of  ordinance,  befo re  the  Parliament.  The Committee makes the 
following recommendations for improvement of the of fice  of  Custodian   of   Enemy Property:  
( i) The  Committee  has  been  given  to  understand  t hat  the  Office  of  the  Custodian    
of Enemy Property is facing severe staff crunch. Pr actically, there are very  few  
officers manning the Office due  to  which  the  pr ocess  of  verification,  etc.,  of 
enemy properties could not be completed till now. E ven though the Central 
Government has issued a notification requesting all  the State Governments  to  
nominate District Magistrate/District Collector as the Deputy Custodian, the 
Committee has been given to understand that there i s not much progress  in  the  
matter and States have not taken much action. The C ommittee is also 
constrained to note, and the then Home Secretary hi mself admitted before the 
Committee, that the Office of the Custodian of Enem y  Property  has  so  far  been  
given  least  priority.  He  further  went  on  to  say  that  there  is  a  vaccum  in  the  

41   
 
entire system in which the Custodian works. The sta ffing pattern in the 
Custodian’s office is abysmally  low.  Similarly,  the  Chief  Secretary,  West  Bengal  
also stated likewise.  The  same  situation  prevai ls  in  other  States  also.  This  is  a  
very sorry state of affairs and the Committee takes  it very seriously. The 
Committee takes note of the assurance given by the Home Secretary that 
immediate action would be taken to appoint the staf f for the Office of  
Custodian of Enemy Property  instead  of  depending   upon  the  State  Government.  
On the query made to the Ministry of Home Affairs a s to whether workload was 
assessed before appointing District Magistrates/Dis trict Collectors as Deputy 
Custodian of Enemy Properties, the Ministry stated that the assessment of 
additional work load on account of appointment of D istrict Magistrates/District 
Collectors as ex-officio Deputy Custodian was not made  as  they  were  alre ady  
carrying out similar work in the  past.  The  Commi ttee  fails  to  understand  as  to  
why the  workload  arrangement  was  not  made.  Th e  Ministry  further  informed  
that District Magistrates/District Collectors are f ree to engage  retired  District  
Revenue officials; or deploy other staff from other  sections from time to time  
depending on the workload for assisting  him in  ve rification/identification  of 
enemy properties in the area falling within their r espective districts. The 
Custodian of Enemy  Property  would  consider  requ ests  from  State  Government/  
UT Administrations for meeting expenditure on hirin g of such additional 
manpower  by  the  concerned  DMs/DCs.  The  Commit tee  however  feels  that  this     
is all ad hoc arrangement. Now that fresh vacancies are being cre ated,  the  
Committee  hopes  that  the  proposal  made  to  Mi nistry  of  Finance  would  have   
been accepted by now and the process of recruitment  would have started. The 
Committee desires that the recruitment process may  be  completed  at  the 
earliest and the staff be in place soon. The Commit tee would like to  review  the  
progress of recruitment of  staff  and  the  proces s  of  enemy  properties  without  
having any regard to this Bill. The  Committee  des ires  to  be  informed  of  the 
progress   periodically.  
( ii) The Committee was informed that  it  would  take  t hree  or  four  years  to  complete 
the verification and disposal and for winding  up  of  the  office  of  Custodian  of  
Enemy Property. The Committee, however, feels that if the things  move  at  the  
current pace, it  may  take  even  more  than  four   or  five  years.  The  Committee  
takes note of  the  fact  that  Pakistan  had  long   back  seized  properties  of  Indians  
and disposed them off in breach of the mutual  agre ement.  It,  however,  does  not  
mean that the enemy properties and the Office of  t he  Custodian  of  Enemy  
Property should remain in perpetuity. The Committee , therefore, desires that a time-
bound plan may be drawn and the entire process of i dentification of enemy properties  
and  disposal  may  be  completed  within  a  stipulated       time.  

 
42  
 
 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMNEDATIONS 
OF  THE   COMMITTEE   —  AT   A GLANCE  
 
The  Committee  also  takes  note  of  the  opinion   expressed  by  Shri  Ram  Jethmalani 
that  an  heir  can  only  get  what  the  proposit us  had.  When  a  person  is  dead,  his  heir  ge ts  
what  he  owned.  Even  if  he  is  an  Indian  nat ional  and  the  heir  of  his  father,  he  gets  what   
the father had, but if  the  father  did  not  have   the  property,  the  property  belonged  to  the 
Indian   nation,   he gets  zero. (Para  5.14) 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Gov ernment  may  withdraw  the 
present Bill, i.e. , Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010  and  bring  
forward a fresh Bill incorporating the views and ob servations of the Committee and of the  
Statement made by the Minister of Home Affairs expl aining the circumstances which 
necessitated the  immediate  legislation  by  procl amation  of  ordinance,  before  the  Parliament.  
The Committee makes the following recommendations f or improvement of the office  of  
Custodian   of   Enemy Property:  
( iii) The  Committee  has  been  given  to  understand  t hat  the  Office  of  the  Custodian    
of Enemy Property is facing severe staff crunch. Pr actically, there are very  few  
officers manning the Office due  to  which  the  pr ocess  of  verification,  etc.,  of 
enemy properties could not be completed till now. E ven though the Central 
Government has issued a notification requesting all  the State Governments  to  
nominate District Magistrate/District Collector as the Deputy Custodian, the 
Committee has been given to understand that there i s not much progress  in  the  
matter and States have not taken much action. The C ommittee is also 
constrained to note, and the then Home Secretary hi mself admitted before the 
Committee, that the Office of the Custodian of Enem y  Property  has  so  far  been  
given least priority. He further went  on  to  say  that  there  is  a  vaccum  in  the  
entire system in which the Custodian works. The sta ffing pattern in the 
Custodian’s office is abysmally  low.  Similarly,  the  Chief  Secretary,  West  Bengal  
also stated likewise.  The  same  situation  prevai ls  in  other  States  also.  This  is  a  
very sorry state of affairs and the Committee takes  it very seriously. The 
Committee takes note of the assurance given by the Home Secretary that 
immediate action would be taken to appoint the staf f for the Office of  
Custodian of Enemy Property  instead  of  depending   upon  the  State  Government.  
On the query made to the Ministry of Home Affairs a s to whether workload was 
assessed before appointing District Magistrates/Dis trict Collectors as Deputy 
Custodian of Enemy Properties, the Ministry stated that the assessment of 
additional work load on account of appointment of D istrict Magistrates/District 
Collectors as ex-officio Deputy Custodian was not made  as  they  were  alre ady  
carrying out similar work in the  past.  The  Commi ttee  fails  to  understand  as  to  
why the  workload  arrangement  was  not  made.  Th e  Ministry  further  informed  
that District Magistrates/District Collectors are f ree to engage  retired  District  
Revenue officials; or deploy other staff from other  sections from time to time  
depending  on   the   workload  for   assisting  hi m   in   verification/identification  of  
 
42 

43   
 
enemy properties in the area falling within their r espective districts. The 
Custodian of Enemy  Property  would  consider  requ ests  from  State  Government/  
UT Administrations for meeting expenditure on hirin g of such additional 
manpower  by  the  concerned  DMs/DCs.  The  Commit tee  however  feels  that  this     
is all ad hoc arrangement. Now that fresh vacancies are being cre ated,  the  
Committee  hopes  that  the  proposal  made  to  Mi nistry  of  Finance  would  have   
been accepted by now and the process of recruitment  would have started. The 
Committee desires that the recruitment process may  be  completed  at  the 
earliest and the staff be in place soon. The Commit tee would like to  review  the  
progress of recruitment of staff  and  the  process   of  enemy  properties  without  
having any regard to this Bill. Committee desires  to  be  informed  of  the 
progress   periodically.  
( iv ) The Committee was informed that it would take three  or four  years  to  
complete the verification and disposal and for wind ing up of the office  of 
Custodian of Enemy Property. The Committee,  howeve r,  feels  that  if  the  
things move at  the  current  pace,  it  may  take  even  more  than  four  or  five  
years. The Committee takes note  of the  fact  that   Pakistan  had  long  back  
seized properties of Indians and disposed them off in breach of the mutual 
agreement. It, however, does not mean  that  the  e nemy  properties  and  the  
Office of the Custodian of Enemy Property should re main in perpetuity. The 
Committee, therefore, desires that a time-bound pla n may  be  drawn  and  the  
entire process of identification of enemy propertie s and disposal may be 
completed   within   a stipulated  time. (Para  5.20) 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  
 
 
 

 
46  
 

 
47   
 
 
 
XII 
TWELFTH  MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 12.30 P.M. on  Wednesday,  the  2 nd  February,  2011  in  Committee  Room-
B,  Ground  Floor,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New   Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia 
3. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
4. Shri   Prasanta  Chatterjee 
5. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
6. Shri  L.K. Advani 
7. Dr.  Rattan  Singh Ajnala 
8. Shri  Ramen  Deka 
9. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
10. Shri  Naveen  Jindal 
11. Adv.  A.  Sampath 
12. Shri  Hamdullah Sayeed 
13. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
14. Dr.   Raghuvansh   Prasad Singh 
15. Shri  Ravneet  Singh 
16. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
17. Shri  Dinesh  Chandra  Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
Shri  P.P.K.  Ramacharyulu,  Director 
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,   Committee  Officer  
 
WITNESSES  
 
Representatives   of   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
1. Shri  Gopal  K.  Pillai,  Home  Secretary 
 
47 

48   
 
2. Shri  Anil  Goswami,  Additional  Secretary 
3. Shri  A.K.  Goyal,  Joint   Secretary 
4. Shri  Dinesh  Singh,  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property,    Mumbai 
5. Shri   J.P.N.   Singh,  Director 
 
Representatives   of   Legislative   Department,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1 . Shri  V.K.   Bhasin,  Secretary 
2 . Shri  N.K.  Nampoothiry,  Additional   Secretary 
3 . Shri  Diwakar  Singh,  Deputy  Legislative   Counsel 
 
Representatives   of   Department   of   Legal  Affairs,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1. Shri   D.R.   Meena,   Law Secretary 
2. Shri  R.L.  Koli,  Additional  Secretary 
 The  Chairman  welcomed  the  Members  to  the  meeting  of  the     Committee. 
 The Chairman then apprised the Members that the mee ting had been scheduled  for  a  presentation of 
the Home Secretary on the Enemy Property (Amendment  & Validation) Second Bill,    2010,  which  had  
been  referred  to  it  on  30 th   December,   2010,  for   examination  and   report  by  15 th    February,  2011. 
 The Chairman then recapitulated that  as  per  the  decision  of  the  Committee  taken  in  its  sitt ing 
held  on  5 th  January,  2011,  he,  on  behalf  of  the  Committe e,  had  sought  extension  of  time  up to the 
last week of  Part  II  of  the  Budget  Session,  2011  of  Parliament,  from  Hon’ble  Chairman,  Ra jya 
Sabha, for presentation of report on the Bill.  He  informed  the  Members  that  Hon’ble Chairman,  
however,  has  granted  extension  upto  6 th    April,  2011  only  for  the     purpose. 
[At  this  stage  the  witnesses  were  called   in ]  
 The Chairman welcomed the Home  Secretary,  the  La w  Secretary,  the  Legislative  Secretary  and 
other officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs  an d  the  Department  of  Legal  Affairs  and Legisla tive 
Department of  the  Ministry  of  the  Law  &  Just ice.  He  asked  the  Home  Secretary  to  make a 
presentation on the Enemy  Property  (Amendment  &  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010.  The  Home 
Secretary then sought the permission of the Committ ee to  allow  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  to  
make  the  presentation.  The  Committee  granted  the      permission. 
 Thereafter, the Custodian  of  Enemy  Property,  Mumbai,  made  a  presentation.  He  elaborated  on the 
Laws/Rules/Notifications governing Enemy Properties ; definition of Enemy National for the  purpose of 
enemy properties and what constituted Enemy Propert y;  constraints/issues  in  final settlement of ene my 
property; duties and powers  of  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  of  India;  various decisions/judgments 
of Courts  on  the  issue  and  difficulties  faced  in  the  management  of  enemy   properties. 
 The Custodian then listed out  the  objectives  sou ght  to  be  achieved  by  the  proposed  Bill  whi ch  
were  as   under: 
(a) The enemy property shall continue to vest in the Cu stodian till  it  is  divested  by  the  
Central Government even if the enemy subject/firm c eased to be enemy due to death, 
extinction,  winding  up,  or  change  of  national ity  or  that  the  legal  heir  or  successor  is  
a  citizen  of  India  or  a  citizen  of  a  country,  which  is  not     enemy. 
(b) The enemy property will be divested to the owner  or  his  lawful  heir  and  that  the  
claimant  shall  establish  that  he  is  the  lawful   heir. 

 
49 
 
(c) The enemy  property  divested  from  the  Custodian   to  any  person  under  the  provisions  
of the Act shall stand transferred to and vest or c ontinue  to  vest  in  the  Custodian  
provided: 
■ That if Enemy  Property  was  divested  from  the  Custodian  by  a  valid  order  prior 
to 2 nd July, 2010, or where the property had  been  return ed  to  the  owner  or  his 
lawful heir by an order of the court and the  Gover nment  is  satisfied  that  the  
property was returned  to  the  owner  or  his  law ful  heir  such  enemy  property  
would  continue  to  remain  with  such     persons. 
■ That any claim made by  any  person  before  any  c ourt  or  other  authority  against  
the owner or his lawful  heir,  shall  not  be  aff ected  and  such  claim  shall  be  
decided in accordance with the law  by  the  court  or  other  authority  as  the  case  
may  be. 
(d) Custodian of Enemy Property is proposed to  be  emp owered  to  decide  a  case  after  
enquiry and issue a vesting certificate which may b e appealed in court of competent 
jurisdiction. 
(e) Custodian of Enemy Property can declare certain tra nsfers without Custodian/RBI’s 
permission  and  through  oral  will/gift  etc.  as  null  and    void. 
(f) No court shall have jurisdiction to order divestmen t  from  the  Custodian  of  enemy  
property  vested  in   him. 
After  the  presentation,  the  Home  Secretary  made  some  additional     observations. 
 Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committ ee sought clarifications  on  the  following  
issues: 
■ Reasons for the promulgation of the Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) 
Ordinance,   2010. 
■ The legislative intent of the Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Second Bill,    2010. 
■ Comparative study of the provisions  of  the  Enemy   Property  Act,  1968,  the  changes  
made  through  Enemy  Property  (Amendment)  Act,  1977  and  the  amendments  sought   
to be made through the promulgation of the Enemy Pr operty (Amendment &  
Validation)  Ordinance,  2010,  and  the  present  Bill. 
■ Role of National Institute of Financial Management and  its  effectiveness  in  regard  to  
study  of  Enemy  Properties  in   India. 
■ Self-contradictions in the provisions of  the  Bill   as  enumerated  in  para  6(b)  and  (c)  of 
the  Statement  of  Objects  and  Reasons  of  the    Bill. 
■ Applicability  of  the  provisions  of  Land  Ceiling  Act  in  respect  of  Enemy    Property. 
■ Status of legal heirs of the persons who left India  and acquired citizenship  of  another 
country,  leaving  behind  property  in  India  dec lared  enemy  property  and  compensated   
in  that  country  for  whatever  property  he/she  lost  in     India. 
■ Contradictions  in  the  judgments  of  different  courts  on  the     issue. 
■ Role  of  Custodian  under  the  present   Bill. 
■ Issue of compensation to be given to the people who  migrated from  Pakistan  to  India 
leaving  behind  their  property. 

50   
 
■ Abolition of Zamindari Act of UP,  Land  Reforms  Act  of  UP  and  Tenancy  Act  of  UP 
and  their  impact  on  proposed   legislation. 
■ Desirability of changing the nomenclature of ‘Enemy  Property’, in the  current 
scenario. 
4.0 The Home Secretary  and  other  officials  repl ied  to  some  of  the  queries.  The  Chairman  th en 
asked  the  Home  Secretary  to  furnish  written  replies  to  the  issues/queries      raised. 
5.0  The  Chairman  and  Members  thereafter  obser ved  that  the  Bill  contained  provisions  with   
serious implications and decided that the Committee  should issue a press release inviting written 
memoranda from the public/stakeholders.  They  were   also  of  the  view  that  the  Committee  should   
hear some of the affected individuals/parties. Sinc e,  bulk  of  the  enemy  properties  were  located   in  
Uttar Pradesh, particularly at  Lucknow,  Sitapur  and  Lakhimpur,  it  was  also  decided  to  hear  the  
Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  Uttar  Pradesh  in  the  first      instance. 
6.0      A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
 The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  1.54  P.M.  to  meet  again  at  12.30  P.M.  on  Monday,  the  14 th    
February,  2011. 

 
51  
 
 
 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH   MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the  25 th  April,  2011  in  Room  No.  63,  First  
Floor,  Parliament  House,  New   Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  Rishang  Keishing 
3. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia 
4. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
5. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
6. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
7. Shri  L.K. Advani 
8. Dr.  Rattan  Singh Ajnala 
9. Shri  Raman  Deka 
10. Shri  L.  Raja  Gopal 
11. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
12. Shri  Naveen  Jindal 
13. Shri  Lalubhai  Babubhai Patel 
14. Shri  Natubhai  Gomanbhai  Patel 
15. Shri  Bishnu  Pada  Ray 
16. Adv.  A.  Sampath 
17. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
18. Shri  Ravneet  Singh 
19. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
20. Shri  Bhausaheb  Rajaram   Wakchaure 
21. Shri  Dinesh  Chandra  Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,  Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,   Committee  Officer  
 
51 

52   
 
2.0      * * * 
2.1      * * * 
 
Enemy   Property   (Amendment   &  Validation)   Second   Bill, 2010.  
 The Chairman then informed the Members that the Com mittee may constitute  a  Sub- Committee to 
examine and report to it  on  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  &  Validation)  Second Bill, 2010. Aft er 
some discussion, the Committee agreed to the proposal and decided that the sub- Committee  may  comprise  
the  following    Members: 
1. Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu,  Chairman 
2. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia,  Convenor 
3. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
4. Shri  D.  Raja 
5. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
6. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
7. Shri  Rattan  Singh Ajnala 
8. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
9. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
 The  Committee  authorized  its  Chairman  to  constitute  the     sub-Committee. 
4.0      * * * 
4.1      * * * 
5.0      A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
 The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  12.50    P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***  Relate  to  other  matters. 

 
53  
 
 
 
I 
FIRST  MEETING 
 
The Sub-Committee met at 11.20 A.M. on  Wednesday,  the  11 th  May  2011  in  Room  No.  63, 
First  Floor,  Parliament  House,  New   Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia  —   Convenor  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
3. Dr.  Rattan  Singh Ajnala 
4. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
5. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
6. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati  Sharda  Subramaniam,  Joint   Secretary  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,  Director  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
2.0 At the outset,  the  Convenor  welcomed  the  M embers  to  the  first  sitting  of  the  newly 
constituted Sub-Committee on the Enemy Property (Am endment and Validation) Second Bill,  2010. 
Giving a background to the constitution of the Sub- Committee on the Bill, he  informed  that  the  
Chairman, DRSC on  Home  Affairs  has  constituted  the  Sub-Committee,  consisting  of  Nine  members  
to examine the Enemy Property (Amendment and Valida tion) Second Bill, 2010 in detail and submit           
a  report  on  the  same  to  the  DRSC  on  Home    Affairs. 
 Then, after a brief discussion,  the  Sub-Committee ,  unanimously,  decided  to  examine  the  issues 
contained in the Bill in Delhi, itself, and not to undertake any study tour to the States where            the  said  
enemy  properties  are    located. 
 The Sub-Committee were of the view that it would be  better if the Home Secretary to the Government 
of India, Custodian of the Enemy Property in  India   and  the  Chief  Secretaries  and  the Home Secre taries 
of the concerned States are  invited  to  appear  b efore  the  Committee  for  oral  evidence  and  th e  written  
response  on  the  Bill  may  be  sought  from  the  concerned       States. 
 The Convenor then informed the  Members  that  the  main  Committee  had  issued  a  Press  release 
inviting memoranda containing views/comments from p ublic/stakeholders on this Bill. The Secretariat 
received about 80 memoranda which would be  forward ed  to  the  Ministry  for  their  comments and 
replies. The  Convenor  added  that  after  hearing   oral  evidence  of  Home  Secretary  to  the  Gov ernment  
of  India,  Custodian  of  the  Enemy  Property  in  India  and  the  Chief  Secretaries  and 
53 

54   
 
Home Secretaries of the concerned States, the  sub-committee  would  hear  some  of  the  people  who  
have   sent   representations/memoranda. 
 The Sub-Committee, then, decided  to  meet  on  20 th  May,  2011  at  11.00  A.M.  to  hear  the  Home  
Secretary  and  the  Custodian  of  the  Enemy  Property  in     India. 
5.0 The  Convenor  then  directed  the  Secretariat   to   prepare  a   questionnaire  on      the  iss ues 
concerning  the  Bill  and  send  it  to  the  MHA  for  their   replies. 
6.0 A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
 The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  11.30    A.M. 

 
55  
 
 
 
II  
SECOND  MEETING 
 
The Sub-Committee met at  11.00  A.M.  on  Friday,  the  20 th  May,  2011  in  Committee  Room  
‘B’,  First  Floor,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New   Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia  —   Convenor  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
3. Shri  D.  Raja 
4. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
 
LOK SABHA  
5. Dr.  Rattan  Singh Ajnala 
6. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
7. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
8. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director 
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant   Director 
 
WITNESSES  
Representatives   of   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
1. Shri  Gopal  K.  Pillai,  Home  Secretary 
2. Shri  Anil  Goswami,  Additional  Secretary 
3. Shri   R.R.   Jha,   Joint Secretary 
4. Shri  Dinesh  Singh,  Custodian,  Enemy    Property 
5. Shrimati   Sarita   Puri,   Deputy Secretary 
Representatives   of   Ministry   of   Law   and   Justice,   Legislative Department  
1 . Shri  V.K.   Bhasin,  Secretary 
2 . Shri  N.K.  Nampoothiry,  Additional   Secretary 
3 . Dr.  G.   Narayana  Raju,  Joint  Secretary  and  Legal   Advisor 
4 . Shri  Diwakar  Singh,  Deputy  Legislative   Counsel 
 
55 

56   
 
Department   of   Legal  Affairs  
Shri  R.L.  Koli,  Additional  Secretary 
 At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members to the second sitting of Sub-Committee         on  the  
Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,   2010. 
 The Convenor then  recalled  that  in  the  last  m eeting  of  the  Sub-Committee,  it  was  decided  to 
hear the Home Secretary and the Custodian of the En emy Property in India. He added that the Sub-
Committee had  decided  to  seek  written  comments   of  all  the  State  Governments  wherever  enemy  
properties were located and also to hear the Chief Secretaries and Home Secretaries of some           of the 
concerned States. He also informed the Members that  the  Home  Secretary  had  made  a  presentation 
before the main Committee  on  the  Bill  on  2 nd  February,  2011  and  the  MHA  had  sent  the  wri tten  
replies  to  the  queries/issues  raised  by  the  Members  in  that      meeting. 
 The Convenor then  informed  the  Members  that  th e  Home  Secretary  and  the  Custodian  of  the 
Enemy Property in India had been invited for oral e vidence before the Sub-Committee. He also      adde d 
that besides the Home Secretary, the Law Secretary and Legislative  Secretary  had  also  been invited  to 
appear before the Sub-Committee to clarify legal an d legislative queries of the Members. However,  the   
Law  Secretary  had  sought  exemption  from  appea ring  before  the  Sub-Committee  as   he was 
accompanying Law Minister on a foreign tour and he had acceded to the request. Additional Secretary,  
Department  of  Legal  Affairs,  would  therefore  represent  the      Department. 
[At  this  stage  the  witnesses  were  called   in ]  
 The Convenor welcomed  the  Home  Secretary,  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  in  India,  the 
Legislative Secretary,  Additional  Secretary,  Dep artment  of  Legal  Affairs  and  other  officials  of  the 
Ministry of Home Affairs  and  the  Department  of  Legal  Affairs  and  Legislative  Department  of  the 
Ministry  of  the  Law  and  Justice.  He  asked  the  Home  Secretary  to  make  a  brief  presentati on  on the 
Bill, clarify the issues raised in  the  previous  meeting  of  the  Main  Committee  and  also  enlig hten  the  
Sub-Committee  on  following   point:- 
“According  to  the  Ministry,  the  purpose  of  t he  proposed  amendment  is  to  limit  the  scope  
of judicial review by courts, including the Supreme  Court.  In  view  of  this,  whether  
enactment  of  this  amendment  Bill  will  stand  judicial     review?”  
 The Home  Secretary  elaborated  on  the  historical  background  of  the  Enemy  Property  in  India. He 
endorsed the view  expressed  by  the  Custodian  o f  Enemy  Property  in  India  before  the  Main 
Committee that the mechanism for dealing with the E nemy Property in India is suffered from         lac k of 
required staff. He further  stated  that  the  Government  had  given  low  priority  to  the  subject. The Home 
Secretary also made some additional observations. The  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  apprised  Members  
of  the  Sub-Committee  of  certain  facts  and  th e  modus  operandi  of  maintenance  of  Enemy  Property  
in   India. 
 Commenting on the issue of scope of judicial review , the Legislative  Secretary  drew  the  attention  of  
the  Sub-Committee  to  the  proposed  Section  18( B)  and  the  Explanation  thereto,  given  in the Bill. He 
stated that the jurisdictions  of  the  High  Courts  and  the  Supreme  Court  are  of  two types - t he ordinary 
jurisdiction and the writ jurisdiction. He further  stated  that  the  ordinary jurisdiction can be ou sted by 
law but the  writ  jurisdiction  or  the  judicial  review,  being  the  basic  feature  of  the  Constitution,  under  
article  226  or  227,  cannot  be  ousted  and,  therefore,  the  power    to  declare  or  adjudicat e  whether  a  
property  is  enemy  property  or  not,  remains  w ith  the  courts. 
 The Additional Secretary, Department of Legal  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice  also  added by 
stating that all the orders passed by  the  administrative  authorities  are  subject  to  judicial  review  and  the  
power  of  the  High  Courts  and  the  Supreme  Court  cannot  be  taken  away  by      any 

 
57 
 
statute. He added that  order  passed  by  any  aut hority,  whether  in  the  Central  Government  or  the  
State Government, are subject to judicial review  a nd,  therefore,  whatever  orders  are  passed,  al l  of  
them can be scrutinized by the court in  exercising   the  powers  under  articles  226  and  227  and 
wherever the Fundamental Rights are infringed, the Supreme Court can  also  take  cognizance  under 
article  32  of  the   Constitution. 
 Thereafter, the Convenor and Members of the Sub-Com mittee sought clarifications on the following  
issues: 
■ Whether the Government has identified all the Enemy  Properties in India? If so, when       
this identification was completed? How many Enemy P roperties in India have  been  
identified  and  how  many  are  yet  to  be   identified? 
■ Whether the Government has any specific plan to inc rease the man-power  to  manage  
Enemy  Properties? 
■ Relevance of the nomenclature of ‘Enemy Property’ i n the perspective of changing 
international  relations  may  be   reviewed. 
■ Judgements by various High Courts and Supreme Court  have  adversely  affected  the  
powers of the Custodian of Enemy  Property  in  Ind ia.  Whether  the  proposed  Bill  is  
meant  to  undo  the  implementation  of  the  judgements  in  letter  and    spirit? 
■ Whether the purpose of the Bill  is  to  benefit  s ome  individuals  as  there  is  a  provision 
that the decisions of Supreme Court given after 2 nd July, 2010 will only be 
implemented. 
■ After the enactment of  this  Act  in  1968,  how  many  Enemy  Properties  have  been  
handed  over  to   claimants? 
■ Number of properties which were classified as not b elonging to the  enemy  persons.  
Reasons for dealy by Government in taking such a lo ng time to take decision on those  
Enemy   Properties. 
■ How long it is going to take to complete  the  proc ess  of  identification  of  Enemy  
Properties   in   the country? 
■ The office of the Custodian of Enemy Property  in  India  is  situated  at  Mumbai.  
However, the largest  number  of  Enemy  Properties   in  India  are  in  Uttar  Pradesh.  How 
is  that  justified? 
■ Reasons  for  not  disposing  off  the  Enemy  Properties  which  have  no       claimants. 
 
■ By  when  the  whole  exercise  of  settling  the  Enemy  Properties  be     completed? 
 
■ Whether the people who migrated  to  Pakistan  and  got  compensation  there,  were 
eligible  for  getting  properties  in  India? 
■ If the properties are returned back to their legal heirs, would they pay taxes on those 
properties   with   effect   from 1965? 
■ Applicability  of  the  provisions  of  Land  Ceiling  Act  in  respect  of  Enemy    Property. 
 
■ The background note  furnished  by  the  MHA,  unde r  the  heading  ‘Proposed Amendment 
of the Act,’ uses a phrase ‘till a decision  is  ta ken  for  extinguishment  of  the  Act.’  
Whether  the  Ministry  visaulises  a  time-frame  of  extinguishment  of  this     Act? 

58   
 
 The Home Secretary and the Custodian of Enemy Propert in India replied  to  some  of  the  queries. 
 The Convenor then asked the Home Secretary to furni sh written replies to the issues/queries    which 
were not replied in the meeting. He then told the H ome Secretary that after hearing the oral   evidenc e  of  
concerned  officials  of  different  State  Governments,  the  Sub-Committee  would  again  hear  him  before  
finalizing  the  report  on  the  said   Bill. 
6.0      A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
 The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  12.10    P.M. 

 
59   
 
 
 
III 
THIRD  MEETING 
 
The Sub-Committee met at  3.00  P.M.  on  Tuesday,  the  19 th  July,  2011  in  Committee  Room  
‘B’,  First  Floor,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New   Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia  —   Convener  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
3. Shri  D.  Raja 
4. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
 
LOK SABHA  
5. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
6. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
7. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,   Joint  Secretary  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,   Committee  Officer  
 
WITNESSES  
 
Representatives   of   Legislative   Department,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1 . Shri  V.K.   Bhasin,  Secretary 
2 . Shri  N.K.  Nampoothiry,  Additional   Secretary 
3 . Dr.  G.   Narayana  Raju,  Joint  Secretary  and  Legislative    counsel 
Representatives   of   Department   of   Legal  Affairs,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
Shri  Sudhir  Ranjan  Mishra,  Deputy  Legal   Advisor 
 
Representative   of   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
Shri   R.R.   Jha,   Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives   of   Government   of Goa  
1. Shri  Sanjay  Kumar,  Chief   Secretary 
2. Shri  Rajeev  Verma,  Special  Secretary 
3. Shri  R.  Mihir  Vardhan,  District   Collector 
 
59 

60   
 
2.0 At the outset, the Convener welcomed  the  Memb ers  to  the  sitting  of  Sub-Committee  and  
informed  that  pursuant  to  the  decision  taken  in  the  meeting  of   the   main  Committee  held   on   
30 th June, 2011, the Chairman, DRSC on Home Affairs had  requested  the  Hon’ble  Chairman,  Rajya 
Sabha for extension of time up to the first week  o f  Winter  Session  of  Parliament,  2011,  for 
presentation of the report on  the  Enemy  Property   (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010 ,  
and  Hon'ble  Chairman,  Rajya  Sabha  granted  extension  only  upto  31 st    August,  2011  for  the     same. 
 The Convener then  recalled  that  the  Sub-Committee  at  its  first  sitting  held  on  11 th  May,  2011 had 
decided to seek written comments of all  the  State   Governments  wherever  enemy  properties are 
situated in the first instance and also to hear Chi ef Secretaries of  some  State Governments.  Follow ing  
this,  permission  of  Hon'ble  Chairman,  Rajya  Sabha  was  sought,  which   was  accorded. 
 The Convener then recapitulated that the Secretaria t,  accordingly,  had  written  to  respective  Chi ef 
Secretaries on 2 nd June, 2011 for comments and had also reminded them by its written  communication dated 
22 nd June, 2011. He also mentioned  that  the  Secretari at,  while  reminding  the  Chief  Secretaries  of  
concerned  States  had  mentioned  in  its  communication  that  if  the  comments    of the State Government 
were not received by 30 th June, 2011, it would be presumed that the State Gov ernment has no comments to 
offer on the Bill. He further informed that only fo ur States  have responded so far. Out  of  the  fou r,  two  
States/UTs  namely  West  Bengal  and  Daman  and  Diu  had  sent their comments and other two States 
namely Karnataka and Bihar, had only forwarded the communication  of  the  Secretariat  to  the  conce rned  
Departments  of  the  State        Governments. 
4.0 The Convener then informed the Members that the  Chief Secretary of  the  State  
Government of Goa has been invited to tender oral e vidence  before  the  Sub-Committee.  He  also  
apprised the Members that the Chief Secretaries of West Bengal was also invited but he had sought 
exemption from appearing before the Sub-Committee, due to his  engagement  in  the  Tripartite  
Agreement proposed  to  be  signed  by  the  Govern ment  of  India,  Government  of  West  Bengal  and   
the  Gorkha  Janamukti  Morcha  in  Darjeeling  on  18 th    July,  2011,  which  has  been  acceded      to. 
[At  this  stage,  the  witness  was  called    in) 
 The Convener welcomed the Chief Secretary, Government of Goa to the sitting of the Sub- Committee. 
 The Convener asked the Chief Secretary, Government of Goa to  give  his  views  on  the provisions of 
the Bill particularly on the  management  of  enemy   properties  situated  in  the  State  of  Goa. He  also 
asked him to brief the Sub-Committee on the description of enemy properties situated           in  Goa. 
 The Chief Secretary, Goa while endorsing the provis ions of  the  proposed  Bill  made  following  
submissions: 
■ There are 122 enemy properties located in the  Stat e  of  Goa.  Out  of  which,  112  
properties are situated in North Goa District  and  the  remaining  10  properties  are  in  
South   Goa  District. 
■ Out of 122 enemy  properties,  120  properties  hav e  been  vested  in  the  Custodian  and  
the  State  Government  is  verifying  remaining  2    properties. 
■ Out  of  120  vested  properties,  117  properties  have  been  put  under      mutation. 
 Thereafter, the Convenor and Members of the Sub-Com mittee sought clarifications on the following  
issues: 
■ Effect of Hon'ble Supreme  Court  judgement  in  th e  case  of  Maharaja  of  Mahmudabad, 
on  the  enemy  properties  located  in  the  State  of     Goa. 

61   
 
■ Details of cases in the State of Goa where any heir has made claims on  any  enemy  
property. 
■ View  of  the  State  Government  on  the  proposed   bar  on  the  jurisdiction  of  courts  in  
the matter of divesting to the effect that no court   shall  have  jurisdiction  to  order  
divestment  of  such  property  from  the     CEP. 
■ Details of Enemy Properties in the State which bein g used by the Government of Goa. 
■ Details  of  buildings  or  open  lands  on  the  120    properties. 
■ Details  of  Land  Ceiling  Act  and  Agriculture  Land  Tenancy  Act  in  the   State. 
■ Details  of  rent  receipts  from  enemy     properties. 
8.0   The  Convener  asked  the  Legislative  Secre tary  a  specific  query  as  to  which  law  would    
prevail on a property vested in  custodian  with  f alls  under  the  State  Agriculture  Land  Tenancy   Act. 
The  Legislative  Secretary  made  following   submission:- 
“Under the scheme of  the  Constitution,  as  the  hon.  Members  are  aware,  there  are  List  I  
List II and List III — whenever a State  legislatio n  comes  in  conflict  with  the  Central  
legislation, the  State  legislation,  to  that  ef fect,  is  deemed  to  be  revoked,  and  the  Cent ral  
law prevails there. Now, even in  the  case  of  Go a,  my  feeling  is  that  the  same  situation  
should apply because I do not find any  special  pr ovision  as  such.  I  remember, about a few  
years ago,  we  amended  the  Income  Tax  Act  rel ating  to  Goa.  There  is  a  particular  system  
of Goa family,  just  like  we  have  the  Hindu  U ndivided  Family,  and  we  amended  the  law  
and gave effect to local traditions  of  taxation.  If  that  had  been  possible,  they  would  have  
done it by themselves. Taking cue from that, I am o f the view that the  Central  law  should 
prevail.”  
9.0 The Chief Secretary, Government of Goa replied to some to queries of the Members of the Sub-
Committee. The  Convener  then  asked  the  Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  Goa  to  furnish  writt en 
informations/replies to  the  issues/queries  raise d  which  were  not  replied  in  the  meeting,  wi thin   15  
days. 
10.0     A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
11.0      The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  3.40    
P.M. 

 
62   
 
 
 
IV 
FOURTH  MEETING 
 
The Sub-Committee met at  3.30  P.M.  on  Tuesday,  the  27 th  July,  2011  in  Committee  Room  
‘A’,  First  Floor,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New   Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman  
2. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia  —   Convener  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
3. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
4. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
5. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
6. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
7. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,  Joint   Secretary  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,   Committee  Officer  
 
WITNESSES  
 
Representative   of   the   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
Shri   R.R.   Jha,   Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives   of   Legislative   Department,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1 . Shri  V.K.   Bhasin,  Secretary 
2 . Shri  N.K.  Nampoothiry,  Additional   Secretary 
3 . Dr.  G.   Narayana  Raju,  Joint  Secretary  and  Legislative   Counsel 
 
Representative  of  Department  of  Legal  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Law  and        Justice  
Shri  S.R.  Mishra,  Deputy  Legal   Advisor 
Representatives   of   Government   of   NCT   of Delhi  
1. Shri  P.K.   Tripathi,  Chief   Secretary 
2. Shri   Dharmendra,   Secretary  (Revenue) 
3. Shri  Akash  Mohapatra,  D.C.,  Central   Delhi 
 
62 

63   
 
4. Shri  V.P.   Singh,  A.D.M.,  Central  Delhi 
5. Shri  R.S.  Mehra,  O.S.D.,  Central    Delhi 
 
Representatives   of   Government   of   West Benga l  
Shri   Samar   Ghosh,   Chief Secretary 
Representatives   of   Government   of   Uttar Prad esh  
1. Shri  Anoop  Mishra,  Chief   Secretary 
2. Shri   Rajeev   Kumar,   Commissioner/Secretary, Revenue 
3. Shri  R.K.  Goyal,  Commissioner,   Basti 
4. Shri  Ajay  Sukla,  District  Magistrate,   Sitapur 
5. Shri  Ajit  Chandra,  Special  Pleader,  Sitapur 
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman of the Sub-Committe e on the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation) Second Bill welcomed the Members to the  sitting of the Sub-Committee and  
recapitulated that the Sub-Committee at its last si tting held on 19 th July, 2011 had heard  the  Chief 
Secretary, State Government of Goa on  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  
Bill, 2010. The Chairman also apprised the Members  that  the  Chief  Secretaries  of  NCT  of  Delhi,   
West  Bengal and Uttar Pradesh have been invited to  tender oral evidence before the Sub-Committee       
that day on the Bill. He also informed that Legisla tive  Secretary,  a  representative  from  Legal  
Department of the Government of India and a Joint S ecretary level officer from the Home Ministry        
have  also  been  invited  to  assist  the    Sub-Committee. 
[At  this  stage,  the  Chief  Secretary,  NCT  of  Delhi  was  called     in)  
3.0    The  Chairman  welcomed  the  Chief  Secreta ry,  Government  of  NCT  of  Delhi,  to  the  sitt ing  
of the Sub-Committee and briefed him about the refe rence  of  the  Bill  to  the  Committee  and 
constitution of the Sub-Committee for detailed stud y of the Bill. He asked the Chief Secretary, NCT          
of Delhi to give his views on the provisions of the  Bill particularly on the  management  of  enemy 
properties situated in Delhi. He also asked him  to   brief  the  Sub-Committee  on  the  description  of  
enemy  properties  situated  in   Delhi. 
 The Chief Secretary, Delhi while endorsing the majo r provisions  of  the  proposed  Bill suggested  
some  minor  modifications  and  made  following     submissions:– 
■ The State Government of  Delhi  was  following  the   directions  of  the  Custodian  of  
Enemy Properties and registration of properties, de clared as Enemy Property by the 
Custodian, had been banned  because  there  were  s ome  cases  where  registration  had  
taken  place. 
■ In  Delhi,  there  are  nine  districts  and  ADMs  have  been  declared  as  Deputy  Custodian. 
■ Out  of  the  nine  districts  only  one  district  has  all  the  enemy     properties. 
■ As regards the  total  number  of  properties  in  Delhi,  the  owners  were  74  and  there  
were  12  income  dispute  cases  and  there  were  14  declared  court       cases. 
■ The NCT of Delhi was facing  many  problems  in  th e  implementation  of  the  Act.  One 
was that there are no rules at the moment and there  is a need to frame rules. Section-              
3 of the Delhi Rent Control Act provides that this will not apply to the Government 
properties. But the courts  are  entertaining  case s.  So,  there  should  be  a  provision  that  
the properties which were declared Enemy Properties  should be treated at par with 
Government  properties.  Otherwise,  there  will  be  lot  of  litigations  in  the  courts  and    a 

64   
 
lot of time and energy is getting wasted in this process. The NCT of Delhi appreciates         
the  empowerment  of  the  Deputy    Custodian. 
 
Suggestions  
 
■ In Clause 5 of Section 8, the word “periodically” m ay be added before the word “and     
collect the rent” so that the rent could be revised  after every five years. The Supreme      
Court had also in various judgements accepted that the rent could be revised 
periodically. 
 
■ The second suggestion related to clause 6. The prop erties which are sold,  must  be  
registered. Only sale certificate is not enough. Th ere  could  be  a  provision  that  they  
should be registered within ninety days and, for re asons to be recorded, the Custodian        
may  extend  the  period  for  180    days. 
 
■ Under section 15(2) of the Act, the proposed fine o f Rs.500/- should be increased to 
Rs.5,000/-. 
 
5.0 Thereafter, the Chairman, Convener and Members of the Sub-Committee sought  
clarifications on  some  issues.  The  Convener  of   the  Sub-Committee  took  serious  view  of  the  fact  
that the background note sought by the Sub-Committe e was provided by the Delhi Government just    
before the commencement of the meeting only. He als o mentioned that the  information  about  the  
disputed enemy properties in National Capital  Terr itory  given  in  the  background  note  was  not 
updated. 
 
6.0 The Chief Secretary, NCT of Delhi and his offic ials replied  to  some  of  the  queries  of  the 
Members. The  Chairman  asked  the  Chief  Secretar y  to  send  an  updated  report  within  seven  da ys  
and after that the Sub-Committee would again hear h im. The Chief Secretary also assured the Sub- 
Committee  to  update  the  information  and  send  it  to  the     Secretariat. 
 
[At this stage, the Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi withdrew  and  the  Chief  
Secretary,  West  Bengal  was  called   in)  
 
7.0 The Chairman welcomed the Chief Secretary,  Wes t  Bengal  to  the  sitting  of  the  Sub-  
Committee and asked him to give his views on the pr ovisions of  the  Bill  particularly  on  the 
management of enemy properties situated in West Ben gal. He also asked him to  brief  the  Sub-  
Committee  on  the  description  of  enemy  properties  situated  in  his     State. 
 
 The Chief Secretary, West  Bengal while endorsing t he major provisions of the proposed Bill    made  
following  submissions  suggesting  some  minor     modifications:– 
 
■ West Bengal has 377 enemy properties spread over  1 3  districts  and  Kolkata.  In  
Kolkata, the number of enemy properties is 121 and in 13 districts taking together, the 
number of enemy properties is 256. Out  of  these,  the  income  receiving  properties  are 
165; the number of  declared  cases  is  19;  the  number  of  processed  cases  is  119  and  
the  number  of  court  cases  is    74. 
 
■ The  District  Magistrates  are  the  Deputy  Custo dians  of  enemy  properties  and  they  
work  under  the  supervision  of  the  Custodian  of  enemy      properties. 
 
■ Not much attention has been paid to this subject of  Enemy Property by the State  
Government, but now the matter is being reviewed  w ith  the  District  Magistrates.  The 
State Government has formed a Committee comprising Home Secretary, Land 
Commissioner  and  Inspector  General  of  Registration  to  review  the      issue. 

65   
 
■ In  many  cases  rents  are  in  arrears.  The  Dis trict  Magistrates  have  been  instructed  to  
act in accordance with the guidelines  issued  by  the  Custodian  of  enemy  properties  as 
well as the Ministry of Home  Affairs,  that  there   should  not  be  any  registration  in  
respect  of  the  enemy  properties.  The  records  must  be  in  the  name  of  the  Custodian  
of   enemy  properties. 
 
■ To monitor the things centrally  at  the  State  He adquarters,  Government  of  West  Bengal 
has formed a Committee comprising the Home Secretar y, the Land Reforms 
Commissioner and  the  Inspector  General  of  Regi stration  so  that  fraudulent  transfers,  
etc.  do  not  take   place. 
 
■ The State Government requires a little more  time  to  make  a  detailed  survey  of  the  
enemy properties in the State, their present  statu s,  the  present  occupants  and  the 
condition   of   the   properties, etc. 
 
■ The State Government is in agreement  with  various   provisions  of  the  Bill.  In  the 
original Act, in  Sections  20  (1)  and  20  (2),  there  is  no  mention  of  the  quantum  of  
fine that can be imposed. Therefore the quantum of punishment and fine that  may  be 
imposed  for  violation,  may  be  specified  in  the  proposed    legislation. 
 
■ Regarding explanation to Section 6 regarding transf ers. In Section 3, there is an 
explanatory clause saying, “It shall not include tr ansfers through oral will or oral gift.”     
The point is that all the transfers  are  then  inv alid.  Therefore,  there  is  no  need  for  
putting   this   explanatory clause. 
 
 Thereafter, the Chairman, Convener and Members of t he Sub-Committee sought clarifications  
from  him  on  the  following    issues: 
 
■ The details of the 205 properties vested with the P akistani nationals, and  the  165  
properties,  on  which  the  process  is     on. 
 
■ List of enemy properties located in the State  and  the  position  of  each  property,  how  
many  properties  are  there  before  the     Courts. 
 
■ Number of properties in possession of the Governmen t, where there are  Government  
offices. 
 
10.0   The  Chief  Secretary,  West  Bengal  replie d  to  some  queries  of  the  Members.  The  Chair man   
of the Sub-Committee then asked the Chief Secretary  to send the information not replied orally and   
sought  by  the  Sub-Committee  at  the    earliest. 
 
[At this stage, the Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal withdrew and Chief 
Secretary,  Uttar  Pradesh  was  called   in)  
 
11.0 The Chairman welcomed the Chief Secretary,  Ut tar  Pradesh  to  the  sitting  of  the  Sub-  
Committee and stated that the Sub-Committee had fel t that since a  large  number  of  the  enemy  
properties are located in Uttar Pradesh,  particula rly  at  Lucknow,  Sitapur  and  Lakhimpur,  it  sh ould  
hear the Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  Uttar  Pradesh.  He  then  asked  him  to  give  his  view s  on  
the provisions of the Bill particularly on the  man agement  of  enemy  properties  situated  in  Uttar   
Pradesh. He also asked him to brief  the  Sub-Commi ttee  on  the  description  of  enemy  properties  
situated  in  his  State. 
 
 The Chief Secretary, Uttar Pradesh suggested some m odifications and made following submissions:– 

66   
 
■ The proposed  Bill  seeks  to  introduce  amendment s  in  Section  18  and  26  by  insertion  
of Section 26(1) and provisos in  Section  18.  Ess entially,  these  amendments  lay  down  
that if the owner of the enemy property had been a citizen of this country since birth             
or his heir had been a citizen by birth and the hei r establishes through the due process        
that he is the successor to the enemy property,  th en,  in  these  two  cases,  in  all  cases  
where the divestiture has been done other than Sect ion  18,  they  would  automatically  re-
vest  with  the  owner  or  the  heir  as  the  case  may      be. 
■ The State  Government  would  recommend  the  amend ments  in  Section  18  which  bring  
in the definition  of  heir  and  the  amendments  in  Section  26(1),  especially  with  respect 
to  the  second  proviso  which  comes  after  sub- clause  26(1)(b),  as  this  amendment  is  
not in the interest of  the  State,  and  it  takes   away  the  properties  which  are  vested  in  
the  Custodian  and  not  validly  re-vestible  in  the  owners  or  the    heirs. 
■ Before this Bill, there was a replacement  Bill  fo r  Ordinance  named  “the  Enemy 
Property (Amendment and Validation)  Ordinance,  20 10”  The  State  Government  is  of  
the view that the provisions of the said ordinance are valid provisions and they protect         
the  interests  of  both  the  State  and  the     nation. 
■ The contention of the State  Government  is  that  the  proposed  Bill  seeks  to  take  away  
the jurisdiction of all courts completely and then it says that in respect  of  an  enemy  
property which has been vested in  the  custodian,  a  owner  or  his  heir  can  demonstrate 
that he is a citizen by  birth,  and  that  he  is  a  successor  to  the  owner.  Then,  nothing  
else  should  be  done  and  all  these  properties  would  be  restored  to  the      owner. 
 Thereafter, the Chairman, Convener and Members of t he Sub-Committee sought clarifications  
from  him  on  the  following    issues: 
■ What will be the effect  of  Supreme  Court  judgem ent  on  1519  enemy  properties 
located in the State of Uttar Pradesh? Will the ena ctment of this proposed Bill benefit         
one  particular  individual  or  many? 
■ Are the enemy properties in  the  State  of  UP  ex empted  from  urban  land  ceiling  act?  
Are  wealth  tax,  property  tax  and  other  municipal  taxes  imposed  on  these    properties? 
■ The Government offices being  run  in  some  of  th ese  enemy  properties  were  vacated  
after  the  decision  of  Supreme  Court.  What  is  the  status      thereof? 
■ Who were the advocates looking after the  cases  of   custodian  and  appellant  in  Civil  
Court,  Mumbai  High  Court  and  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  Raja     Mehmoodabad? 
■ What is the difference  between  ordinance  No.4  o f  2010  and  the  proposed  Bill?  Had  
the  said  ordinance  been  enacted,  what  would  have  been  the     impact? 
■ List of properties  affected  due  to  Sanad,  tena ncy  act,  1990  and  the  landed  properties  
of  common  people 
14.0  The  Chief  Secretary,  UP  and  his  officia ls  replied  to  most  of  the  queries  of  the  M embers.  
The Chairman of the Sub-Committee then asked the Ch ief Secretary, UP to send written replies/ 
information  of  the  queries  raised  by  the    Members. 
15.0     A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
16.0     The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  5.13    P.M. 

 
67   
 
 
 
V 
FIFTH  MEETING 
 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on  Wednesday,  the  10 th  August,  2011  in  Committee  
Room  ‘A’,  First  Floor,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New   Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia  —   Convenor  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  D.  Raja 
3. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
4. Shri  Tariq  Anwar 
 
LOK SABHA  
5. Shri  Mohd.  Maulana  Asrarul  Haque 
6. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
7. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,  Director  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,   Committee  Officer  
 
WITNESSES  
1. Shri  Lal  Ji  Tandon,  MP,  Lok   Sabha 
2. Shri  Sandeep Kohli 
3. Shri  Kishin  Chand  Bhambhwani 
4. Shri  Murlidhar Ahuja 
5. Shri  Jyoti  Behl 
 
2.0   At  the  outset,  the  Convenor  welcomed  th e  Members  to  the  sitting  of  the  sub-Committe e  on 
the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Secon d Bill, 2010. He then informed the Members   
about the agenda of the  day  which  was  to  hear  the  views  of  Shri  Lal  Ji  Tandon,  MP  Lok  S abha  
and others on the provisions of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010. 
3.0 The convenor then informed the Members that Hon ’ble Chairman, Rajya  Sabha  had  granted 
extension  up  to  31 st   August,  2011  for  presentation  of  the  Report  on  the  Bill.  The     sub-Committee 
 
67 

68   
 
then discussed its future course of action on the B ill and felt that it has to hear some more 
individual/organizations/stakeholders  besides  hearing  some  individuals  on  that  day,  in  order  to  have 
a clear view on the Bill. The Sub-Committee also de cided to further hear the Chief Secretary, Uttar   
Pradesh and the Raja of Mahmoodabad,  if  necessary .  Thereafter  it  needs  about  three  sittings  f or  
clause by clause  consideration  of  the  Bill,  in ternal  discussion  and  consideration  and  adopti on  of  
draft report. Then the Main Committee has to consid er the draft  report  and  adopt.  In  view  of  th e  
amount of work required to be  done  on  the  Bill,   the  sub-Committee  felt  that  it  would  not  b e  
possible for it to complete all stages of considera tion of the  Bill  to  enable  the  main  Committee   to 
present the report on the Bill within the  given  t ime  i.e.  31 st  August,  2011.  The  sub-Committee  
therefore  decided  to  seek  extension  of  time  from  the  hon’ble  Chairman,  Rajya  Sabha  to  la st  day  
of the first week of the winter session 2011 for pr esentation of report on the Bill  and  accordingly 
authorised its Chairman and the Chairman of the mai n Committee to seek extension  of  time  from  
Hon’ble  Chairman. 
4.0   The Convenor then informed the Members that S hri Lal Ji Tandon, MP,  Lok Sabha has been    
invited to have the benefit of his views on the pro visions of the Bill and he has come alongwith 
representatives from his constituency of  Lucknow,  who  are  affected  by  the  provisions  of  the  Bill.  
The convenor also noted that Shri  Tariq  Anwar,  M ember  of  the  Committee  on  Home  Affairs  was  
also attending the meeting as a special invitee and  the sub-Committee could benefit from his views. 
5.0 Thereafter, the Convenor welcomed Shri Lal Ji T andon along  with  other  Members  of  the  
delegation  and  invited  them  to  express  their  views  on  the     subject. 
 Shri Lal ji  Tandon  after  introducing  other  Members  of  the  delegation  made  a  presentation  on  the  
Bill.  The  following  were  the  main  points  made  by  him  in  the    presentation: 
(i) The Enemy  Properties  in  Uttar  Pradesh  were  gi ven  to  Talukdars  by  the  Britishers  
after  the  revolt  of   1857. 
(ii) Out of the total Enemy Property in Uttar Pradesh, r oughtly 80% is claimed by one  
individual  and  the  Bill  has  been  drafted  in  order  to  favour  just  one   individual. 
(iii) There are several inconsistencies in the judgments given by the Courts and the  
Government  promulgated  an  ordinance  to  correct  the      same. 
(iv) The above ordinance was tabled in the Lok Sabha in the  form  of  a  Bill  but  was  
opposed. 
(v) A present Cabinet Minister who had represented the Raja Mahmoodabad in the courts          
is behind the present Bill  in  order  to  favour  the  Raja  so  that  the  earlier  ordinance  
could   be   made defunct. 
(vi) The Bill is a fraud on the Parliament as it  tries  to  favour  an  individual  claiming  
properties   worth   Rs.   20,000  crore. 
(vii) When according to the treaty the Raja had lost his claim on the property, how  his  
successors can lay claim to the same. Moreover, aft er  partition,  properties  of  
Migrants were declared as evacuee properties and  w ere  settled  by  the  custodian.  
Migrants got equivalent property in the country the y  have  migrated.  Since  the  
previous Raja had migrated to Pakistan and took act ive part in formation of Pakistan,          
he  lost  his  claim  on  the  property  and  therefore  claims  of  his  successors  cannot stand. 
(viii) Such enemy  properties  have  been  used  for  sett ing  up  of  refugee  colonies  like  those  
in Sitapur District in Uttar Pradesh. Similarly  Go vernment  offices,  sugar  mills,  
schools and colleges, administrative buildings  hav e  been  opened  in  such  properties  
which  are  now  being  claimed  by  a  single   individual. 

 
69 
 
(ix) Tenants on  such  properties  also  have  rights  w hich  will  be  violated  if  the  properties  
are  evacuated. 
(x) The provisions of the Bill will make Urban Land Cei ling Act and other State Laws 
ineffective. 
(xi) UP Government which is the main affected party  has   not  been  made  a  party  in  the  
case. 
(xii) If the Enemy Property claimed by  Raja  Mahmoodabad   is  returned  to  him  which  
amounts to roughly 80% of the enemy property,  ther e  is  no  point  in  keeping  a  
Custodian for the rest of the 20% and same should a lso be returned to the remaining        
poor   claimants. 
(xiii) The issue is not an issue of  minority  vs.  majori ty  as  the  people  affected  are  poor  
people belonging to all the communities. Moreover, there are properties like 
Imambadas, Mosques and natural water bodies which a re properties belonging to 
communities  and  not  to   individuals. 
(xiv) The government has invested crores of  rupees  in  properties  which  are  now  being  
claimed by the Raja. Five Districts of UP Lucknow, Sitapur, Hardoi, Barabanki and  
Pilibheet  and  Nanital  in  Uttarakhand  are  affected  by  the  provisions  of  the    Bill. 
(xv) The change of ownership will severely affect  peopl e  who  have  migrated  from  
Pakistan  and  after  a  long  struggle  have  been  able  to  establish     themselves. 
(xvi) The  earlier  ordinance  was  more  in  consonance  with  principle  of  justice  rather  than  
the  present  Bill  which  is  before  the    Committee. 
 Thereafter,  other  members  of  the  delegation  expressed  the  following      views/points:- 
(i) The provisions of earlier ordinance dated 2 July 20 10 which was drafted after careful 
consideration  in  national  interest,  should  be  incorporated  in  the    Bill. 
(ii) All the facts relevant to the case were not present ed to the courts like the description            
of  the  properties  and  the  number  of  the  families  likely  to  be     displaced. 
(iii) The ordinance dated 2 July, 2010  was  promulgated  in  order  to  meet  the  extra  
ordinary situation created by the order passed by t he Supreme Court in October, 2006    
where  by  a  spate  of  cases  were  filed  in  the  courts  claiming  enemy       properties. 
(iv) Before 1965 the tenants were paying the rent to  th e  raja  or  his  representative.  
However,  after  11  September  1965,  declaring  p roperties  as  enemy  properties  under  
the  Defence  of  India  rules,  the  rent  is  being  paid  to  Custodian  of  Enemy   Properties. 
(v) There are 54  tenancies  in  Lucknow,  3-4  bungalo ws  in  Sitapur,  a  refugee  colony 
known as Sindie Colony in which  the  properties  h ad  been  sold  by  the  late  Raja  to  
those people who were staying there under registere d deeds. Such properties are also 
affected by the Supreme Court order and such owners  are also being asked to vacate. 
(vi) The tenants enjoy protection  under  the  Rent  Con trol  Act.  They  pay  rent  decided  by  
the  Custodian  which  is  increased  by  10%  every  three     years. 
(vii) The tenants were asked to vacate the properties on the basis of  contempt  
proceedings. The  tenants  then  approached  the  c ourts  and  got  a  stay  order  on  the 
basis of the record and rent receipts of the past y ears.  The  Justice  Goswami 
Committee appointed by the Supreme Court then decla red that 99% of  people  in  
possession   of   property   are unauthorized. 

70   
 
(viii) The  tenants  then  approached  the  Supreme  Court   contending  that  an  ex-parte  order   
has been passed. Thereafter, the Supreme Court cons tituted another  Committee  by  the 
name Justice Wadhwa Committee which gave its orders  on the basis  of  the 
documents.  The  Committee  said  that  whoever  wa s  in  possession  of  properties  prior   
to 1965 will  not  be  evicted  and  whoever  was  in  possession  of  properties  post-1965  
had  to  be  evicted. 
(ix) 95% of the people who were affected are below the poverty line and cannot approach        
the  courts  and  the   legislature. 
 The  Convenor  and  the  Members  then  raised  the  following     queries: 
(i) When  was  the  tenancy  given  and  who  gave  the  tenancy     right? 
(ii) Was   the  tenancy  given  before  1947,  between  1947  and  1968  or  after      1968? 
(iii) If  given  after  1968,  what  is  the  present     status? 
(iv) Are  the  tenants  authorized  or    unauthorized? 
(v) Are there residents on such properties who are not registered?  How  many  such  
residential  colonies  are  there? 
(vi) What is the rent  being  paid  by  the  tenants?  Is  it  according  to  the  market  price  or  
not? 
9.0   The  queries  raised  by  the  Members  were  replied  accordingly.  The  Convenor  then  reques ted 
the delegation to send detailed written information  which could not be placed before the Committee           
or  replied  in  the  meeting. 
10.0     A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
{The   witnesses   then  withdrew}  
11.0 The sub-Committee then discussed the opinion g iven  by  the  members  of  the  delegation  and 
decided to have the benefit of the views of the emi nent legal luminary, Shri Ram Jethmalani, M.P.        
Rajya Sabha. The Sub-Committee also  decided  to  h ear  some  more  persons  likely  to  be  affected  by 
the Bill. 
12.0     The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  4.15    
P.M. 

 
71   
 
 
 
II  
SECOND  MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 3.00  P.M.  on  Friday,  the  30 th  September,  2011  in  Committee  Room  
“B”,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New  Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia 
3. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
4. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
5. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
6. Shri  L.K. Advani 
7. Shri  Ramen  Deka 
8. Shri  Mohammad  Asrarul  Haque 
9. Shri  Naveen  Jindal 
10. Shri  Bishnu  Pada  Ray 
11. Shri  Adhi Sankar 
12. Shri  Ravneet  Singh 
13. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
14. Shri  Dinesh  Chandra  Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,   Joint  Secretary  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,   Committee  Officer  
 
WITNESSES  
Representatives   of   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
Shri   R.R.   Jha,   Joint Secretary 
Member,  Rajya  Sabha  and  Eminent   Lawyer  
Shri  Ram  Jethmalani,  Special   Invitee 
 
Representatives   of   Legislative   Department,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1. Dr.  S.D.  Singh,  Joint  Secretary  &  Legislative    Counsel 
 
71 

72   
 
2. Shri  K.V.  Kumar,  Assistant  Legislative  Counsel 
3. Dr.  G.   Raju,  JS  &  LC 
 
Representatives   of   Department   of   Legal  Affairs,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1. Shri  Satish  Chandra,  Joint  Secretary  &  Legal    Adviser 
2. Shri  S.R.  Mishra,  Deputy  Legal   Advisor 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting  of  the  Committee  and  informed  
them  that  the  meeting  had  been   called: 
➢  * * * 
➢ to have the benefit of the views of Shri Ram Jethmalani, Member, Rajya Sabha, and an  
eminent  lawyer,  on  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill, 2010. 
 The Chairman informed the Members that the Hon. Cha irman, Rajya  Sabha  had  granted  extension of 
time to the Committee  up  to  30 th  October,  2011,  for  presentation  of  report  on  the  Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill,  2010.  He  observed  that  since  there  was very  little  ti me  at  
the  Committee’s  disposal,  the  work  was  to  be  done  at  a  fast       pace. 
 The Chairman recalled that the Sub-Committee which was constituted by the  previous Committee 
had earlier decided to hear the expert opinion of S hri Ram Jethmalani, MP,  on the Bill.         The C hairman  
explained  that  since  the  Sub-Committee  had  ce ased  to  exist  with  the  expiration  of  the ter m of the 
previous Committee, the Bill  would  be  considered  by  the  reconstituted  Main  Committee  itself. 
4.0      * * * 
 
5.0      * * * 
 
5.1      * * * 
 
5.2      * * * 
 
5.3      * * * 
5.4      * * * 
 
6.0      * * * 
 
7.0      * * * 
 
8.0      * * * 
 
III.     Enemy  Property  (Amendment  &  Validation )  Second  Bill,      2010  
 
 Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Shri Ram Jethmala ni, Member, Rajya  Sabha,  and  an  eminent 
lawyer and invited him to express his views on  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  &  Validation)  Second  
Bill, 2010. 
Shri  Jethmalani  made  the  following  observations  on  the  Bill  and  its    background: 
• A heir can only get  what  the  propositus  had.  When  a  person  is  dead,  his  heir  gets  
what   he  owned. 
 
 
***  Relate  to  other  matters. 

 
73 
 
• Raja of Mahmoodabad, who was an Indian citizen,  ow ning  vast  properties,  mainly  in  
Uttar Pradesh,  migrated  to  Pakistan  alongwith  his  minor  son,  soon  after  the  partition  
of India and acquired the citizenship of Pakistan. After a long stay in Pakistan, he was      
also an ambassador of Pakistan in  London.  He  set tled  in  London  and  died  there  in  
1973.  He  died  as  citizen  of   Pakistan. 
• All his properties naturally  came  to  vest  in  t he  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property,  under  
the provisions of the Enemy Property Act, 1968. It is  a  well  known  piece  of  
legislation, which comes into operation at a time w henever there is a war between the       
two countries. All enemy properties vest  in  the  Government.  His  property  which  runs 
into  thousands  of  crores,  became  the  property  of  the  Indian       Nation. 
• After he became a  major,  he  managed  to  obtain  passports,  first  in  Lucknow,  the 
second  in  Teheran,  the  third  in  Baghdad  and  the  later  one  from     London. 
• His mother, knowing fully well that the property ha d ceased to be the property of the  
family,  applied  for  a  job  to  the  Custodian  for  taking  care  of  the     property. 
• Then, after many years, the son in  India  conteste d  elections  in  UP  and  became  a  
Member of the  Legislative  Assembly.  A  question  was  raised  in  the  Assembly  that  he  
is  not  an  Indian  citizen. 
• After many years, he started a litigation in India saying that he was an Indian national,         
the property belonged to  him  which  he  had  inhe rited?  The  result  was  that  a  decree  
was passed, which was sustained by the  Supreme  Co urt.  Even  the  Government  
realized that all this was wholly wrong. They then issued an Ordinance under our 
compulsion. 
• That  Ordinance  displays  the  honesty  of  the  Government  of  India  for  the  first       time. 
• This Ordinance was intended to nullify the Supreme Court decision and to prevent the 
property  from  getting  into  the  hands  of  those  who  are  not  entitled  to      it. 
• It was, therefore, proposed to bring about amendmen ts to the  Enemy  Property  Act  to 
clarify the legislative intent and strengthen the h ands of the Custodian and the Central 
Government and also to prevent the courts from  iss uing  any  orders  for  divestment  of 
these   properties. 
• That Ordinance was to be replaced by a Bill. The En emy Property (Amendment & 
Validation) Bill, 2010 was brought before the Parli ament. This  Bill,  when  presented,  
would  have  passed  in  both  the  Houses  of  Parliament.  However,  it  didn’t      happen. 
• He quoted from  his  article  published  in  a  new spaper  “The  ordinance  is  a  belated  act 
of justice to  the  Indian  people.  The  entire  C ongress  party  saw  the  wisdom  of  it.  All  
the law officers of the Government and the entire C abinet must have approved of the 
Ordinance before the hon.  President  promulgated  it.  Certainly,  it  brought  jubilation  to 
the occupants of the property and  the  nation  bec ame  richer  by  thousands  of  crores,  
even  Mr.   Chidambaram ’s  statement  modestly  mentions  hundreds  of   crores.  
• The same Chidambaram in the company of advocate and  Minister Salman 
Khursheed have persuaded the Prime Minister to aban don  the  Bill  and  thereby 
ensure the  lapsing of  the  wholesome Ordinance. S hri  Khursheed was  the  advocate 
for the junior Raja supporting the eviction of tena nts, a clear case  of  conflict  of 
interest. Shri Chidambaram is  a  signatory  to  th e  explanatory  statement  justifying  
the  Ordinance. 

74   
 
• The Prime  Minister  owes  an  explanation  to  the   nation.  The  same  person  has  moved  
an amendment to the Bill completely going back from  his earlier statement  to  
Parliament. 
• The latest amendment that Shri  Chidambaram  has  m oved  means  that  a  custodian  has  
the power to return the property to the  heirs  and   all  that  the  heir  has  to  do  is  to  
produce  a  succession  certificate.  If  he  proves  that  he  is  an  heir,  he  gets  the  property. 
 The  Chairman  and  the  Members  then  raised  som e  queries  which  were  replied  by  Shri 
Jethmalani. The  Chairman  requested  him  to  furn ish  a  note  on  the  sanad  proclaimed  by  Briti sh on  
Taluqadari  in  Oudh. 
10.0     Some Members of the Committee requested th e Chairman to invite Shri M.A.M Khan before     
the  Committee  who  was  the  main  party  in  the  Supreme  Court      Judgment. 
11.0      A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
12.0   The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  4.51  P.M.  to  meet  again  at  11.00  A.M.  on  Monday,  the   
10 th   October,  2011. 

 
75   
 
 
 
III 
THIRD  MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the  10 th  October,  2011  in  Main  Committee  
Room,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New  Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  S.S.  Ahluwalia  —  In   Chair  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
3. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
4. Shri  L.K. Advani 
5. Dr.  Kakali  Ghosh  Dastidar 
6. Shri  Ramen  Deka 
7. Shri  Naveen  Jindal 
8. Shri  Baijayant  Panda 
9. Shri  Lalubhai  B. Patel 
10. Shri  Bishnu  Pada  Ray 
11. Shri  Hamdullah Sayeed 
12. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
13. Shri  Ravneet  Singh 
14. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,   Joint  Secretary  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,   Committee  Officer  
 
WITNESSES  
 
Representatives   of   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
Shri   R.R.   Jha,   Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives   of   Legislative   Department,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1 . Shri  V.K.   Bhasin,  Secretary 
2 . Shri  N.K.  Nampoothiry,  Additional   Secretary 
 
75 

76   
 
Representatives   of   Department   of   Legal  Affairs,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1. Shri  Satish  Chandra,  Joint  Secretary  &  Legal    Adviser 
2. Shri  S.R.  Mishra,  Deputy  Legal   Advisor 
 
Representatives   of   Government   of   NCT   of Delhi  
1. Shri  P.K.   Tripathi,  Chief   Secretary 
2. Shri   Dharmendra,   Secretary   (Revenue)-cum-Divisional  Commissioner 
3. Shri  Akash  Mohapatra,  D.C.,  Central   Delhi 
4. Shri  V.P.   Singh,  A.D.M.,  Central  Delhi 
5. Shri  R.K.  Mehra,  O.S.D.,  Central   Delhi 
 
Individual  
 
Shri  Mohammad  Amir  Mohammad  Khan 
2 * * * 
3. The Chairman then welcomed the  Members  to  the  s itting  of  the  Committee  and  apprised  
them of  the  agenda  of  the  day  i.e.  to  further  hear  the  views  of  Chief  Secretary ,  NCT  of  Delhi;  
and hear Mohammad Amir Mohammad Khan, the erstwhile  Raja of Mahmoodabad, on the Enemy  
Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,   2010. 
 *** He also recalled that the Committee had also to present Report on the Enemy Property (Amendment 
& Validation) Second Bill, 2010 latest by 30 th   October, 2011, and therefore, there was     need to  work at a 
faster pace.  He  added  that  the  Sub-Committee  of  the  previous  Committee  had  heard the Chief 
Secretary, Government  of  NCT  of  Delhi  on  the  Bill,  but  the  Chief  Secretary  was  not  havin g  
updated  information  and,  therefore,  he  was  di rected  to  come  again  well  prepared,  and  in  that  
context,  he  had  been  invited  to  tender  his  evidence  before  the     Committee. 
 The Chairman recalled that in the previous sitting of the Committee held on 30 th   September,    2011, the 
Committee had heard Shri Ram Jethmalani, Member, Rajya Sabha and an eminent lawyer,         on the Bil l. 
In that sitting, the Committee felt that Shri Moham mad  Amir  Mohammad  Khan,  the  erstwhile Raja of 
Mehmoodabad, who was  the  main  party  in  the  case  of  enemy  properties,  which  was dealt by the Hon. 
Supreme Court, might also be heard. Therefore,  Shr i  Mohammad  Amir  Mohammad  Khan  had  been  
called  to  tender  his  views  before  the     Committee. 
 The Chairman also informed the Committee that the L aw  Secretary  and  the  Legislative  Secretary of 
the Government of India and  an  officer  from  the   Home  Ministry  was  also  called  to  assist the  
Committee. However, the Law Secretary, on request b eing  made,  had  been  granted  exemption from 
being present in the meeting, who in turn had autho rized Senior Officer  of  the  Department  to  atte nd  the   
meeting. 
[At  this  stage,  witnesses  were  called   in]  
4. The Chairman, then, welcomed the Chief Secretary, G overnment of NCT of Delhi and other 
officers and asked the Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi to express  the  views  of  
Government  of  NCT  of  Delhi  on  the   Bill. 
 Thereafter,  Chief  Secretary,  NCT  of  Delhi  made  the  following     submissions:- 
(i) Insertion of new section after Section 5  reading  as  “5A.  The  Custodian  may,  after  
making  such  inquiry  as  he  deems  necessary,  by  an  order,  declare  that  the  property of  
 
 
***  Relate  to  other  matters. 

77   
 
the enemy or the enemy subject or the enemyfirm des cribed in the order,  vests in him    
under this Act and issue a certificate to this effe ct and such certificate  shall  be  the  
evidence of the facts  stated  therein.”  The  idea  of  a  certificate  is  already  there  in  
section  12  however,  a  revised  format  needs  to  be  devised  for  issuing  such  certificate. 
(ii) Section 8(2) (ia) of  the  Act  may  be  modified  to  read  as  “Periodically  fix  and  collect 
the rent, standard  rent,  lease  rent,  license  f ee  or  usage  charges,  as  the  case  may  be, 
in respect of enemy property.”  The  word  “periodically”  must  precede  the  word s  “fix  
and collect the rent” to make provision clear and g et  rent  revised  from  time  to  time. 
Under  every  rent  agreement  the  rent  gets  revised  over  a  period  of      time. 
(iii) Insertion of an additional sub-section under Sectio n 10(1) of the  Act  reading  as 
“Pursuant to the issue of such certificate as menti oned at Sub-section (1) above, the 
purchaser shall, within 90 days of the date of  iss ue  of  the  certificate,  get  such  
immovable property registered in his name in the of fice  of  Competent  Registering  
Authority after paying  the  requisite  stamp  duty .  The  aforesaid  period  of  90  days  shall 
be extendable by  the  Custodian  of  enemy  proper ty  by  another  90  days  on  submission 
of reasonable cause to the satisfaction of  the  Cu stodian  of  Enemy  Property.  On  the  
expiry of the period of 180 days from the date of t he issue  of  certificate,  in  case  the 
property has not been registered before the Compete nt  Registering  Authority,  the 
certificate shall lapse and a fresh application wil l have to be moved by the Purchaser    
before Custodian of Enemy Property for issue of a f resh certificate in accordance with        
the procedure laid down in Sub-section 1.” The word “receipt” may be substituted for         
the word “certificate” to avoid the loss of  revenu e.  The  whole  idea  is  that  the  stamp 
duty,  which  is  one  of  the  revenues  of  the  state,  should  not  be      lost. 
(iv) Under Section 17(1) of the Act, instead of 2 per ce nt levy  of  fee  for  management  of 
proceed of  sale,  which  is  proposed  to  be  inc reased  to  5  per  cent,  must  be  increased  
to  10  per   cent. 
(v) Section 18C- It prescribed that the “Central  Gover nment  may,  by  general  or  special  
order, direct that any or  all  of  enemy  properti es  vested  with  the  custodian  under  this  
Act shall be sold or disposed off  in such a manner  as may be prescribed”. Suggestion            
is that the  “procedure  and  manner”  should  be  defined  so  that  there  is  no  discretion  
and there can be no  debate  on  this  issue.  To  avoid  discretion,  the  procedure  and 
manner   should   be specified. 
(vi) Under Section 24 it is being proposed that while th ere has been a penalty of Rs.10,000 
proposed for persons who do not give information  w hen  they  are  called  for,  now,  for 
those who give a false return, the fine is only Rs. 500. That is less because if a person      
does not file his return or  even  give  a  wrong  return,  the  fine  should  be  the  same  as 
that   of  Rs.10,000. 
 On being asked  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  to  Comment  on  the  suggestions  made  by the 
NCT of  Delhi,  the  representative  of  the  Minis try  of  Home  Affairs  stated  that  the  Ministry   had 
furnished its comments on the six suggestions as ma de by the NCT of Delhi and most of  the suggestions   
would  be  taken  care  of  at  the  time  of  framing  the      rules. 
 The Chairman,  then,  asked  the  Legislative  Secretary  to  comment  on  the  suggestions  made  by the 
NCT of Delhi as to whether stamp duty can be levied   on  such  property.  The  Legislative  Secretary stated 
that under Article 285 of  the  Constitution  of  I ndia,  all  the  properties  of  the  Union were ex empted and 
the issue  whether  stamp  duty  could  be  levied  on  a  property  which  is  vested  with  the  Cus todian  
needed  to  be  examined.  The  Chief  Secretary,  NCT of  Delhi  clarified  that Stamp 

78   
 
duty should be levied in case the  Custodian  had  arrived  at  a  decision  that  the  property  woul d  be  
given  to  private  person,  who  in  turn,  wanted   to  register  that  property  in  his/her  own  n ame. 
 On the issue of levying stamp  duty  or  the  munic ipal  taxes  on  the  properties  during  the  peri od  in  
which  the  properties  were  vested  in  the  Cust odian  and  which  was  being  transferred  to  the  claimant 
or  the  purchaser,  the  Legislative  Secretary  o pined  that  once  it  was  in  the  custody  of  t he Custodian, 
prima facie it would appear that it was in the custody of the Government and the Government was the owner 
and no taxes could be imposed on the property of th e Union. However,           the  matter  needed  to   be   
examined. 
 On the query raised by the member as  to  period  o f  time  required  for  verification  of  propertie s 
belonging to the Pakistani Nationals, the Chief Sec retary, NCT of Delhi clarified that Verification of  36 
properties was in progress in Delhi and no time fra me can be given for the same             as there w ere court  
cases  during  the  verification.  As  to  the  num ber  of  the  enemy  properties  where the courts w ere  
intervening  and  taking  cognizance  of  rent  con trol,  the  Chief  Secretary,  NCT  of  Delhi  info rmed  that  
the  total  list  of  number  of  cases  was  19  involving  31  properties  out  of     803. 
 On the issue raised whether any work load analysis has been made before giving additional          job  of 
ex-officio Deputy Commissioner to already overburdened DCs/DMs , the representative of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs submitted  that  the  Home  Ministry  was  not  giving  any  grant  and  court  cases  we re  
handled  by  the  custodian  in  Mumbai    only. 
(The  witnesses  then  withdrew  and  the  Committee  adjourned  for      tea)  
5. In the post tea-session, the  Chairman  welcomed  S hri  Mohammad Amir  Mohammad  Khan  to 
the  meeting  and  asked  him  to  present  his  views  on  the    Bill. 
 Shri Khan, while giving background of  his  case  a nd  responding  to  the  queries  of  the Members   
submitted   as follows:- 
■ He was born  in  India  and  both  his  parents  we re  born  in  India.  Mother  was  opposed  
to the idea of partition  who  translated  this  op position  by  never  even  contemplating  
going  to  Pakistan.  She  remained  a  citizen  of  India  to  her  dying  days  in  April    1991; 
■ His father, in a very honourable and amicable  way,   lived  a  separate  life  from  his  
mother. He travelled on  his  mother’s  passport  w hich  was  an  Indian  passport.  He  got  
his  own  passport  in  1959  as  an  Indian  citizen  in  Lucknow  where  he  was  a   resident; 
■ His father died in London in 1973. He was not the a mbassador of Pakistan as people       
have said. He was the Director-General of Islamic C entre in London, of which all the 
ambassadors of the Muslim countries - Saudi Arabia,  Egypt, Iran and others - were  
members. 
■ His father did not get any property  against  the  property  left  in  India.  Property  in  
Pakistan was purchased by his mother before partiti on, which  was  also  declared  as  
evacuee  property. 
■ He has always been domiciled in Lucknow and has bee n a resident of India. Till date,          
he  had  never  applied  nor  contemplated  nor  taken  any    nationality. 
■ He applied to the Custodian of Enemy Property to re lease his late  father’s  properties  
because he was an Indian citizen. In 1980, the late  Mrs. Indira Gandhi took a decision          
to release the properties of his late father to his  legal heirs  and  successors  who  were 
Indians. Then,  he  was  given  an  opportunity  to   prove  that  he  was  the  Indian  heir  of  
his father. In 1986, the Civil Court of  Lucknow  i n  which  he  had  impleaded  the 
Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  and  the  Union  of  India  as  one  party,  gave  its judgment 

79   
 
that he was the sole heir of his  father  under  th e  Oudh  Estate  Act  of  1869.  That  
judgment became final because it was not challenged  and, therefore,  it  became  res  
judicata. He again pleaded with the Government of India to re lease the properties with        
no  effect.  He  got  letters  from  various  Prime     Ministers. 
■ Mr. Rajiv Gandhi nominated  him  as  the  Congress  (I)  candidate  and  he  won  the 
election with a  historic  majority.  All  kinds  o f  charges  were  levelled  against  him  that  
he was not an Indian, etc. But, those didn’t hold w ater. In 1989, he was re-nominated          
by Mr. Rajiv Gandhi and he won again although durin g the scrutiny of  the  papers,  
objections  were  made  that  he  was  not  an  Indian  citizen.  But,  they  were       rejected. 
■ The State  Government  of  UP  sent  the  matter  t o  the  Governor  and  the  Governor  sent  
it  to  the  Election  Commission,  which  did  not  dispute  his    citizenship. 
■ In 1995, Mr. P. Chidambaram met him and his wife. H e was then the Minister  of  
Commerce. The enemy property at that time came unde r the purview  of  the 
Commerce Ministry. They were assured that a  decisi on  would  be  taken.  The  general  
view was that this property should be released or a  part of it should be released. That         
was   the   Government’s  decision. 
■ There were two reasons behind  filing  case  in  Bo mbay  High  Court.  Number  one,  
there were so many cross currents  in  U.P.  that  there  could  be  an  attempt  at  some  
kind of convolution. The other reason was the large   number  of  correspondence  
between the Custodian  and  his  mother,  his  fami ly  and  him.  They  felt  that  it  would 
be easier for them to obviate  the  position  where   the  Custodian  would  make  an  
excuse to say, “I have not got papers and I  have  to  go  back  to  Bombay  and  get  
them.”, and this would lead to unnecessary  prolong ed  delay  because  litigation  takes 
huge  amount  of  time. 
■ Property came through the sanad or talukdari. He  did  not  have  the  copy  of  the  sanad.  
He had the Lord Canning’s Proclamation. But, as  fa r  as  sanad  was  concerned,  he  
doubted if anyone had that. The kabooliyat, as it is called, is  vanished.  In  his  grand- 
father’s will, it was  accepted  as  talukdari  property.  In  the  Oudh  Estates  Act,  there  
were schedules. In this schedule, the names, both o f his  father’s  and  of  his  mother’s  
family were there. The 1869 Oudh Estates  Act  was  studied  by  the  civil  court  in  
Lucknow and all this property was deemed to be talukdari property. The succession 
certificate  was  got  through  the  Civil  Procedure     Code. 
■ He impleaded his mother, his two sisters, his uncle , his two aunts — his father’s real     
sisters; and, none of them contested —  and,  the  custodian.  He  won  the  case  in  2001 
from the Bombay  High  Court.  In  para  8  and  in   other  paras,  the  court  categorically  
says that the Government admitted that he  was  an  Indian  citizen.  After  winning  this  
case, an appeal was filed by  the  Union  of  India   in  the  Supreme  Court.  When  this  
appeal was  admitted  before  Justice  Lahoti,  the re  was  an  intervention  application  and  
an order was given that it should be taken up at th e final disposal of the case. At the        
final hearing, it was dismissed as withdrawn by the  Bench of the Supreme Court. Shri 
Chidambaram  appeared  initially  on  behalf  of  other   party. 
■ The State Government of UP made every attempt to be come  a  party  in  the  Supreme  
Court. They filed half a dozen applications. He nev er made them a party because the 
properties were under the  Custodian  of  the  Gove rnment  of  India,  not  of  the  State.  
They had themselves sought to be made a  party,  wh ich  was  good  enough.  The  
Supreme  Court  heard  them,  but  did  not  accept     them. 

80   
 
■ The permission for maintenance was  given  by  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  with 
the  permission  of  the  Ministry  of    Commerce.  
■ He had not mentioned about displacement  of  tenent s  in  his  appeal  in  Supreme  Court. 
The Supreme  Court  divided  the  occupied  propert y  in  two  parts.  One  part  was  in  
which Government officers were there at  a  small  rent.  The  rent  was  Rs.160  for  19  
acres. 873 properties are wakf-alallalah.  The  cas es  are  going  on  in  the  court.  Out  of  
873 properties, 400 will go in ceiling.  It  can  h appen  today  or  tomorrow  or  any  other 
day. 
■ There  are  some  urban  properties.  In  the  urba n  properties,  there  are  two  categories.  
One pertains to Government officials. The Supreme  Court  gave  its  order  on  that.  Its  
order was implemented  through  the  contempt  of  court  proceedings.  As  far  as  the  rest 
of occupants, non-government people, are  concerned ,  the  Supreme  Court  ordered  that  
two categories should be made.  This  is  the  judg ement  of  the  Supreme  Court.  Those  
who were staying there since  1965  as  tenants  of   his  father  would  continue  to  be  
tenants. To do this, they appointed a commission  c alled  the  Goswami  Commission.  He 
gave a report. That report was not acceptable to ab out ten  tenants.  There  are  five  
properties involved in that. Out  of  those  five,  two  are  in  Hazratganj  and  three  are  in 
old  Lucknow. 
■ As far  as  poor  tenants  are  concerned,  they  a re  those  people  who  cannot  afford  to  
have top lawyers such as Mr. Ram Jethmalani,  or,  Mr.  Arun  Jaitley,  or,  Mr.  Harish  
Salve, or, Mr. Rohtagi,  or,  Mr.  Venugopal,  or,  Mr.  Shanti  Bhushan  as  their  advocates. 
As far as  rest  of  the  occupants  are  concerned ,  he  had  given  them  an  undertaking  that 
he could not  in  good  conscience  dislodge  them  because  he  would  be  answerable  to  
the  God  as  well. 
 Then, Shri Khan gave his suggestions/comments on th e Bill. The gist of  the  views/  suggestions   is   
as follows:- 
■ The Enemy Property Act  was  enacted  in  1968.  Si nce  then  till  2010,  this  Act  has 
served well its purpose. There have been various Go vernments.  They  have  looked  at  
enemy property and  all  its  problems  in  great  detail.  None  of  them  found  any  reason  
for  bringing  in  an  amendment  or  a  Bill. 
■ The Bill is based on the ordinance which was promul gated on the 2nd July, 2010. This 
ordinance was brought a few  weeks  before  the  Pa rliament  was  to  convene.  The  
reason that was given by the Government for bringin g in this ordinance does not make    
much  sense. 
■ A question arises why this Bill  was  brought  abou t.  The  reason  given  by  the  Ministry 
was  that  there  was  a  spate  of  legislations  which  made  it  difficult  for  the  Custodian  
to   manage  properties. 
■ This proposed Bill is an unfair and unjust Bill. Th e provisions of this Bill will or may          
be  deemed  as  ultra  vires  by  the    courts. 
■ One of the things, which are very alarming, in this   Bill  is  that  it,  to  some  extent,  
bypasses the judiciary  and,  in  fact,  limits  th e  judiciary,  or,  in  fact,  overturns  or  tries   
to overturn and nullify some  very  important  deci sions  that  were  taken  in  the  past  by  
the  High  Courts. 
■ Giving a retrospective effect to this Bill is a ver y draconian and unfair decision. 
Retrospective  effect  can  be  given  in  certain  circumstances  when  the  need  and urgency 

81   
 
is there. For nearly over 40 years, there was no ne ed to give any kind of retrospective     
effect to this Bill to nullify the judgments of cou rts. There  should  be  no  retrospective 
action. 
■ If the Parliament so chooses, it can ensure  and  strengthen  the  rights  of  those  whose  
rights  ought  to  be  protected  under  the  Civil  Procedure     Code. 
■ Sanctity of the judgements which have become final, should be  upheld.  The  judiciary 
should  not  be  diminished  and   belittled. 
■ Powers that have been given to the Custodian are judicial powers and are  beyond  the 
purview  of  courts.  This  is  unthinkable  in  our     country. 
■ Parliament is the main pillar and the Executive  and  the  Judiciary  are  the  supporting  
pillars  of  our   democracy. 
6. A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
7. The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  1.30  P.M.  to  meet  again  on  14 th    October,      2011. 

 
82   
 
 
 
VI 
SIXTH  MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M.  on  Monday,  the  14 th  October,  2011  in  Committee  Room  
“A”,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New  Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
3. Shri  Tariq  Anwar 
4. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
5. Dr.  Kakali  Ghosh  Dastidar 
6. Shri  Naveen  Jindal 
7. Shri  Baijayant  Panda 
8. Shri  Bishnu  Pada  Ray 
9. Shri  Hamdullah Sayeed 
10. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
11. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,  Joint   Secretary  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
Shri  Sanjeev  Khokhar,   Committee  Officer  
 
Representatives   of   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
Shri   R.R.   Jha,   Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives   of   Legislative   Department,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1. Shri  N.K.  Nampoothiry,  Additional   Secretary 
2. Dr.  G.   Narayana  Raju,  Joint  Secretary  &  Legislative   Counsel 
3. Shri  Diwakar  Singh,  Deputy  Legislative   Counsel 
4. Shrimati  Veena  Kothavale,  Deputy  Legislative  Counsel 
Representatives   of   Department   of   Legal  Affairs,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1. Shri   D.R.   Meena,   Law Secretary 
2. Shri  Satish  Chandra,  Joint  Secretary  &  Legal    Adviser 
3. Shri  S.R.  Mishra,  DLA 
 
82 

83   
 
2 * * * 
3. Thereafter, Chairman  apprised  the  Members  of  the  agenda  of the  day  i.e.  in-house  
discussion and clause-by-clause consideration on ** * (ii) The Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010 ***. 
4.         * * * 
4.1      * * * 
4.2      * * * 
II.       The  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Va lidation)  Second  Bill,     2010  
5. The Committee thereafter held internal discussion o n the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation) Second Bill, 2010. The Chairman mention ed that the State Government of U.P. had 
categorically stated that  this  Bill  was  ultra  vires.  The  U.P.  Government,  where  a  large  number  of   
the properties are located,  was  of  the  view  th at  the  Ordinance  should  have  been  converted  into  a  
law instead of bringing in a new Bill which is tota lly against the spirit of the Ordinance. According            
to  Shri  Ram  Jethmalani,  who  appeared  before  the  Committee,  a  person  who  left  the  country   on   
his own will has forgone the property. As far  as  his  son,  who  was  brought  up  in  India,  was 
concerned, the son  would  inherit  the  property  from  father.  Since  the  father  has  no  propert y,  so  
there is no question of the son inheriting any prop erty. The Chairman further sated that even Raja 
Mahmoodabad was also opposed to the Bill on the gro und that the  provisions  of  the  Bill  may  be  
deemed as ultra vires by the  court  as  the  Bill  nullifies  some  very   important  decisions  taken  in  the 
past by the High Courts, and moreover, giving retro spective effect  to  this  Bill  was  draconian  an d  
unfair. 
 A Member of the Committee opined that the Enemy Pro perty Act  was  brought  in  conjunction  
with  actions  taken  in  Pakistan  where  a  lot  of  property  belonging  to  people  who  left  for  India was  
confiscated  and  Committee  should  not  lose  sight  of  that  fact  while  taking  decisions  on legislations in 
the country. The Chairman while  agreeing  to  the  observation  made  by  Member  stated  that  in  
collective  wisdom  Government  first  brought  in  an  amendment  Bill,  suddenly,  made    a  180  d egree  
about-turn  and  nobody  was  explaining  the  reason  for  this       about-turn. 
[At  this  stage,  Representatives  of  the  Ministries  were  called    in]  
6. The Committee thereafter took up the Enemy  Propert y  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second 
Bill, 2010 for  clause  by  clause  consideration.  The  Chairman  asked  the  Home  Secretary  to  cl arify  
the reason for bringing a Bill which was totally in  contradiction  with  the  objectives  of  the  
Ordinance. 
 The Home Secretary could not  reply  specifically  to  the  query  except  submitting  that  two  othe r 
clauses were added in substance to the Ordinance to  enable  the  Government  to  direct  that  property could 
be passed on to  the  legal  heirs  of  the  enemy  if  he  is  a  citizen  of  India  or  to  the  le gal heirs of  the  
enemy  if  he  is  not  an  enemy  subject  himself   which  meant  he  may  be  a  citizen  of   anoth er  
country. 
 The Legal Affairs  Secretary,  however,  maintained   that  there  was  no  contradiction  between  the   
Ordinance  and  the  proposed   Bill. 
 Responding on the issue, the Representative of Legi slative Department submitted that after 
promulgation of the Ordinance, certain provisions h ad been added in the Bill, relating to validation, 
 
 
***  Relate  to  other  matters. 

84   
 
giving effect to one of the important changes  that   in  case  the  lawful  heir  is  a  citizen  of  India  by 
birth,  according  to  law  of  succession,  it  should  be  given  to      him. 
 The Chairman then  asked  specific  query  as  to  what  had  prompted  the  Government  to  bring in 
new provisions within a  gap  of  few  months.  The   Chairman  also  mentioned  that  an  impression  was  
gaining  ground  that  the  entire  effort  and  th e  afterthought  of  the  Government  was  to  prot ect   an 
individual and that individual  is  a  person  who  was  represented  by  the  present  Law  Minister  earlier as 
an advocate. Responding  to  this,  the  Home  Secr etary  submitted  that  the  Government  was not 
concerned with individuals. It is concerned with the principle to uphold certain court decisions. However, the 
Home Secretary could not respond convincingly to the above observations  of  the  Chairman. 
6.5. The Chairman,  thereafter,  summed  up  the  d iscussion  by  observing  that  the  best  course  of  
action for the Government would be to come with a f resh Bill, in Parliament. The Committee then     
decided to take up clause-by-clause consideration o f the Bill and the draft report on the Bill in the         
next  meeting. 
[Some   witnesses   then withdrew]  
7.0 * * * 
7.1 * * * 
7.2 * * * 
7.3 * * * 
7.4 * * * 
7.5 * * * 
7.6 * * * 
7.7 * * * 
7.8 * * * 
7.9 * * * 
7.10 * * * 
7.11 * * * 
7.12 * * * 
7.13 * * * 
8. A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
9. The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  1.40  P.M.  to  meet  again  on  24 th    October,     2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***  Relate  to  other  matters. 

 
85   
 
 
 
V 
FIFTH  MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00  A.M.  on  Monday,  the  24 th  October,  2011  in  Committee  Room  
‘B’,  Parliament  House  Annexe,  New  Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu  —  Chairman  
 
RAJYA  SABHA  
2. Shri  Rishang  Keishing 
3. Shri  Naresh  Chandra   Agrawal 
4. Shri  Tariq  Anwar 
5. Dr.  V.   Maitreyan 
6. Shri  D.  Raja 
 
LOK SABHA  
7. Shri   Sansuma   Khunggur  Bwiswmuthiary 
8. Dr.  Kakali  Ghosh  Dastidar 
9. Shri  Ramen  Deka 
10. Shri  Mohammad  Asrarul  Haque 
11. Shri  Naveen  Jindal 
12. Shri  Babulal Marandi 
13. Shri  Bishnu  Pada  Ray 
14. Shri  Neeraj  Shekhar 
15. Shri  Ravneet  Singh 
16. Shri  Harsh Vardhan 
17. Shri  Dinesh  Chandra  Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri  P.P.K.   Ramacharyulu,   Joint  Secretary  
Shri  D.K.  Mishra,  Joint   Director  
Shri  Bhupendra  Bhaskar,  Assistant  Director  
 
WITNESSES  
Representatives   of   Ministry   of   Home Affairs  
1. Shri  Anil  Goswami,  Additional  Secretary 
2. Shri   R.R.   Jha,   Joint Secretary 
3. Shri  Dinesh  Singh,  Custodian,  Enemy    Property 
4. Shri  D.B.  Sahu,  Additional  Custodian,  Enemy   Property 
 
85 

86   
 
Representatives   of   Legislative   Department,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1 . Shri  V.K.   Bhasin,  Secretary 
2 . Shri  N.K.  Nampoothiry,  Additional   Secretary 
3 . Dr.  G.   Narayana  Raju,  Joint  Secretary  and  Legislative   Counsel 
4 . Shri  Diwakar  Singh,  Deputy  Legislative   Counsel 
5 . Shri  K.V.  Kumar,  Assistant  Legislative  Counsel 
Representatives   of   Department   of   Legal  Affairs,   Ministry   of   Law   and Justice  
1. Shri   D.R.   Meena,   Law Secretary 
2. Shri  Satish  Chandra,  Joint  Secretary  and  Legal    Adviser 
3. Shri  S.R.  Mishra,  DLA 
2. At the  outset,  the  Chairman  welcomed  the  M embers  to  the  sitting  of  the  Committee.  He  
informed  them  about  the  agenda  of  the  day  which  was     to 
(i)  * * * 
(ii) consider the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill,  2010  clause-by- 
clause  and  draft  155th  Report  thereon  and  adopt  the      report. 
3.         * * * 
II. Clause by Clause  consideration  of  the  Enemy   Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  
Second  Bill,  2011  and  draft  Report    thereon  
4 . Thereafter, the Committee took up the Enemy  Proper ty  (Amendment  and Validation)  Second 
Bill, 2010 for consideration. The Chairman made a r eference to a letter received  from  the  Home  
Secretary  stating  that  he  along  with  the  Cab inet  Secretary  had  to  go  on  an  official  tou r  on  that  
day  to  Srinagar  on  the  orders  of  the  Prime  Minister  and  in  view  of  that,  he  would  not   be  able   
to attend the meeting of the Committee that day and  in his absence, Shri Anil Goswami, Additional 
Secretary and Shri R.R. Jha,  Joint  Secretary,  ha ndling  the  subject,  would  attend  the  said  me eting.  
The Chairman then observed that  if  there  was  so me  important  development  in  Kashmir  and  the  
Home Secretary had to go, the Committee had no prob lem but as per  the  convention,  the  Home  
Secretary should have  made  a  telephone  call  to   the  Chairman  and  sought  permission,  which  w as  
not done. The Chairman stated that though the Commi ttee  would  not  like  to  make  the  absence  of  
Home Secretary a big issue, but it would like to re mind him about the convention of seeking leave             
of  absence. 
5 . Thereafter, the Chairman pointed out two ways of de aling with the Enemy Property Bill i.e.        
first to return the Bill back to the  Government  a nd  ask  them  to  bring  back  the  Ordinance,  an d,  
second one was to have clause-by-clause considerati on, and, then, to communicate the Government 
whatever the Committee felt, or,  considered  on  t he  basis  of  evidence  before  it.  The  Chairman   
recalled that everybody had opposed the Bill includ ing Mr. Ram Jethmalani as well as the Raja of 
Mahmoodabad. 
[At  this  stage,  representatives  of  the  Ministries  were  called    in]  
6 . The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Mi nistry of Home Affairs, Legislative 
Department and Legal Affairs. He reminded the Addit ional  Secretary  of  Ministry  of  Home Affairs 
that as per the convention and practice of  the  Co mmittee,  even  if  the  Home  Secretary  got  an  
urgent call or  programme which could not be  avoid ed, the Home Secretary was supposed to  seek      
the  permission  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Parlia mentary  Standing  Committee  and  he  could  not  take 
a  decision  himself  and  go  away.  He  desired  that  feelings  of  the  Committee  may  be  convey ed to 
 
***  Relate  to  other  matter. 

87   
 
the Home Secretary that on any such occasion in fut ure, he should  seek  the  Chairman’s  
permission. 
7 . The  Chairman  then  pointed  out  a  number  of  i ssues  which  were  raised  during  the  course   
of examination of the Bill. He informed that on the  basis of  the  views  of  Uttar  Pradesh 
Government, Ram Jethmalani, or, of  the  some  othe r  witnesses,  the  Committee  may  send  back  the   
Bill and ask the  Central  Government  to  bring  b ack  the  Ordinance,  which  the  Government  had 
issued. The Second way was to  consider  the  Bill  clause-by-clause,  examine  by  merits  of  the  c ase,  
and, then, give the Committee’s Report to the Parli ament. Either way, some  of  the  amendments  
suggested in the  second  Bill  were  not  acceptab le  because  they  were  against  ‘natural  justice ’  and  
also the ‘national interest’. The Chairman then rec alled  that  the  Chief  Secretary,  Uttar  Pradesh ,  
strongly  felt  that  the  Bill  itself  was  ultra-vires  of  the    Constitution. 
8 . The Chairman, pointing out the viewpoint of Mr.  Ra m Jethmalani on the Bill stated that that       
the  property  could  be  devolved  only  if  the  property  was  there.  When  there  was  no  proper ty  and   
it was already vested in the custodian, there was n o question of devolving it to the legal heirs. On              
the other hand, Mr. M.A.M. Khan, the Raja of Mahmoo dabad, who was going to be one of the  
beneficiaries, had also gone on record to say that the Bill was against the Constitution. Mr.  M.A.M.   
Khan, vehemently opposed giving the retrospective e ffect to the Bill. The Chairman pointed out that           
if retrospective effect  was  not  given,  then,  t here  would  be  a  problem  that  whatever  action s  had  
been taken by the Government in this ‘gap’ would be come invalid. That would be the problem for           
the   Government.   That   was   the situation. 
9 . The  Chairman  then  highlighted  the  opinion  of  the  Law  Ministry  about  sanad  which  reads  
as  under: 
“The Department of Legal Affairs maintains that in general, sanad, is valid  as  per  the  
provisions under article 363 of  the  Constitution  of  India.  However,  while  examining  the  
status of ‘sanad taluqdari’  in  any  particular  i ndividual  case,  the  provisions  of  article  294  
and  295  of  the  Constitution  may  also  be  kept  in     view”.  
 The Chairman further added that as per articles  29 4  and  295  of  the  Constitution,  the  propertie s  
and  assets  which  were  vested  in  His  Majesty  for  the  purposes  of  the  Government  of   the Dominion 
of India, shall vest in the Union i.e. whichever properties that were vested in British Go vernment,  
automatically,  got  transferred  to  Indian  Government  after  Independence.  Properties    and assets, which 
were vested in His Majesty for the  purposes  of  t he  Government  of  each  Governor’s province, shal l 
vest in the corresponding State. These articles  ma ke  provision  for succession  by  the  present  
Government  of  the  Union  and  the  States  to  p roperty,  rights,  liabilities  and obligations ves ted in the 
former Governments. Pointing out further the opinio n  of the Department of Legal Affairs, the  
Chairman  added  that  Article  363  (1)  bars  all   courts  from  having any jurisdiction in any disp ute 
arising of a pre-Constitutional treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement or sanad  executed  between  a  
Ruler  of  an  Indian  State  and  the  Government  of  India,  or, in any  dispute  in  respect  of  any  right  
accruing  under  or  any  liability  or  obligation   arising  out  of any of the provisions of the Con stitution 
relating to any such treaty etc. However, there are  two conditions for the application of the Article  363(1).  
Number  one,  the  covenant  with  the  Ruler  must  have been entered into before the coming  into  force  of  
the  Constitution,  and,  second,  the  covenant mu st continue in force after the commencement of the Indian 
Constitution. Based on  that,  the  Law Ministry ha s given its opinion  which  strengthened  the  view point  
of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Government  and  also  the   observations  of  the  Committee,  the  Chairman     
added. 
10 . Thereafter, a Member of the Committee opined that t he Government might bring again some    
fresh changes in the Bill. Another Member proposed that even  if  the  Committee  discussed  the  Bill  
clause  by   clause,  it   could  give  its   recom mendation  and   it   was   for   the   Government  to   take 

88   
 
whichever actions the Government wanted to take. Th e Chairman responding to this stated that 
undisputedly, ultimately, it was  for  the  Parliam ent  and  for  the  Government  but,  at  the  same   time,  
the  Committee,  in  its  collective  wisdom,  must   convey  to  the  Government  that  this  was  the   view   
of the Committee. He  informed  that  about  80  re presentations  were  received  and  the  Committee  
heard important witnesses also. The Committee could  suggest that the Government should bring an 
Ordinance  and  later  a  Bill.  Alternatively,  he   suggested  that  while  going  through  clause  b y  clause,  
at  one  stage,  the  Committee  might  have  to  say  that  there  seemed  to  be  some  conflict  of    interest. 
 Another Member recalled  that  in  the  previous  meeting  of  the  Committee,  the  representative of the 
Law  Ministry,  had  accepted  that  there  was  a  departure  from  Ordinance  to  the  Bill  present ed in the 
Parliament. The  Home  Secretary  was  not  able  t o  explain  in  the  last  meeting  the  justificat ion for that 
departure and for the Bill. The Member felt that th e Bill had to be once again re-considered           by the 
Government. First of  all,  the  Government  should   have  clarified  in  that  regard  and  come  bef ore the 
Parliament again. Another Member opined that in the  fitness of things, it would be more   prudent for the 
Committee to return the Bill and ask the Government  to come afresh with  a  new  Ordinance and a  new  
Bill.  He  further  suggested  that  the  Committee   would  be  serving  no  purpose  by doing  clause -by-
clause  consideration.  Other  Members,  while  sup porting  the  overwhelming  view  of the Committee for 
returning the Bill to the Government, as the  repre sentatives  of the  Government could not reply 
clearly and convincingly various issues including r easons for promulgating the Ordinance and  thereaft er  
taking  a  U-turn,  felt  that  the  Committee  may   not  go  ahead with clause by clause consideratio n and 
instead ask the Government to bring a fresh and com prehensive Bill addressing the  issues  and  concer ns  
raised  by  the  Members  of  the  Committee.  The   Committee   unanimously agreed. 
 The Chairman, then  added  that  while  making  a  recommendation  for  bringing  a  fresh  Bill,  the  
Committee could make recommendations for the  Office  of  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  which was 
facing severe staff crunch and  read  out  the  fol lowing  recommendations  from  the  draft  report  on  the 
Bill:– 
“Practically, there are very few officers manning t he Office due to which the process of 
verification, etc., of enemy properties could not  be  completed  till  now.  Even  though  the  
Central Government has issued a notification reques ting all  the  State  Governments  to  
nominate District Magistrate/District Collector as the Deputy  Custodian,  the  Committee  has 
been given to understand that there is not much pro gress in the matter and States have not      
taken much action. The Committee is also constraine d to note, and the then Home Secretary  
himself admitted before the Committee,  that  the  Office  of  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property 
has so far been  given  least  priority.  He  furth er  went  on  to  say  that  there  is  a  vacuum  in  
the entire system  in  which  the  Custodian  works .  The  staffing  pattern  in  the  Custodian’s  
office is abysmally low. Similarly, the Chief Secre tary, West  Bengal also stated likewise. The   
same situation prevails in other States also. This is a very sorry state of affairs  and  the  
Committee takes it very seriously. The Committee ta kes note  of  the  assurance  given  by  the 
Home  Secretary  that  immediate  action  would  be   taken  to  appoint  the  staff  for  the  Office   
of Custodian of Enemy Property instead of depending   upon  the  State  Government.  On  the  
query made to the Ministry of Home Affairs as to wh ether workload was assessed before  
appointing District Magistrates/District Collectors   as  Deputy  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property,  
the Ministry stated  that  the  assessment  of  add itional  work  load  on  account  of  appointment  
of District Magistrates/District Collectors as  ex- officio  Deputy  Custodian  was  not  made  as  
they were already carrying out similar work in the past. The Committee fails to understand            
as to why the  workload  assessment  was  not  made .  The  Ministry  further  informed  that  
District Magistrates/District Collectors  are  free   to  engage  retired  District  Revenue  officials ; 
or deploy other staff from other sections from time  to time depending on the  workload  for 
assisting  him  in  verification/identification  of   enemy  properties  in  the  area  falling  within  

89   
 
their respective districts. The Custodian  of  Enem y  Property  would  consider  requests  from  
State Government/UT Administrations for meeting exp enditure on hiring of such additional 
manpower by the concerned DMs/DCs. The Committee ho wever feels that this is all ad hoc 
arrangement. Now that fresh vacancies are being cre ated, the Committee  hopes  that  the  
proposal made  to  Ministry  of  Finance  would  ha ve  been  accepted  by  now  and  the  process  
of recruitment would have  started.  The  Committee   desires  that  the  recruitment  process  may 
be completed at the earliest and the staff be  in  place  soon.  The  Committee  would  like  to  
review the progress of recruitment  of  staff  and  the  process  of  enemy  properties  without  
having any regard to this Bill. The Committee desir es to be informed of the progress  
periodically.”  
11 . The Committee then decided not  to  take  up  claus e  by  clause  consideration  of  the  Second  
Bill and recommend to the Government to bring a fre sh Bill, incorporating  the  views  and  
observations  made  by  it  by  withdrawing  the  Second    Bill. 
12 . The Committee, thereafter, adopted the 155th draft Report on the Enemy Property 
(Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010,  as   amended. 
13 . The Committee, then, decided to present the followi ng Reports to  Hon’ble  Chairman,  Rajya 
Sabha during the inter-session period since the Hou se  is  not  in  session  as  the  Committee  has  been 
given extension upto 30th October, 2011 to present the Reports on the Border Security  Force  
(Amendment)  Bill,  2011  and  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Bill,  2010:– 
(i) 152nd Report on Action Taken by Government on the r ecommendations/observations 
contained in the 136th Report on Revamping and Revi talization of Civil Defence in the 
country; 
(ii) 153rd Report on the Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 135th Report on  Bord er  Fencing  and  Floodlighting 
Projects   along   Indo-Pak Border; 
(iii ) 154th  Report  on  the  Border  Security  Force  (Amendment)  Bill,  2011;    and 
(iv) 155th Report on the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Second Bill, 2010 
alongwith  Evidence  tendered  before   it. 
14 . The Committee also authorized its Chairman  to  pre sent  the  reports  to  Hon’ble  Chairman,  
Rajya  Sabha. 
15 . A  verbatim  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  meeting  was     kept. 
16 . The  Committee  then  adjourned  at  11.45    A.M. 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES  
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
AS   INTRODUCED   IN   LOK    SABHA  
 
15  NOV.,  2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill  No.  124  of  2010  
 
THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION) 
SECOND  BILL,  2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34  of  1968. 
 
A 
 
BILL 
further to amend the Enemy Property Act, 1968 and the Public 
Premises   (Eviction   of   Unauthorised   Occupants)  Act, 1971.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first  Year  of  the 
Republic  of  India  as   follows:— 
1 . (1) This Act may be called the Enemy Property 
(Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Act,   2010. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be deemed      
to  have  come  into  force  on  the  2nd  day  of  July,     2010. 
2 . On and from the date of commencement of the Enemy  
Property Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in  
section 5, after sub-section (2), the  following  s hall  be  inserted  and  
shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  inserted,   namely:— 
 
93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section  5. 

94   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new 
section  5A. 
 
Issue  of 
certificate by 
Custodin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section  6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section  8. 
‘( 3) The enemy property vested in the Custodian shall,  
notwithstanding that the enemy or the enemy subject   or  the  
enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to death, extinction, 
winding up of business or change of nationality or that the legal 
heir and successor is a citizen of  India  or  the  citizen  of  a  
county which is not an enemy, continue to remain ve sted in the 
Custodian  till  it  is  divested  by  the  Central Government. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, “enemy 
property vested in the Custodian” shall include all  titles, rights   
and interest in, or any benefit arising out  of,  s uch  property  
vested  in  him  under  the Act.’. 
3 . After section 5 of the principal Act,  the  following  section 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:— 
“5A. The Custodian may, after making such inquiry a s he 
deems necessary, by an order, declare that the prop erty of  the 
enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy firm descri bed in the 
order, vests in him under this Act and issue a cert ificate to this 
effect and such certificate shall be the evidence  of  the  facts  
stated  therein.”. 
4 . On and from the date of commencement of the princip al Act,   
in section 6, the following Explanation shall be in serted and shall be 
deemed  to  have  been  inserted, namely:— 
“Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is herby 
declared that for the purposes  of  this  section,  the  transfer  of  
any enemy property shall not include any transfer o r any claim     
of  transfer  made,— 
(a) )  through  oral  will  or  oral  gift;  or 
(b) by  concealment  of  enemy  nationality; or 
(c) in case the transfer of such property requires the 
permission of the Reserve Bank of India or any othe r competent 
authority,  without  such  permission;  or 
(d) without  the  permission  of  the Custodian.”. 
5 . In  section  8  of  the  principal  Act,  in  sub-section  (2),— 
(a) after clause ( i), the following clause shall be inserted 
and  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  inserted, namely:— 
“( ia ) fix and collect the rent, standard  rent;  lease 
rent, licence fee  or  usage  charges,  as  the  ca se  may  be, 
in  respect  of  enemy  property;”; 
(b) after clause ( iv ), the following clause shall be inserted 
and  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  inserted, namely:— 
“( iva ) secure vacant possession of the enemy 
property by evicting the unauthorised or illegal oc cupant    
or trespasser and remove unauthorised or illegal 
constructions,  if  any;”. 

95   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5   of  1908. 
6 . After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:- 
“l0A. ( 1) Where the Custodian proposes to sell any enemy 
immovable property vested in him, as referred to in  section 8,       
to any person, he may, on receipt of the sale proce eds of such 
property, issue a certificate of sale in favour of such person and 
such certificate of sale shall, notwithstanding the  fact that the 
original title deeds of the property have not been handed over       
to the transferee, be valid and conclusive proof of  ownership of 
such  property  by  such   person. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for  the 
time being in force, the certificate of sale, refer red to in  sub- 
section ( 1), issued by the Custodian shall be a valid instrum ent    
for the registration of the  property  in  favour  of  the  transferee 
and the registration in  respect  of  enemy  proper ty  for  which  
such certificate of sale had been issued by the Cus todian, shall    
not be refused on the ground of lack of original ti tle deeds in 
respect  of  such  property  or  for  any  such  other    reason.”. 
7 . In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-secti on ( 2), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted and shall  be  deemed  to  have 
been  inserted, namely:— 
“( 3) The Custodian, Deputy Custodian or Assistant 
Custodian shall have, for the purposes of exercisin g powers or 
discharging his functions under  this  Act,  the  s ame  powers  as  
are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908, 
while dealing with any case under this Act, in resp ect of the 
following  matters, namely:— 
(a) requiring the discovery and inspection of 
documents; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including 
any officer dealing with land, revenue and registra tion 
matters, banking officer or officer of a company an d 
examining  him  on oath; 
(c) compelling, the production of books, documents 
and  other  records;  and 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of 
witnesses   or  documents.”. 
8 . In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the 
words “two per centum”, at both the places  where  they  occur,  the  
words “five per centum” shall be substituted and sh all be deemed to    
have  been substituted. 
9 . For section 18 of the principal Act,  the  followin g  section  
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have be en substituted, 
namely:— 
Insertion of new 
section  10A. 
 
Transfer of 
immovable 
property  
belonging to 
enemy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section  11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section  17. 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of 
new section for 
sectioin  18. 

96   
 
Divesting  of 
enemy property 
vested  in 
Custodian to 
owner or his 
legal heir in 
certain  cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new 
section  18A. 
 
 
 
Income not 
liable to be 
returned. 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new 
sections  18B 
and  18C. 
 
 
Bar  of 
jurisdication  of 
courts in matters 
of  divesting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disposal  of 
enemy property 
vested  in 
custodian by 
Central 
Government. 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
Section  20. 
“18. The Central Government may, by general or spec ial 
order, direct that any enemy property vested in the   Custodian 
under this Act and remaining with him  shall  be  d ivested  from 
him and be returned, in such manner, as may be pres cribed, to    
the owner thereof or,  if the owner is dead, to any  lawful heir         
of the owner in accordance with the law of successi on applicable  
to that owner, as may be specified in the direction , and thereupon 
such property shall cease to vest in the  Custodian   and  shall  
revest  in  such  owner  or  heir: 
Provided that any person, claiming to be the lawful  heir      
of the owner, shall obtain a succession certificate  or a declaration 
to the effect that he is the  lawful  heir  of  the   owner  from  a  
court of competent jurisdiction  in  a  civil  proc eeding  instituted 
for that purpose and the Central Government shall o rdinarily 
accept  such  certificate  or  declaration,  as  the  case  may   be.”. 
1 0. On and from the date of commencement  of  the  prin cipal  
Act, after section 18, the following section shall be inserted and shall      
be  deemed  to  have  been  inserted, namely:— 
“18A. Any income received in respect of the enemy 
property by the Custodian shall not, notwithstandin g that such 
property had been  divested  or  transferred  to  a ny  other  person, 
be returned or liable to be returned to such person  or any other 
person unless so directed by order, by the Central    Government.”. 
1 1. After section 18A of the principal Act, [as so inse rtred by 
section 10], the following sections shall be  inser ted  and  shall  be  
deemed  to  have  been  inserted, namely:— 
“18B. No court shall have jurisdiction to order div estment 
from the Custodian  of  enemy  property  vested  in   him  under  
this Act or direct the Central Government to divest  such property 
from  the  Custodian. 
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that the courts shall have jurisdiction to  adjudicate 
whether the property claimed to be vested in the Cu stodian is        
an  enemy  property  or  not. 
18C. The Central Government may, by general or spec ial 
order, direct that any or all enemy property vested  in the 
Custodian under this Act shall be sold or disposed of in such 
manner  as  may  be  prescribed.”. 
 
 
 
 
1 2. On and from the date on which the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation)  Second Bill, 2010 recei ves the assent of   
the President, in section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 3), for   
the words “five hundred rupees”, the  words  “ten  thousand  rupees”  
shall  be  substituted. 

97   
 
1 3. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after 
clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted and shall  be deemed      
to  have  been  inserted, namely: 
“( da ) the manner of sale or disposal of the enemy prope rty 
vested  in  the  Custodian  under  section 18C;”. 
1 4 . After section 25 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely: 
“26. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or  other 
authority,— 
Amendment of 
section  23. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new 
section  26. 
 
Validation. 
(a) the provisions of this Act, as amended by the 
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)  Second 
Act, 2010, shall have and shall be deemed always to  have 
effect for all purposes as if the provisions of thi s Act, as 
amended by the said Act had been in force at all ma terial 
times; 
(b) any enemy property divested from the Custodian 
to any person under the provisions of this Act, as it stood 
immediately before the commencement of the Enemy 
Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Act, 201 0 
shall stand transferred to and vest  or  continue  to  vest,  
free from all encumbrances, in the Custodian in the  same 
manner as it was vested in the Custodian before suc h 
divesting of enemy property under the provisions of  this  
Act, as if the provisions of this Act, as amended b y the 
aforesaid  Act,  were  in  force  at  all  material times: 
Provided that if the Central Government had, before  
the commencement of the Enemy Property  (Amendment 
and Validation) Second Act, 2010, made any order un der 
section 18, as it stood  before  such  commencement ,  and 
the property had been returned  to  the  owner  or  such  
other person, such property shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this clause, continue to vest in the o wner or 
such  other  person,  as  the  case  may  be: 
Provided further that if any enemy  property  had  
been otherwise divested from the Custodian (by an o rder    
of a court or without any direction under section 1 8) and 
returned to the owner or his lawful heir before the  
commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation)  Second  Act, 2010, 
(i ) in a case where the owner or  the  lawful 
heir, as the case may be, is a  citizen  of  India  by 
birth, such property shall, notwithstanding anythin g 
contained in this clause, continue to vest in such 
owner or the lawful heir, if the owner or the lawfu l 
heir, as the case may be, furnishes, within  six  
months from the day on which the Enemy    Property 

98   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 2 and  3 
of  Act  40  of 
1971.  
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 
receives the assent of  the  President,  evidence  to  
the satisfaction of the Central Government that he     
is a citizen of India by birth and, in the case  of   
lawful heir, he is the lawful heir of the owner in 
accordance with the  law  of  succession  applicabl e  
to  the  owner;  or 
(i i ) in any other case, if the Central 
Government is satisfied, after causing to  be  held 
such inquiry as it deems fit, that the property had  
been returned to the owner or his lawful heir,  it  
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
clause, issue a direction under section 18 to  the  
effect that such property shall revest in the owner     
or  his  lawful  heir,  as  the  case  may be; 
(c) no suit or other proceedings shall, without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provis ions, be 
maintained or continued in any court or tribunal or authority 
for the enforcement of any decree or order or  dire ction 
given by such court or tribunal or authority direct ing 
divestment of enemy property from the Custodian ves ted    
in him under section 5 of this Act, as it stood bef ore the 
commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation) Second Act, 2010, and such enemy  prope rty 
shall continue to vest in the Custodian under secti on 5 of  
this Act, as amended by the aforesaid Act, as if th e said 
section, as amended by the aforesaid Act was always   in 
force  at  all  material time; 
(d) any transfer of any enemy  property,  vested  in 
the Custodian, by virtue of any order  of  attachme nt,  
seizure or sale in execution of decree of a civil c ourt or 
orders of any tribunal or other authority in  respe ct  of  
enemy property vested in the Custodian which is con trary  
to the provisions of this Act, as amended by the En emy 
Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Act, 201 0, 
shall be deemed to be null and void and notwithstan ding 
such transfer, continue to vest in the Custodian un der this 
Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any cl aim made by 
any person before any  court  or  other  authority  against  the  owner  or 
his lawful heir to whom the property was or may be returned under       
this Act and such claim  shall  be  decided  in  ac cordance  with  law  by 
the  court  or  other  authority,  as  the  case  may   be.”. 
15 . In the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Oc cupants) 
Act,  1971,— 

99   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34  of  1968. 
(a) in section 2, in clause ( e), after sub-clause ( 3), the 
following sub-clause shall be inserted and shall  b e  deemed  to 
have  been  inserted, namely:— 
“( 4) any premises of the enemy property as defined  
in clause ( c)  of  section  2  of  the  Enemy  Property  
Act,  1968.”; 
(b) in  section  3,  in  clause  (a),— 
(i) in the second proviso, the word “and” shall be 
omitted  and  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been omitted; 
(ii) after the second proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, 
namely:— 
 
 
 
 
 
34  of  1968. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ord.  4  of 
2010.  
 
 
 
 
34  of  1968. 
40  of  1971. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ord.  4   of  2010. 
34  of  1968. 
40  of  1971. 
“Provided also that the Custodian, Deputy 
Custodian and Assistant Custodian of the enemy 
property appointed under section 3 of the Enemy 
Property Act, 1968 shall be deemed to have been 
appointed as the Estate Officer in respect of those  
enemy property, being the public premises, referred   
to in sub-clause ( 4) of clause  ( e)  of  section  2  of 
this Act for which they had been appointed as the 
Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant 
Custodian under section 3 of the  Enemy  Property 
Act,  1968.”. 
1 6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions    
of this Act during the period beginning on the  dat e  on  which  the  
Enemy Property (Amendment  and Validation)  Ordinance,  2010  ceased 
to operate and ending immediately before  the  date   on  which  the  
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 receives 
the assent of the President, the Central Government  may, by order, 
published in the Official Gazette, make such provis ions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Enemy Property Act, 1968 , or the Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, as amended 
by this Act, as may appear to be necessary for remo ving the difficulty 
during  the  said period: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under  th is  
section after the expiry of six months from the dat e on which      
the Enemy Property (Amendment and  Validation) Seco nd  
Bill,  2010  receives  the  assent  of  the  President. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon       
as  may  be  after  it  is  made,  before  each  House  of Parliament. 
1 7. Notwithstanding the cessation of the operation of t he Enemy 
Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010, anything done or 
any action taken under the Enemy Property Act, 1968 , or the Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised  Occupants)  Act,  1971,  as  amended 
by this Act, shall be deemed to have been done or t aken under the 
corresponding  provisions  of  those  Acts,  as  amended  by  this   Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of Central 
Government to 
make transitional 
provisions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Savings. 

 
100  
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND REASONS 
 
The Enemy Property Act, 1968 was enacted on the  20 th  
August, 1968 to, inter alia, provide  for  the  continued  vesting  of  
enemy property vested in the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  for  
India under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 and fo r matters  
connected  therewith. 
2. Of late, there have been a number of  judgments  by   
various courts that have adversely affected the pow ers of the 
Custodian and the Government of India  as  provided   under  the  
Enemy Property Act, 1968. In view of  such  interpr etation  by  the  
courts, the Custodian has been  finding  it  diffic ult  to  sustain  his 
actions   under   the   Enemy   Property  Act, 1968. 
3. In the above circumstances, it had become necessary   to  
amend the Enemy Property Act, 1968,  with  retrospe ctive  effect  to,  
inter alia, clarify the legislative intention. Accordingly, the  Enemy 
Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010  was 
promulgated  on  the  2nd  day  of  July,  2010,    providing— 
(a) that the enemy property  shall  continue  to  vest  in  
the Custodian till it is divested by  the  Central  Government,  
even if the enemy subject or enemy firm ceases to b e enemy    
due to  death,  extinction,  winding  up  of  busin ess  or  change  
of nationality or  that  the  legal  heir  or  succ essor  is  a  citizen 
of  India  or  a  citizen  of  a  country  which  is  not  an     enemy; 
(b) to authorise the Custodian, after making such 
enquiry as  he  deems  necessary,  to  declare  tha t  the  property  
of the  enemy  or  the  enemy  subject  or  the  en emy  firm  vest  
in him under the aforesaid Act and issue a certific ate  to  that 
effect  which  would  be  evidence  of  the  facts  stated     therein; 
(c) that the transfer of any enemy property shall not 
include any transfer, or any claim of  transfer,  m ade  through 
oral will or oral gift, or, by concealment of enemy  
nationality, or, in case  the  transfer  of  such  property  requires 
the permission of the Reserve Bank of India or any other 
competent  authority,  any  transfer  without  such   permission,  
or,  without  the  permission  of  the    Custodian; 
(d) that no court shall have jurisdiction to order 
divestment from the  Custodian  of  the  enemy  pro perty  vested 
in him under the aforesaid Act or direct the Centra l 
Government to divest such property  from  the  Cust odian,  but 
the court shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate whe ther the  
property claimed to be vested in the Custodian is a n enemy 
property   or  not; 
 
100 

101   
 
(e) to authorise the Central Government to  direct  tha t  
any or all enemy property vested in the Custodian u nder the 
aforesaid Act shall be sold or disposed of  in  suc h  manner  as 
may   be  prescribed; 
(f) that any transfer  or  any  other  action  taken  c ontrary 
to the provisions of the aforesaid Act, as amended by the  
proposed  legislation,  would  be  null  and   void. 
4. In order to have speedy and effective eviction of 
unauthorised occupants from the enemy property unde r the 
Custodian, the Public Premises (Eviction of Unautho rised  Occupants) 
Act, 1971 was also amended by the aforesaid  Ordina nce  so  as  to  
declare the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assista nt Custodian of 
enemy property appointed under the Enemy Property A ct, 1968  as  
“Estate  Officer”  in  respect  of  the  enemy   properties. 
5. Further, the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validati on) 
Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 2 nd August, 2010       
to replace the Ordinance. This  Bill  was  not  pas sed  by  the  House  of 
the People. Consequently, the Enemy Property (Amend ment and 
Validation)  Ordinance,  2010  lapsed  on  6th  September,    2010. 
6. It is proposed to withdraw,  with  the  leave  of  the  House,  
the aforesaid Bill and to introduce a fresh Bill ti tled as “the Enemy 
Property (Amendment and Validation) Second  Bill,  2010”  which, 
inter alia, provides for the following, in addition to the prov isions 
mentioned  in  paragraphs  3  and  4  above,    namely:— 
(a) that the enemy property  will  be  divested  only  to  
the owner or, if the  owner  is  dead,  to  any  la wful  heir  and  
that the claimant shall have  to  establish,  in  a ccordance  with  
the  law,  that  he  is  the  lawful   heir; 
(b) that any enemy property divested from the 
Custodian to any person under the provisions of the  Enemy 
Property Act, 1968, as it stood immediately before 2nd  July, 
2010, shall stand transferred to and  vest  or  con tinue  to  vest, 
tree from  all  encumbrances,  in  the  Custodian.  If,  however,  
the enemy property had been divested from the Custo dian by       
a valid order  made  under  section  18  prior  to  2nd  July,  2010 
or where the property had been returned to the owne r or his 
lawful heir by an order of a court and the  Governm ent  is  
satisfied that the property was returned to the own er or  the  
lawful heir, such enemy property would  continue  t o  remain  
with   such  persons; 
(c) that nothing contained in this Act shall affect the   
claim made by any person before any court or other  
authority against the owner or his lawful heir to w hom the 
property was or may be returned  under  this  Act  and  such  
claim shall be  decided  in  accordance  with  law  by  the  court  
or  other  authority,  as  the  case    be; 

 
102 
 
(d) to empower the Central Government to issue 
appropriate orders, within a  period  of  six  mont hs  from  the  
date on which the  proposed  legislation  receives  the  assent  of 
the President, to remove any difficulty which may  arise  in  
giving effect to the provisions of the Act during t he period 
beginning on the date on which the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010 ceased t o 
operate and ending immediately before the date on w hich the 
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)  Second  Bill,  
2010  receives  the  assent  of  the    President; 
(e) to provide that anything done or any action taken  
under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, or the Public P remises 
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)  Act,  1971,  as  amended 
by the proposed legislation, shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  
done or taken under the  corresponding  provisions  of  those  
Acts,  as  amended  by  the  proposed   legislation . 
7. The amendments will  come  into  force  from  the  2nd  day  
of  July,  2010  unless  otherwise    provided. 
8. The  Bill  seeks  to  achieve  the  aforesaid    objects. 
 
 
 
 
NEW   DELHI ; P. CHIDAMBARAM. 
The  3rd  November,  2010. 

 
103   
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Clause 11 of the Bill  seeks  to  insert  a  new  s ection  18C  
which empowers the Central  Government  to  make  r ules  relating  to  
the  manner  in  which  the  enemy  property  shall  be  sold  or   disposed. 
 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be mad e are  
matters of procedure and administrative details and  it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.  The delegation of 
legislative  powers  is,  therefore,  of  a  normal     character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103 

 
104  
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ENEMY PROPERTY ACT ,  1968 
(34  OF  1968)  
* * * * * 
 
Transfer  of 
property vested 
in Custodian by 
enemy  on 
enemy  subject 
or  enemy  firm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Levy  of  fees. 
6. Where any property vested  in  the  Custodian  unde r  this Act 
has been transferred, whether before or  after  the   commencement  of  
this Act, by an enemy or an enemy subject or  an  e nemy  firm  and  
where it appears to the Central Government that suc h  transfer  is  
injurious to the  public  interest  or  was  made  with  a  view  to  evading 
or defeating the vesting of the property in the Cus todian, then, the  
Central Government  may,  after  giving  a  reasona ble  opportunity  to  
the transferee to be heard in  the  matter,  by  or der,  declare  such  
transfer to be void and on  the  making  of  such  order,  the  property  
shall  continue  to  vest  or  be  deemed  to  vest  in  the     Custodian. 
17. (1) There shall be levied by  the  Custodian  fees  e qual  to  
two   per   centum of— 
(a) the  amount  of  moneys  paid  to   him; 
 
(b) the proceeds of the sale or transfer of any propert y 
which  has  been  vested  in  him  under  this  Act;    and 
(c) the value of the residual property, if any, at the time      
of its transfer to  the  original  owner  or  other   person  specified 
by  the  Central  Government  under  section    18: 
Provided that in the case of an enemy  whose  prope rty  is 
allowed by the Custodian to be managed by some person specially 
authorised in that behalf, there shall  be  levied  a  fee  of  two  per 
centum of the  gross  income  of  the  enemy  or  such  less  fee  as  may 
be specifically fixed by the Central Government after taking into 
consideration the cost of direct management incurre d by that 
Government, the  cost  of  superior  supervision  a nd  any  risks  that 
may  be  incurred  by  that  Government  in  respect  of  the  management: 
Provided further that the Central Government may, f or 
reasons to be recorded in writing, reduce or remit  the  fees  leviable  
under  this  sub-section  in  any  special  case  or  class  of      cases. 
Explanation .—In this sub-section “gross income of the 
enemy” means income derived out of the properties  of  the  enemy  
vested  in  the  Custodain  under  this   Act. 
* * * * * 
 
 
104 

 
105 
 
18. The Central Government may, by general or special o rder, 
direct that any enemy  property  vested  in  the  C ustodian  under  this  
Act and remaining with him shall be divested  from  him  and  be  
returned, in such  manner  as  may  be  prescribed  to  the  owner  thereof 
or to such other person as may be specified in the direction and  
thereupon such property  shall  cease  to  vest  in   the  Custodian  and  
shall  revest  in  such  owner  or  other     person. 
20.  (1)* * * * * 
(3) If any person fails to  comply  with  a  requisitio n  made  by 
the Custodian under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 11,       
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend t o five hundred 
rupees. 
* * * * * 
EXTRACT    FROM    THE    PUBLIC    PREMISES    (E VICTION   OF UNAUTHORISED 
OCCUPANTS )   A CT ,   1971 
(40   OF  1971) 
 
* * * * * 
3 . The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette,— 
(a) appoint such persons, being gazetted officers of 
Government  or  of  the  Government  of   any  Unio n  territory 
or officers of equivalent rank of the statutory authority,  as  it 
thinks  fit,  to  be  estate  officers  for  the  purposes  of  this     Act: 
Provided that no officer of the Secretariat of the Rajya 
Sabha shall be so appointed except after consultati on with the 
Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and no officer of the S ecretariat       
of the Lok Sabha shall be so appointed except after  
consultation  with  the  Speaker  of  the  Lok    Sabha: 
Provided further that an officer of a  statutory  a uthority  
shall only be appointed as an estate officer in res pect  of  the  
public  premises  controlled  by  that  authority;    and 
* * * * * 
Divesting  of 
enemy property 
vested  in  the 
Custodian. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment of 
estate  officers. 

 
106  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
further to amend the Enemy Property Act, 1968 and the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorised   Occupants)   Act,  1971. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri   P.   Chidambarm,   Minister   of   Home Affairs)  
 
 
 
 
106 

ANNEXURE -
107  
 
107  
 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs Invites Suggesti ons  on 
Enemy  Property  (Amendment  &  Validatiion)  Second  Bill,      2010  
 
The Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Second Bill, 2010, as introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on 15 th November, 2010 and pending therein, has been referr ed to Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, h eaded  by  Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu,  M.P.  
Rajya Sabha for examination and  report.  The  Bill  proposes  for  inserting  suitable  provisions  to  
enable the Custodian of Enemy Property and the Cent ral Government  to  preserve  and  manage  the  
enemy   properties   more effectively. 
2. The Committee  has  decided  to  invite  written  m emoranda  from  the  public/stakeholders,  on  
the Bill. 
3. Those desirous of submitting written memoranda  to  the  Committee,  may  send  the  same  to  
Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director, Rajya Sabha Secr etariat, Room No. 142, First  Floor,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-ll0001 {Tele: 23 035410 (O) and 23012007 (fax)} 
indicating whether they  would  also  be  intereste d  in  giving  oral  evidence  before  the  Committ ee,  
latest  by  15 
th    March,   2011. 
4. The memorandum which might be  submitted  to  the  Committee,  would  form  part  of  its 
records  and  treated  as  confidential  and,  ther efore,  should  not  be  printed,  circulated  or  publicized   
by  anyone,  as  such  an  act  would  constitute  a  breach  of  privilege  of  the       Committee. 
5. Individuals/stakeholders may obtain, on written req uest, a copy of the Bill,  from  Shri 
Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat,  Cabin  ‘A’,  Basement,  Parliament  
House Annexe, New  Delhi-l10001  (Telephone  No.  0 11-23034034).  The  electronic  text  of  the  Bill   
can be viewed on the official website http://rajyas abha.nic.in byclicking on the above Bill under the   
option  “Bills  with  Committees”. 
Website:- http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:  rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 

 
108  
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-III  
 
PARLIAMENT   OF  INDIA  
 
Standing   Committee   on   Home Affairs  
Enemy Property (Amendment & Validatiion) Second Bill, 2010 
Extension   of   Time   for   Submission   of Memoranda  
 
The Enemy Property (Amendment & Validation) Second Bill, 2010, as introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on 15th November, 2010 and pending therein, h as been referred to Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, h eaded  by  Shri  M.  Venkaiah  Naidu,  M.P.  
Rajya Sabha, for examination and report.  The  Bill  proposes  f or  inserting  suitable  provisions  to  
enable the Custodian of Enemy Property and the Cent ral Government  to  preserve  and  manage  the  
enemy   properties   more effectively. 
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commi ttee on Home Affairs had  earlier  invited  
written memoranda from the public/stakeholders, on the Bill latest by 15 th March,  2011.  The  
Committee  has  now  extended  the  last  date  for   submission  of  written  Memoranda  upto   
25 th    April,  2011.  
3. Those desirous of submitting written Memoranda  to  the  Committee,  may  send  the  same  to  
Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director, Rajya Sabha Secr etariat, Room  No.  142,  First  Floor,  Parliament  
House Annexe, New Delhi-l10001 {Tele: 23035410 (O) and 23012007 (fax)} indicating whether they 
would  also  be  interested  in  giving  oral  evidence  before  the  Committee,  latest  by  25 th   April,    2011. 
4. The memorandum submitted to the Committee, would fo rm part of its records and treated as 
confidential and,  therefore,  should  not  be  pri nted,  circulated  or  publicized  by  anyone,  as  such  an  
act  would  constitute  a  breach  of  privilege  of  the     Committee. 
5. The electronic text  of  the  Bill  can  be  viewed   on  the  official  website  http://raiyasabha.nic .in 
by  clicking  on  the  above  Bill  under  the  option  “Bills  with   Committees”. 
Website:- http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:  rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108 

ANNEXURE -
109  
 
109  
 
Gist of views/suggestions of individuals/organisati ons on the Bill and comments  of the  
Ministry   of   Home   Affairs thereon  
1. Email dated 15 th March. 2011 from  Mujda  Faruq,  Jamia  Nagar.  New  Delhi:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) The  bill  is  out  of  context  as  no  country  is  hostile  to     India. 
(ii) Retrospective  amendment  to  the  Act  may  deprive  individuals  of  properties  held  by     them. 
(iii) The Bill is intended to negate the judgement of var ious courts including the Supreme Court           
of  India. 
(iv) The Enemy Property Act, 1968 does not confer the ti tle of Enemy Properties on the 
Custodian/Central Government as the  Act  provides  for  preservation  and  management  of  
enemy  properties  by  the   Custodian. 
(v) Custodian  has  wide  powers,  which  are  not     justified. 
 
Comments:  
(a)   The  Enemy  Property Act,  1968  was  enacted   on  the  20 th   August,  1968  to,  inter  alia ,  provide 
for the continued vesting of enemy property vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property for     
India under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 and fo r matters  connected  therewith.  
Therefore, the Enemy Property (Amendment and Valida tion) Second Bill, 2010 is not out of 
context. 
(b)(i)    Section 1(2) of the Bill provides “Save a s otherwise provided in the Act, it shall be deemed            
to  have  come  into  effect  on  the  2 nd  July,  2010.”  Therefore,  provisions  of  the  Bil l  relating   
to procedural aspects would have  prospective  effe ct  and  others  would  have  retrospective  
effect. There have been number of judgements  of  v arious  courts  that  have  adversely  
affected the powers of the Custodian/Central  Gover nment  provided  in  the  Act.  Because  of  
such interpretation of  the  Act  by  various  cour ts,  the  Custodian  has  been  finding  it  diffic ult 
to sustain his action under the Act. Therefore, som e of  the  amendments  to  the  Act  
mentioned in  the  Bill,  as  specified  therein,  have  been  given  retrospective  effect  to  clari fy  
the  legislative  intention  of  the  Act. 
(b)(ii) The Bill provides, inter alia , that  if  the  enemy  property  had  been  divest ed  from  the 
Custodian  by  a  valid  order  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  prior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where  
the property had been returned to the owner or his lawful heir by an order of a Court and             
the Government is satisfied that the property  was  returned  to  the  owner  or  the  lawful  heir, 
such enemy property would continue  to  remain  wit h  such  persons.  In  the  Statement  of  
Objects and Reasons of the Bill, it has also been c larified that the provisions of the Bill shall        
not affect the claim made by  any  person  before  any  court  or  other  authority  against  the  
owner or his lawful heir to whom  the  property  wa s  or  may  be  returned  under  the  Act  and 
such claim shall be decided in  accordance  with  l aw  by  the  court  or  other  authority  as  the  
case   may  be. 
 
109 

110   
 
(c) In terms of the Enemy Property (Amendment  &  Valid ation)  Second  Bill,  2010,  the  court  
would continue to have jurisdiction to adjudicate w hether the property to be vested in the  
Custodian is an enemy  property  or  not.  However,   the  courts  will  have  no  jurisdiction  to  
order divestment from the Custodian of  Enemy  Prop erty  vested  in  him  under  this  Act  or  
direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  properties  from  the      Custodian. 
(d ) While Section 8(1) of the Enemy Property Act, 1968  empowers  the  Custodian  to  preserve  
enemy  property,  the  Section  8(2)(vii)  of  the  Act  empowers  the  Custodian  to  transfer  by  
way of sale or disposal of any of  the  enemy  prop erties.  Since  powers  to  sell  enemy  
properties vested in him is already available to th e Custodian under the Act, insertion of sub- 
Section 5(3) and its Explanation provided in Enemy Property (Amendment and  Validation)  
Second Bill, 2010 clarifies  that  any  property  v ested  in  Custodian  includes  all  titles,  right s  
and   interest   in   such properties. 
(e) The powers similar to those being conferred on Cust odian  under  sub-section  11(3)  of  the  
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bi ll, 2010 are available to many 
functionaries dealing  with  matters  of  enquiry/i nvestigation/inspection  etc.  Such  powers  need  
to  be  conferred  on  Custodian  so  as  to  enable  him  to  function  more      effectively. 
 
2. Email dated 15 th March, 2011 from  Shri  Adil  Siddiqui:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
1. The  Bill  is  unfair  and  may  create  problem s  for  the  people  of  Muslim     community. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 
 
3. Email dated 15 th March, 2011 from Abida  Jamal:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
India has more number of Muslims than in Pakistan.  The  Bill  would  take  away  the  
properties  of  Muslims,  which  is    unfair. 
 
Comments:  
Only the properties  of  Chinese  and  Pakistani  n ationals  are  vested  in  the  Custodian  under-  
the Enemy Property Act, 1968.  The  properties  of  Indian  nationals  belonging  to  Muslim  communit y 
are not vested with the Custodian and will not be v ested with  the  Custodian  even  after  the 
amendments  to  the   Act. 
 
4. Letter dated 15 th March,  2011  from  Wikar  Ahmed  Zaidi,  District  Bijnor,  UP:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Legal heirs should not be dispossessed of propertie s and they be allowed to approach courts         
for   redressal   of   their grievances. 
 
Comments:  
Section 18 of the Enemy Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010  provides 
that  the  enemy  property  vested  in  the  Custodian  could  be  divested  from  him  and  returned  to     the 

111   
 
owner or their legal heirs. It is further  clarifie d  that  the  provisions  of  the  Bill  shall  not   affect  the 
claim made by any person before any court or other authority against the owner or his lawful heir               
to whom the property was or may be returned under t he Act and such claim shall be  decided  in  
accordance with the law by  the  court  or  the  au thority  as  the  case  may  be.  It  is  also  cla rified  that 
the courts shall continue to have jurisdiction to a djudicate whether the property to be vested in the 
Custodian  in  an  enemy  property  or    not. 
 
5. Letter dated 15 th March, 2011 from Mohd. Anwaar Husain Quadri,  District  Sitapur,  UP: 
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) There  is  no  justification  for  introducing  the  Bill  as  at  present  no  nation  is  hostile  to  India. 
 
(ii) The  Bill  nullifies  the  judgement  of  Supreme  Court  delivered  in   2005. 
 
(iii) The  Bill  confers  arbitrary  powers  to  Central     Government. 
 
(iv) The Bill does not provide safeguards against action  of Government, which could be violative         
of  constitution. 
 
Comments:  
 
(i ) The Enemy Property Act, 1968  was  enacted  on  the   20 th  August,  1968  to,  inter  alia ,  provide 
for the continued vesting of enemy property vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property for     
India under the Defence  of  India  Rules,  1962  a nd  for  matters  connected  therewith.  There  
have been a  number  of  judgements  by  various  c ourts  that  have  adversely  affected  the 
powers of the Custodian and the Government  of  Ind ia  as  provided  under  the  Enemy  
Property Act, 1968. The amendments  to  the  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968,  is  intended,  inter  
alia , to clarify various matters connected with enemy p roperties, which are vested in  the  
Custodian  so  that  Custodian  is  able  to  function  more    effectively. 
(ii ) The Bill provides, inter alia , that if the  enemy  property  had  been  divested   from  the 
Custodian  by  a  valid  order  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  prior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where  
the property had been returned to the owner or his lawful heir by an order of a Court and             
the Government is satisfied that the property  was  returned  to  the  owner  or  the  lawful  heir, 
such enemy property would continue  to  remain  wit h  such  persons.  In  the  Statement  of  
Objects and Reasons of the Bill, it has also been c larified that the provisions of the Bill shall        
not affect the claim made by  any  person  before  any  court  or  other  authority  against  the  
owner or his lawful heir to whom  the  property  wa s  or  may  be  returned  under  the  Act  and 
such claim shall be decided in accordance  with  la w  by  the  court  or  other  authority  as  the  
case   may  be. 
(ii i) The powers similar to those being conferred on Cust odian under  sub-Section  11(3)  of  the  
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bi ll, 2010 are available to many 
functionaries dealing  with  matters  of  enquiry/i nvestigation/inspection  etc.  Such  powers  need  
to  be  conferred  on  Custodian  so  as  to  enable  him  to  function  more      effectively. 
(iv ) In terms of the Enemy Property (Amendment  &  Valid ation)  Second  Bill,  2010,  the  court  
would continue to have jurisdiction to adjudicate w hether the property to be vested in the  
Custodian is an enemy  property  or  not.  However,   the  courts  will  have  no  jurisdiction  to  
order divestment from the Custodian of  Enemy  Prop erty  vested  in  him  under  this  Act  or  
direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  properties  from  the      Custodian. 

112   
 
6. Letter dated 15th March,  2011  from  Shri  S.K.  Ray,  Kolkata:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) The 3/4 th claim for compensation of persons  left,  who  left   behind  their  properties  in  
Pakistan  have  not  yet  been   settled. 
(ii) The  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968,  should  not  be     repealed. 
 
Comments:  
The ex-gratia scheme of 1971 was to  provide  for  ad-hoc  compen sation  to  Indian  nationals  
who lost their properties in Pakistan. Government  may  take  a  decision  in  the  matter  at  approp riate 
time for final settlement of the issue. There is no  proposal  under  condition  to  repeal  the  Enemy   
Property   Act,  1968. 
 
7. Letter dated 15 th  March,  2011  from  Shri  Pritish  Kantha  Ray,  Kolkata:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) The 3/4 th claim for compensation of persons  left,  who  left   behind  their  properties  in  
Pakistan  have  not  yet  been   settled. 
(ii) The  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968,  should  not  be     repealed. 
 
Comments:  
 
The ex-gratia scheme of 1971 was to  provide  for  ad-hoc  compen sation  to  Indian  nationals  
who lost their properties in Pakistan. Government  may  take  a  decision  in  the  matter  at  approp riate 
time for final settlement of the issue. There is no  proposal under consideration to repeal the Enemy  
Property   Act,  1968. 
 
8. Letter dated 15 th March, 2011  from  Mohd.  Fauzal  Ahmad,  Bihar:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Muslims  of  India  oppose  this  Bill. 
 
Comments:  
 
Grounds  for  opposing  the  Bill  have  not  been  given.  Hence,  no  comments  are  being offered. 
 
9. Letter dated 16 th March, 2011 from Dr. M.J. Khan, President, Indian  Muslims’  
Research   and   Coordination   Centre,   New Delhi:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
 
The  provisions  of  the  Bill  are  against  the  Muslims  and  not  the  Enemy     Property. 
 
Comments:  
 
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 

113   
 
10. Letter dated nil of Dr. Wajid  Ali,  Muzaffarpur,  Bihar:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Muslims  of  India  oppose  this  Bill. 
 
Comments:  
Grounds  for  opposing  the  Bill  have  not  been  given.  Hence,  no  comments  are  being offered. 
 
11. Letter dated nil of Mohd.  Shakil  Ahmad,  Bihar:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Muslims  of  India  oppose  this  Bill. 
 
Comments:  
Grounds  for  opposing  the  Bill  have  not  been  given.  Hence,  no  comments  are  being offered. 
 
12. Letter dated 15 th April, 2011 from  M.  R.  Madhvan,  PRS  Legislative  Research,  New  
Delhi:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) Delete the words ‘and returned to  the  owner  to  his  lawful  heir’  from  sub-section  (i)  of  
second proviso to Section 26(b)  of  the  Bill  for   denying  the  enjoyment  of  rights  accrued  to 
the  beneficiaries  of  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  the  Raja  of  Mahmudabad      case. 
(ii) Replace the words ‘in any other case’ in sub-sectio n (ii) of second proviso to Section 26(b)            
of the Bill with  the  words  “in  cases  where  th e  owner  or  the  lawful  heir,  as  the  case  ma y  
be,  is  not  a  citizen  of   India.” 
(iii) Section 26 (b) of the Bill be  suitably  modified  to  ensure  that  no  difference  is  made  in  
relation  to  the  method  of  divestment  of  the    property. 
(iv) Modify  Section  18  C  of  the  Bill  as  it  provides  excessive  powers  to  Central      Government. 
 
Comments:  
(i) Second proviso to Section 26  (b)  of  the  Bill  n eed  not  be  amended  as  existing  provisions  
have been  incorporated  so  as  to  ensure  that  where  the  enemy  property  had  been  divested  
by an order  of  the  court  or  without  any  dire ction  under  Section  18  of  the Act  and  return ed 
to the owner or his lawful heir  who  are  citizen  of  India  by  birth,  such  properties  may 
continue to vest in such owner or the lawful heir s ubject  to  the  owner  or  his  lawful  heir  
meeting the condition stipulated in sub-Section (i)  of Section 26(b). As this amendment  is  
proposed to honour court order  and  is  not  inten ded  either  to  deny  or  confer  any  rights  on  
the  properties  of  any  particular  individual,  the  amendments  suggested  may  not  be  agreed to. 
(ii) Section 18 C of the Bill need  not  be  amended  as   rules  for  disposal  of  enemy  properties  
vested  in  the  Custodian  would  be  framed  after  the  Bill  is    passed. 
 
13. Letter dated 21.04.2011 from Shri  K.K.  Swami,  Delhi:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
As Pakistan has done,  the  enemy  property  should  be  sold  and  the  proceeds  should  be  used 
for  national  development. 

114   
 
Comments:  
The Bill provides for settlement of various issues relating to enemy property including their 
disposal. 
 
14. Letter  dated  22 nd    April,  2011  from  Amir  Saad  Farooqi,    Delhi:  
(i) The office location of Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  for  India  should  be  at  New  Delhi  
instead  of  Bombay. 
(ii) Suitable provisions should be inserted to enable the Custodian to sell the property to the co-   
sharer  or  the  kith  and  kin  of  the  person  whom  migrated  to      Pakistan. 
 
Comments:  
(i) There is no proposal to shift the office of Custodi an from Mumbai to Delhi. A branch office          
of the Custodian is functioning at Kolkata and a pr oposal to set up a branch office  of  the 
Custodian  at  Lucknow  is  under    consideration. 
(ii) As and when  rules  for  disposal  of  enemy  properties  are  framed,  the  second  suggestion  of  
the  petitioner  may  be   considered. 
 
15. Letter dated 24 th April, 2011  from  Shri  Ajit  Rai,  Faridabad:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
In the Bill provision may be made for return of pro perties of Hindus and  Sikhs,  who  had  
migrated  from  Pakistan  to  India  after    indep endence. 
 
Comments:  
The Bill is not  intended  to  settle  issues  on  religious/communal  lines.  Its  object  is  to  se ttle  
the  issues  of  enemy  properties  vested  in  the     Custodian. 
 
16. Letter dated 15 th March, 2011  from  Dr.  S.  Kalbe  Sadiq,  Lucknow.  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  serves  no  purpose  other  than  to  pressurise  the  minority      community. 
 
Comments:  
As submitted earlier, only the properties of Chines e and Pakistani national are vested in the 
Custodian and is not linked to persons belonging to  any particular community. The Bill only clarifies 
various  issues  related  to  enemy    properties. 
 
17. Letter dated 15 th March, 2011  from  Syed  Muhammed  Ahmed  from  Moradabad,  UP:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The Custodian is required to preserve and manage th e enemy  property  and  has  no  
ownership  rights. 
 
Comments:  
The Section 8(2)(vii) of the Enemy Property Act,  1 968  empowers  the  Custodian  to  sell/  
dispose  of  enemy  property.  It  therefore  follows  that  legal  intention  of  Enemy  Property  Act,     1968 

115   
 
was that title of such properties also rests with the Custodian. This  issue  matter  has  been  further  
clarified  under  Explanation  to  Section  5(3)  of  the   Bill. 
 
18. Letter dated 8 th March, 2011 from  Pro.  Mohd.  Sulaiman,  Indian  National  League,  UP: 
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The Bill does not take into consideration Muslim Pe rsonal Law where oral gift or Hiba is 
acceptable. 
 
Comments:  
The applicability of Muslim Personal Law with regar d to transfer of enemy property or any     
claim of transfer of enemy property through oral wi ll or oral gift would be examined in consultation     
with  Ministry  of  Law. 
 
19. Letter dated 8 th March,  2011  from  Syed  Kalbe  Jawad  Naqui,  Lucknow:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) The  Bill  is  intended  to  pressurise  the  minority    community. 
 
(ii) The Bill is intended to negate the judgement of Sup reme Court delivered in 2005 and denies       
the  jurisdiction  of  the   court. 
(iii) The  Bill  confers  wide  powers  on  the    Custodian. 
 
Comments:  
(i) Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in  the  Custodian.  Vesting  of  enemy  properties  with  the  Custodian  is  not  linked  
to  persons  belonging  to  any  particular    community. 
(ii ) The Bill provides, inter alia , that if the  enemy  property  had  been  divested   from  the 
Custodian  by  a  valid  order  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  prior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where  
the property had been  returned  to  the  owner  or   his  lawful  heir  by  an  order  of  a  Court  a nd 
the Government is satisfied that the property  was  returned  to  the  owner  or  the  lawful  heir, 
such enemy property would continue  to  remain  wit h  such  persons.  In  the  Statement  of  
Objects and Reasons of the Bill, it has also been c larified that the provisions of the Bill shall        
not affect the claim made by  any  person  before  any  court  or  other  authority  against  the  
owner or his lawful heir to whom  the  property  wa s  or  may  be  returned  under  the  Act  and 
such claim shall be decided in accordance  with  la w  by  the  court  or  other  authority  as  the  
case may be. In terms of the Enemy Property (Amendm ent & Validation) Second Bill, 2010,       
the  court  would  continue  to   have  jurisdictio n  to   adjudicate  whether  the  property  to  
be vested  in the  Custodian  is an enemy  property   or not.  However,  the  courts  will  
have  no  jurisdiction  to  order  divestment  from   the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  vested      
in him under this Act or direct the Central Governm ent to divest such properties from the 
Custodian. 
(iii) The powers similar to those being conferred on Cust odian under  sub-Section  11(3)  of  the  
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bi ll, 2010 are available to many 
functionaries dealing  with  matters  of  enquiry/i nvestigation/inspection  etc.  Such  powers  need  
to  be  conferred  on  Custodian  so  as  to  enable  him  to  function  more      effectively. 

116   
 
20. Letter dated 8 th March, 2011  from  Shri  Khera,  Chandigarh:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The properties of those persons who left  India  af ter  independence  need  to  be  distributed  
among   refugees   from  Pakistan. 
 
Comments:  
The suggestion is  not  related  to  Enemy  Propert y Act,  1968  or  the  amendments  incorporated 
in  the Bill. 
 
21. Letter dated 9 th March,  2011  from  Zameer  Ahmed  Jumlana,  Delhi:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) Enemy  Property  Act,  1968  be   repealed. 
(ii) The  oral  gift  of  property  by  ‘enemy’  to  Indian  nationals  may  be      recognised. 
(iii) The  preservation  and  management  of  enemy  property  does  not  serve  national       interest. 
 
Comments:  
There is no proposal to repeal Enemy Property  Act,   1968.  The  applicability  of  Muslim 
Personal Law with regard to  transfer  of  enemy  p roperty  or  any  claim  of  transfer  of  enemy  
property through oral will  or  oral  gift  would  be  examined  in  consultation  with  Ministry  of  Law.  
The properties vested in Custodian must be preserve d by  the  Custodian  till  such  properties  are  
divested  from  him  and  either  returned  to  eligible  persons  or  disposed  off  by  the      Custodian. 
 
22. Letter dated 9 th March,  2011  from  Shri  K.K.  Swami,  New  Delhi:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  enemy  property  should  immediately  be    sold. 
 
Comments:  
An enabling provision  for  disposal  of  propertie s  as  per  rules  has  been  incorporated  in  
Section  18C  of  the  Bill. 
 
23. Letter dated 9 th  Marh,  2011  from  Shri  S.  Hamidul  Hasan,  Lucknow:  
Gist  of  Memorandum   : 
The  Bill  seeks  to  undo  settled  judgements  of  various     courts. 
 
Comments:  
(i ) The Bill provides, inter alia , that if the  enemy  property  had  been  divested   from  the 
Custodian  by  a  valid  order  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  prior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where  
the property had been returned to the owner or his lawful heir by an order of a Court and             
the Government is satisfied that the property  was  returned  to  the  owner  or  the  lawful  heir, 
such enemy property would continue  to  remain  wit h  such  persons.  In  the  Statement  of  
Objects and Reasons of the Bill, it has also been c larified that the provisions of the Bill shall        
not  affect  the  claim  made  by  any  person  before  any  court  or  other  authority  against       the 

117  
owner or his lawful heir to whom  the  property  wa s  or  may  be  returned  under  the  Act  and 
such claim shall be decided in accordance  with  la w  by  the  court  or  other  authority  as  the  
case   may  be. 
 
(i i ) In terms of the Enemy Property (Amendment  &  Valid ation)  Second  Bill,  2010,  the  court  
would continue to have jurisdiction to adjudicate w hether the property to be vested in the  
Custodian is an enemy  property  or  not.  However,   the  courts  will  have  no  jurisdiction  to  
order divestment from the Custodian of  Enemy  Prop erty  vested  in  him  under  this  Act  or  
direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  properties  from  the      Custodian. 
 
24. Letter dated 3 rd March, 2011 from  Joydip  Roy,  Kolkata:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The petitioner has made certain observations about the effect of Enemy Property 
(Amendment  and  Validation)  Ordinance,  2010  on  the  properties  of  Shri  M.A.M.    Khan. 
 
Comments:  
Since  no  suggestions  have  been  made  about  the  Bill,  no  comments  are      offered. 
 
25. Letter dated 9 th March, 2011 from Moulana Mirza Mohd.  Athar,  All  India  Shia  
Personal   Law   Board, Lucknow:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) The  Bill  negates  the  judgement  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  in    2005. 
(ii) The Bill provides  arbitrary  powers  to  Central  Government  and  does  not  provide  safeguards  
to   action   of   the Government. 
 
Comments:  
(i) The Bill provides, inter alia , that if the enemy property had  been  divested  f rom  the  
Custodian by a  valid  order  under  Section  18  o f  the  Act  prior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where 
the property had been  returned  to  the  owner  or   his  lawful  heir  by  an  order  of  a  Court  
and the Government is satisfied that the property w as  returned to  the  owner or  the  lawful  
heir, such enemy  property  would  continue  to  re main  with  such  persons.  In  the  Statement 
of Objects and Reasons of the  Bill,  it  has  also   been  clarified  that  the  provisions  of  the  
Bill shall not affect the claim made by any person  before  any  court  or  other  authority  
against the owner or  his lawful heir to  whom the property was or  may be  returned under       
the Act and such claim shall be decided in accordan ce with law  by  the  court  or  other  
authority as the case may be. In terms of the Enemy  Property (Amendment & Validation)  
Second Bill, 2010, the court would continue to have  jurisdiction to adjudicate whether the 
property to be vested in the  Custodian  is  an  en emy  property  or  not.  However,  the  courts 
will have no jurisdiction  to  order  divestment  f rom  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  
vested in him under this Act or  direct  the  Centr al  Government  to  divest  such  properties 
from  the  Custodian. 
(ii) The powers similar to those being conferred on Cust odian  under  sub-section  11(3)  of  the  
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bi ll, 2010 are available to many 
functionaries dealing  with  matters  of  enquiry/i nvestigation/inspection  etc.  Such  powers  need  
to  be  conferred  on  Custodian  so  as  to  enable  him  to  function  more      effectively. 

118   
 
26. Letter dated 15 th March, 2011  from  Prof.  Khan  Mohd.  Atif,  Lucknow:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) The  Bill  would  annihilate Muslims. 
(ii) Explanation to Section 6 of the  Act  regarding  transfer  of  properties  through  oral  gift  is  
against  Muslim  Personal  Law. 
 
Comments:  
The properties of  Chinese  and  Pakistani  nationa ls  are  vested  in  the  Custodian.  The  vesting  
of enemy properties  is  not  linked  to  persons  belonging  to  a  particular  community.  The  applicability 
of Muslim Personal Law with  regard  to  transfer  of  enemy  property  or  any  claim  of  transfer  of  
enemy property through oral will or oral gift  woul d  be  examined  in  consultation  with  Ministry  of  
Law. 
 
27. Letter dated  10 th  March,  2011  from  Shri  Ashok  V.  Jagtiani,  Lucknow:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Provisions  of  Oudh  Estates  Act,  1869  have  not  been  considered  in  the     Bill. 
 
Comments:  
The matters relating  to  the  Oudh  Estates  Act,  1869  are  within  the  purview  of  Government  
of  UP  and  cannot  be  part  of  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010. 
 
28. Letter dated 10 th March,  2011  from  Shri  Pankaj  K.  Tondon,  Lucknow:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Provisions  of  Oudh  Estates  Act,  1869  have  not  been  considered  in  the     Bill. 
 
Comments:  
The matters relating  to  the  Oudh  Estates  Act,  1869  are  within  the  purview  of  Government  
of  UP  and  cannot  be  part  of  the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010. 
 
29. Letter dated 22 nd March, 2011 from Maulana  Mohd.  Noorul  Huda  Jamai,  Sitapur,  UP: 
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The Bill seeks to undo judgements of various courts  and grants arbitrary powers to Central 
Government. 
 
Comments:  
(i ) The Bill provides, inter alia , that if the  enemy  property  had  been  divested   from  the 
Custodian  by  a  valid  order  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  prior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where  
the property had been returned to the owner or his lawful heir by an order of a Court and             
the Government is satisfied that the property  was  returned  to  the  owner  or  the  lawful  heir, 
such enemy property would continue  to  remain  wit h  such  persons.  In  the  Statement  of  
Objects and Reasons of the Bill, it has also been c larified that the provisions of the Bill shall        
not  affect  the  claim  made  by  any  person  before  any  court  or  other  authority  against       the 

119  
owner or his lawful heir to whom  the  property  wa s  or  may  be  returned  under  the  Act  and 
such claim shall be decided in accordance  with  la w  by  the  court  or  other  authority  as  the  
case   may  be. 
 
 
(i i ) In terms of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Valid ation) Second  Bill,  2010,  the  court  
would continue to have jurisdiction to adjudicate w hether the property to be vested in the  
Custodian is an enemy  property  or  not.  However,   the  courts  will  have  no  jurisdiction  to  
order divestment from the Custodian of  Enemy  Prop erty  vested  in  him  under  this  Act  or  
direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  properties  from  the      Custodian. 
(i i i ) The powers similar to those being conferred on Cust odian under  sub-Section  11(3)  of  the  
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bi ll, 2010 are available to many 
functionaries dealing  with  matters  of  enquiry/i nvestigation/inspection  etc.  Such  powers  need  
to  be  conferred  on  Custodian  so  as  to  enable  him  to  function  more      effectively. 
 
30. Letter dated 12 th March, 2011  from  Maharaj  Kumar  Mohd.  Amir  AU  Khan:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The petitioner has referred to the claim in respect  of some of  the  properties  of  
Mehmudabad Estate, against which one of the legal h eirs of the Estate, namely, M.A.M. Khan alias 
Suleman, is claiming absolute rights on the basis o f orders of Mumbai High Court and to safeguard           
his  interests  has  sought  amendments  to  Enemy  Property  Act,      1968. 
 
Comments:  
The petitioner may approach the appropriate court f or staking his claim  and  challenge  the  
Court’s  decisions. 
 
31. Letter dated 12 th March, 2011  from  Iftiyaz  Sayed,  Mumbai.  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  is  against  Muslims. 
 
Comments:  
 
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 
 
32. Letter dated 12 th March, 2011  from  Bashir  Ahmed  Wani,  J&K.  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  is  an  anti-Muslim  legislation,  which  should  not  be   passed. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 

120   
 
33. Letter dated 12 th March, 2011  from  Syed  Homammd  Zafar  Nadwi,  Dubai:  
List   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  should  not  be  passed  as  it  would  affect  the  image  of  India  as  a  secular    country. 
 
Comments:  
The  passing  of  the  Bill  would  not  affect  the  image  of  the     country. 
 
34. Letter dated 12 th March, 2011 from  Mohammed  Aman:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The Bill would deprive the Indian Muslims to claim their properties illegally vested in the 
Custodian. 
 
Comments:  
Section 18 of the Bill  provides  that  the  enemy  property  vested  in  Custodian  could  be  
divested from him and returned to the owner or thei r legal heirs. In terms of the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010, the c ourt would continue to have jurisdiction  to  
adjudicate whether the property to be vested  in  t he  Custodian  is  an  enemy  property  or  not.  
However, the courts will have no jurisdiction to or der divestment  from  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  
Property vested in him under this  Act  or  direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  proper ties  
from   the  Custodian. 
 
35. Letter dated 12 th March, 2011  from  Shri  Ratna  Sarkar.  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  claims  of  various  persons  who  migrated  to  India  from  Pakistan  be  settled      early. 
 
Comments:  
The ex-gratia scheme 1971 provided for the relief to those Indian  persons who lost  their  
properties  in  Pakistan,  on  ad-hoc  basis  and  a  final  decision  may  be  taken  by  the  Government  at  
an  appropriate  time. 
 
36. Letter  dated  12 th    March,  2011  from  Saif    Abrar,  Bangalore: 
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Indian Muslims would be deprived of their  legal  r ights  to  seek  judicial  redressal  and  claim 
their  properties  vested  in  the    Custodian. 
 
Comments:  
Section 18 of the Bill  provides  that  the  enemy  property  vested  in  Custodian  could  be  
divested from him and returned to the owner or thei r legal heirs. In terms of the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010, the c ourt would continue to have jurisdiction  to  
adjudicate whether the property to be vested  in  t he  Custodian  is  an  enemy  property  or  not.  
However, the courts will have no jurisdiction to or der divestment  from  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  
Property vested in him under this  Act  or  direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  proper ties  
from   the  Custodian. 

121   
 
37. Letter  dated  13 th    March,  2011  from  Jang    Bahadur  Malik: 
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
If  the  property  belongs  to  Indian  Muslims  then  it  should  be  returned  to  their  legal      heirs. 
 
Comments:  
Only the properties of Chinese and Pakistani nation als are vested in the Custodian under the  
Enemy Property Act, 1968. The  properties  of  Indi an  nationals  belonging  to  Muslim  community  ar e 
not vested with the Custodian and will not be veste d with the Custodian even after the amendments           
to  the  Act. 
38 to 42. Letter dated 13 
th March,  2011  from  Goltay  Mohammed  Iqbal,  UAE,  Shri  Khalid  
Faridi, Kuwait, Shri A.R. Siddiqui, Karnataka, Moha mmad Kalam and Shri Nooh 
Jamaludeen,  Qatar  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  would  deprive  the  citizens  to  claim  the  property  of  their     forefathers. 
 
Comments:  
Section 18 of the Bill  provides  that  the  enemy  property  vested  in  Custodian  could  be  
divested from him and returned to the owner or thei r legal heirs. In terms of the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010, the c ourt would continue to have jurisdiction  to  
adjudicate whether the property to be vested  in  t he  Custodian  is  an  enemy  property  or  not.  
However, the courts will have no jurisdiction to or der divestment  from  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  
Property vested in him under this  Act  or  direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  proper ties  
from   the  Custodian. 
Hence   the   statements   are misconceived. 
 
43. Letter dated 13 th  March,  2011  from  Ismail  Shaikh,  Saudi  Arabia:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  is  targeted  against  Muslims. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 
 
44. Letter dated 14 th March, 2011 from  Shri  Anwar  Basha:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  would  deprive  the  citizens  to  claim  the  property  of  their     forefather. 
 
Comments:  
Section 18 of the Bill  provides  that  the  enemy  property  vested  in  Custodian  could  be  
divested from him and returned to the owner or thei r legal heirs. In terms of the Enemy Property 
(Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010,  the  court  would  continue  to  have  jurisdiction      to 

122   
 
adjudicate whether the property to be vested  in  t he  Custodian  is  an  enemy  property  or  not.  
However, the courts will have no jurisdiction to or der divestment  from  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  
Property vested in him under this  Act  or  direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  proper ties  
from   the  Custodian. 
Hence   the   statement   is misconceived. 
 
45. Letter dated 14 th March,  2011  from  Shri  Abdulrub  Shaikh,  Mumbai:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  is  targeted  against  Muslims. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 
 
46. Letter dated 14 th March, 2011  from  Shri  Irfan  Pasha:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  would  deprive  the  citizens  to  claim  the  property  of  their     forefather. 
 
Comments:  
Section 18 of the Bill  provides  that  the  enemy  property  vested  in  Custodian  could  be  
divested from him and returned to the owner or thei r legal heirs. In terms of the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010, the c ourt would continue to have jurisdiction  to  
adjudicate whether the property to be vested  in  t he  Custodian  is  an  enemy  property  or  not.  
However, the courts will have no jurisdiction to or der divestment  from  the  Custodian  of  Enemy  
Property vested in him under this  Act  or  direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  proper ties  
from   the  Custodian. 
Hence   the   statement   is misconceived. 
 
47. Letter dated 14 th March,  2011  from  Shri  Saleem  Nusrath:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Interests  of  Indian  Minorities  be    protected. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 
 
48. Letter dated 14 th March, 2011  from  Shri  Dilshad  A.  Khan:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Enemy  property  should  be  given  to  legal  heirs  of  the     owners. 

123   
 
Comments:  
Section 18 of the Enemy Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,  2010  provides 
that the enemy property vested in the  Custodian  c ould  be  divested  from  him  and  returned  to  t he  
owner or their legal heirs. It is further  clarifie d  that  the  provisions  of  the  Bill  shall  not   affect  the 
claim made by any person before any court or other authority against the owner or his lawful heir               
to whom the property was or may be returned under t he Act and such claim shall be  decided  in  
accordance with the law by  the  court  or  the  au thority  as  the  case  may  be.  It  is  also  cla rified  that 
the courts shall continue to have jurisdiction to a djudicate whether the property to be vested in the 
Custodian  in  an  enemy  property  or    not. 
 
49. Letter dated 14 th  March,  2011  from  Shri  Sandeep  Kohli,  Lucknow:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The Second Bill favours a particular individual fro m UP therefore, the Ordinance 
promulgated  in  the  2 nd    July,  2010  is   recommended. 
 
Comments:  
The Bill is not intended either to deny or  confer  rights  to  property  of  any  particular  
individual. The Enemy Property  (Amendment  and  Va lidation)  Bill,  2010  to  replace  the  Ordinance   
was  not  passed  and  has  since  been     withdrawn. 
 
50. Letter dated 14 th March, 2011 from Shri Ramakant Mishra and members o f Bar 
Association,   Lakhimpur-Kheri,   UP:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) Explanation  to  Section  18  B  of  the  Bill  is   confusing. 
(ii) Sub-section  (i)  of  the  second  proviso  to  Section  26(2)(b)  is  intended  to  benefit  persons like 
M.A.M.  Khan. 
 
Comments:  
Explanation to Section 18B of the Bill is to clarif y that courts  would  continue  to  have  
jurisdiction to adjudicate whether the property cla imed to be vested in the Custodian  in  an  enemy  
property or not. Hence, there is no question of con fusion  on  this  issue.  Subsection  (i)  of  seco nd  
proviso to Subsection 26(2)(b) is intended to honou r court orders  following  which  enemy  
properties have been divested from  the  Custodian  and  returned  to  the  owner  or  his  lawful  he ir  
before promulgation of the Ordinance on  02.07.2010   subject  to  the  owner  or  his  lawful  heir  
meeting the condition stipulated in sub-Section (i)  of second proviso to Section 26(2)(b) of the Bill.  
 
51. Letter dated 14 th  March,  2011  from  Shri  Kamal  Ahmad,  Advocate,  Kolkata:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  would  adversely  affect  the  Muslim   community. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 

124   
 
52. Letter dated 14 th March,  2011  from  Shri  Rajesh  Chhabra,  Delhi:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) The decision of Custodian should not be unchallengeable in  courts  and  decision  of  superior 
courts  should  not  be   annulled. 
(ii) Legal heirs of  owner  of  enemy  property  who  are  Indian  Citizens  may  be  given  rights/title  
of   such  properties. 
 
Comments:  
(i) In terms of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Valid ation) Second  Bill,  2010,  the  court  
would continue to have jurisdiction to adjudicate w hether the property to be vested in the  
Custodian is an enemy  property  or  not.  However,   the  courts  will  have  no  jurisdiction  to  
order divestment from the Custodian of  Enemy  Prop erty  vested  in  him  under  this  Act  or  
direct  the  Central  Government  to  divest  such  properties  from  the      Custodian. 
(ii ) The  modified  Section  of  the  Bill  provides  for  return  of  enemy  properties  to  lawful     heir. 
 
53. Letter dated 14 th March,  2011  from  Syed  Aziz  Nizami,  Delhi:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968  should  be    repealed. 
 
Comments:  
There  is  no  proposal  to  repeal  the  Enemy  Property  Act,     1968. 
 
54. Letter dated 14 th March, 2011 from  Shri  Pasha:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Enemy  Property  Act,  1968  need  not  be     passed. 
 
Comments:  
Grounds  for  not  supporting  the  Bill  have  not  been  indicated.  Hence,  no      comments. 
 
55. Letter dated 15 th March, 2011 from Abdul  Latif:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  is  against  Muslims. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 
 
56. Letter dated 14 th March, 2011  from  Zafarul-Islam  Khan:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
(i) The  Bill  attacks  Muslim  community  as  no  Indian  Citizen  can  be  termed  as     Enemy. 

125   
 
(ii) There should  be  no  bar  on  Indian  citizens  to  seek  justice  from  courts  in  matters  identical  
to  the  case  of  M.A.M.   Khan. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 
The Bill provides, inter alia , that if the  enemy  property  had  been  divested   from  the 
Custodian by a valid order  under  Section  18  of  the  Act  prior  to  2 nd  July,  2010  or  where  the 
property had been returned to the owner or his  law ful  heir  by  an  order  of  a  Court  and  the 
Government is satisfied that the property was retur ned to the owner or the lawful heir, such enemy   
property  would  continue  to  remain  with  such  persons.  In  the  Statement  of  Objects  and  Rea sons    
of the Bill, it has also been clarified that the pr ovisions of the Bill shall not affect the claim mad e               
by any  person  before  any  court  or  other  auth ority  against  the  owner  or  his  lawful  heir  to  whom  
the property was or may be returned  under  the  Ac t  and  such  claim  shall  be  decided  in  accord ance 
with  law  by  the  court  or  other  authority  as  the  case  may      be. 
In terms of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Valid ation) Second  Bill,  2010,  the  court  
would continue to have jurisdiction to adjudicate w hether the property to be vested in the Custodian           
is an  enemy  property  or  not.  However,  the  co urts  will  have  no  jurisdiction  to  order  dive stment  
from the Custodian of Enemy Property vested in him under this Act  or  direct  the  Central  
Government  to  divest  such  properties  from  the     Custodian. 
 
57. Letter dated 14 th March, 2011 from  Qaiser  Mujtaba:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Owners  and  occupiers  of  enemy  properties  are  Indian  citizens  who  enjoy  all  civil      rights. 
 
Comments:  
No   comments   are required. 
 
58. Letter dated 15 th March, 2011 from  Syed  Abdul  Aziz  Chisty:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
The  Bill  is  against  Muslims  community. 
 
Comments:  
Under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, only the proper ties of Chinese and Pakistani nationals        
are vested in the Custodian. Vesting of enemy prope rties with the Custodian is not linked to persons 
belonging  to  any  particular   community. 
 
59. Letter dated 14 th March, 2011  from  Kishanchand  Bhambhwani:  
Gist   of  Memorandum:  
Amendments proposed in the Second Bill, 2010 should  not be  supported  and  the  Enemy  
Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010  be  tabled  in  the  Parliament  in  its  original   
form. 

126   
 
Comments:  
The Bill is not intended either to deny or  confer  rights  to  property  of  any  particular  
individual. The Enemy Property  (Amendment  and  Va lidation)  Bill,  2010  to  replace  the  Ordinance   
was  not  passed  and  has  since  been     withdrawn. 
 
60. Suggestions/views of Shri  Mohammad  Asrarul  Haque,  MP  (Lok  Sabha)  and  a  Member 
of  the  DRSC  on  Home    Affairs  
(i ) Giving retrospective effect to the Bill should not dilute the judicial verdicts of various courts         
of  law. 
 
Comments   of  MHA  
Section 1(2) of the Bill provides “Save as otherwis e provided in the Act, it shall be deemed           
to have come into effect on the 2nd July,  2010.”  Therefore,  provisions  of  the  Bill  relating  to   
procedural aspects would have  prospective  effect  and  others  would  have  retrospective  effect.  
There have been a number of judgements of various c ourts that have adversely affected the powers           
of the Custodian/Central Government  provided  in  the Act.  Because  of  such  interpretation  of  th e Act 
by various courts, the Custodian has been finding i t difficult to sustain his action  under  the  Act.   
Therefore, some of the amendments to the Act mentio ned in the Bill, as specified therein, have been     
given  retrospective  effect  to  clarify  the  legislative  intention  of  the     Act. 
(ii ) The  long-term  vesting  of  properties  amounts  t o  slow  process  of  take-over  of  property  by  
the CEP till Divestment by the Central Government T his may deny justice to the legal heirs.     
The legal heirs/claimants who are citizens  of  Ind ia  by  birth  should  have  their  claims 
disposed  of  within  a  time-bound  period  of    time. 
 
Comments   of  MHA  
The issue  pertaining  to  the  time-frame  within  which  the  claims  should  be  disposed  off 
would be examined while framing the Rules after pas sing of the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation)  Second  Bill, 2010. 
(ii i) The CEP has  no  infrastructure  for  verification.   These  sort  of  works  should  be  allowed  to  
the  courts. 
 
Comments   of  MHA  
With a view to preserve and manage  enemy  properti es  in  an  effective  manner,  Standing  
Orders were issued in the year 2000  to  all  State   Governments/Union  Territories.  These  Standing  
Orders lay down functions and duties of  the  offic ers  of  the  State  Government,  as  also  the  
procedure for management of such properties.  These   orders  were  reiterated  to  all  States/UTs  vide  
letter No.37/4/2010-EP  dated  the  24 th  February,  2010.  As  the  statutory  powers  of  d istrict  authorities 
to preserve and manage enemy properties had been ch allenged in some of the courts, a notification        
was issued by Ministry of Home  Affairs  on  the  7 th  June,  2010  appointing  District  Magistrates/  
District  Collectors  in  various  States  and  Add itional  District  Magistrate  (Revenue),  Central  District  
of the NCT of Delhi as ex-officio  Deputy  Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  under  Sect ion  3  of  the  
Enemy Property  Act,  1968.  Subsequently,  instruc tion  No.1  of  2010  regarding  delegation  of  wo rk  
and  duties  of  the  Deputy  Custodian  was  issued  by  the  Custodian  in  July,      2010. 
(iv ) New Section 10 A: The Custodian being a custodian, the sale should be done by some other   
agency of the Central Government and it should be d one in a  transparent  and  open  public  
auction  manner.  The  sale  of  the  properties  s hould  be  in  respect  of  category  given  in    
Para  3(c)  only.  The  sale  should  be  over-seen  by  a  competent      Tribunal/Commission. 

127   
 
Comments   of  MHA  
This suggestion would be examined while framing the Rules after  passing  of  the  Enemy  
Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,   2010. 
(v ) The income of the legal owner/legal heirs should not be taken over by any authority except          
the  Central  Government  in  certain  special     circumstances. 
 
Comments   of  MHA  
What  is  sought  for  in  the  above  suggestion  is  already  adequately  provided  for  in     Sect ion 
18A. 
(v i) Section 18 B: This amendment of barring courts of law is not proper. The powers proposed            
to  be  given  to  the  CEP  and  barring  courts  of  law  of  the  land  should  be     avoided. 
 
Comments   of  MHA  
The power to divest any  enemy  property  rests  wi th  Central  Government  and  it  is  clarified  
that the  courts  shall  have  jurisdiction  to  ad judicate  whether  the  property  claimed  to  be  vested  in  
the  Custodian  is  an  enemy  property  or    not. 
(v ii ) Section 18 C: The  owner  should  have  the  right  of  disposal  of  the  property  by  the  legal  
heirs,  or  the  Central  Government,  as  the  case  may  be  and  not  the      CEP. 
 
Comments   of  MHA  
Section 18 C of the Bill need  not  be  amended  as   rules  for  disposal  of  enemy  properties  
vested  in  the  Custodian  would  be  framed  after  the  Bill  is    passed. 
(v ii i) Section 26(a) to (d): The Indian citizens by birth should have their claims settled within a time-
bound period of say 5-6 years. The judgements of va rious courts of law/High  Court/  Supreme  
Court  should  be  respected  and    implemented. 
 
Comments   of  MHA  
Second proviso to Section 26(b) of  the  Bill  have   been  incorporated  so  as  to  ensure  that  
where the enemy property  had  been  divested  by  an  order  of  the  court  or  without  any  direct ion  
under Section 18  of  the  Act  and  returned  to  the  owner  or  his  lawful  heir  who  are  citize n  of  India 
by birth, such  properties  may  continue  to  vest   in  such  owner  or  the  lawful  heir  subject  to  the 
owner or his lawful heir meeting the condition stip ulated in sub-Section (i) of Section 26(b). This 
amendment is proposed to honour  court  order  and  is  not  intended  either  to  deny  or  confer  a ny  
rights  on  the  properties  of  any  particular    individual. 
The above mentioned suggestion  would  be  examined   while  framing  the  rules  after  passing  
the  Enemy  Property  (Amendment  and  Validation)  Second  Bill,   2010. 

 
128   
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
 
Gist of  Views/Suggessions  of  States/UTs  on  the  Bill 
and  Comments  of  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  thereon 
 
 
Sl. Views/Suggestions  by  State Comments 
No. Government  of  Uttar  Pradesh 
 
1 2 3 
 
 
1. The Bill should not come into effect with 
retrospective effect as proposed in 
Section  1(2)  of  the  Bill. 
 
 
2. Inclusion of the word  “till  it  is  divested  
by the Central Government,” in Section 
5(3)  of  the  Bill  not  agreed  to,  Insertion   
of this clause will result in lot of 
administrative   problems. 
 
3. In the new Bill No.124 of 2010  two  
things are alarming. Firstly amendment 
rather insertion of new Sec.18 and  Sec.  
26(1) (b) proviso (i) and (ii) as same are 
against the State of U.P. besides the 
interest of public at large hence State feels 
bound  to  raise  objection  against   it. 
 
1. Section 18 of Act No.34 of 1968  deals 
with  diversity  of  Enemy  Property  vested  
in Custodian. Section 2(c) of the Act 
includes “management of property” too. It 
means, that the property of State in 
possession of enemy or his agent in the 
capacity of tenant, lessee etc. Even  then  
same could have been vested in Custodian  
for   the   purposes   of management. 
 
Any misinterpretation of this clause by 
any court may preclude  the  State  to  have  
its right and title over its property. In 
Ordinance No.4 of 2010 New Section 18B 
was added  with  the intention  to 
prevent unnecessary interference of 
Courts  who  of   and  on   pass  order   for 
Giving retrospective effect to the Act is 
necessary to give validity and continuity to the 
actions taken under the Enemy Property 
(Amendment  and  Validation)  Ordinance,  2010. 
 
The divesting of the property from the 
Custodian is to be decided by the Central 
Government only and hence the provision is 
needed  to  provide  for  clarity  in  the   matter . 
 
 
Amendment of Section 18 of Enemy 
Property  Act,  1968  
The suggestion of  the  State  Government  is 
that some categories of heirs of the  enemy  
should not be entitled to claim return of the 
property. The State Government has suggested 
that if the original owner or his heir had 
enjoyed some property in the enemy  country,  
such owner or his legal heir should not  be  
allowed to claim  the  original  property  situated  
in India. The Standing Committee may 
consider this suggestion. If the Standing 
Committee is inclined to accept this 
suggestion, then the following words may be 
added in clause 9 of  the  Bill  (on  page  3)  in  
line  22,  after  the  words,  “in  such    manner”: 
 
“and in such cases or in such  classes  of  
cases” 
 
 
 
128 

129   
 
 
 
1 2 3 
 
 
 
divestment from the  Custodian  to  divest  
the properties even the State properties 
without considering or analyzing revenue 
records and brushing  aside  the  provisions  
of Para A-124 of  UP Land  Record  Manual 
as  well  as  UP  Tenancy  Act,   1939. 
 
In the Bill No.124 of 2010 the above 
proposed section is omitted and a new 
section 18 is substituted with a specific 
facility to the heir of the enemy 
introducing an  addition  in  Section  18  as  
“if the owner  is  dead,  to  any  lawful  heir  
of the  owner  is  dead,  to  any  lawful  heir  
of the owner  in  accordance  with  the  law  
of succession applicable to that owner, as 
may be specified in the direction, and 
thereupon such property shall cease to  
vest in the Custodian and shall re-vest  in  
such   owner   or heir: 
 
Provided that any person,  claiming  to  
be the lawful heir of the owner, shall 
obtain a succession certificate or a 
declaration to the effect that he is  the  
lawful heir of the owner from a court of 
competent jurisdiction in a civil 
proceeding instituted for that purpose  and  
the Central Government shall ordinarily 
accept such  certificate  or  declaration,  as  
the  case  may   be.” 
 
This new addition is vehemently 
opposed because it frustrates the basic  
soul of the Principal Act. It latently 
confers the right of ownership on the 
enemy and sidelines the interest of  the 
State.  It  also  fails  to  protect  the  interest   
of the Nation as it does  not  put  any  rider 
that if the enemy's heir  has  also  enjoyed  
and inherited the fruits and benefits of the 
property  situated  in  enemy  country  then  
he should not be allowed to take benefit in 
this country. Principle laid down in 
Tashkand Peace Treaty 1966 are being 
violated  in  this  newly  substituted    section 
18   of   Bill  No.124  of   2010.  Pakistan 
 
 

130   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
already sold and disposed off the 
properties of persons who migrated from 
Pakistan to India and up to 1971  the 
entire property was disposed off. 
Photocopy of letter dated 10.06.1986 
written by the Counsellor shows that 
Pakistan did not follow the guidelines and 
conditions of Tashkand Peace Treaty 1966 
and  shows  its  hostility  towards    India. 
 
As per directions of the Sub- 
Committee, Government of U.P. has 
suggested deletion of  modified  Section  18 
of the Enemy  Property  Act  as  mentioned  
in  Clause  9  of  the  Bill. 
 
4. In lieu of section 18 of the Enemy 
Property Act, 1968, the State  Government 
has  suggested  insertion  of  the  following   
as  Section  18A  and  18B  to  the  Act. 
 
“18A- Any income received in respect  of  
any property whether  vested  or  managed  
by the Custodian shall not be  divested  to  
any individual person or any claimant 
rather heir, successor or legal 
representative in any manner and shall not  
be returned unless directed by the Central 
Government.” 
 
18B- No court shall have jurisdiction to  
order divestment from the Custodian of 
Enemy property vested in him under this  
Act. No court shall have right to entertain  
any suit proceedings whatsoever in 
respect of any property vested in the 
Custodian in respect of any person, 
representative claimant  on  the  basis  that  
he be  declared  to  obtain  ownership  right  
in the property as heir and successor of 
enemy. 
 
5. In Bill No.124 of 2010 proposed new 
section  26(1)  (b)  including  proviso  (i) and 
(ii) are not only against the interest of the 
country as well as the State but are added     
to oblige Enemy heir giving special    facility 
Insertion  of   Section   18A  to   the  Act 
Ministry of Home Affairs  is  not  agreeable  to  
the suggestion of the Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, because what is sought for by the 
Government of U.P. is already adequately 
provided  for  in  Section   18A. 
 
 
 
Insertion  of   Section   18B   to   the  Act 
Ministry of Home Affairs  is  not  agreeable  to  
the suggestion of the Government of U.P. The 
purpose behind the provision is already 
adequately  provided  for  in  Section   18B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of Section 26 to the Enemy 
Property  Act,  1968  
The second proviso in the new Section 26 is 
intended to deal with cases where the enemy 
property  had  been  otherwise  divested  from  the 
  Custodian. 
 

131   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
to the heir of the enemy. This proposed 
section  is  as  under: 
 
“Any enemy property divested from the 
Custodian to any person under the 
provisions of this Act, as it stood 
immediately before the commencement of  
the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation) Second Act, 2010 shall stand 
transferred to and vest  or continue  to 
vest, free from all encumbrances, in the 
Custodian in the same manner as it was 
vested in the Custodian before such 
divesting of enemy property under the 
provisions of this Act, as if the 
provisions of this Act, as amended by the 
aforesaid Act, were in force at all material 
times: 
 
Provided that if the Central 
Government had, before the 
commencement of the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Second Act, 
2010, made any order under Section 18, as    
it stood before such  commencement,  and  
the property had been returned to the  
owner or such other person, such property 
shal1 notwithstanding anything contained in 
this clause, continue to vest the owner  or 
such  other  person,  as  the  case  may   be: 
 
Provided further that if any enemy 
property had been otherwise divested 
from the Custodian (by an order  of a  
court or without any direction under 
section 18) and returned  to  the  owner  or  
his lawful heir  before  the  commencement  
of the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation)  Second  Act,  2010. 
 
(i) In case where the owner or the  lawful 
heir, as the case may be, is a  citizen  of  
India by birth, such property shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this 
clause, continue to vest in  such  owner  or  
the lawful heir, as the case may be, 
furnishes,  within  six  months  from  the  day 
(a) by  an  order  of  a  court;    or 
(b) without any  direction  under  Section  
18 
 
and returned to  the  owner  or  his  heir  before  
2nd July, 2010. This  assumes  that  the  order  of 
the court is a valid order  and  remains  valid  
when the present Bill becomes a law. It 
appears that the Government of U.P. has a 
particular case in mind. In that case, 
according to the Government  of  U.P.,  they 
have already filed a petition for review in the 
Supreme Court of its earlier judgement. If the 
earlier judgement  is  reviewed,  then  the  order  
of the court would cease  to  remain  a  valid  
order. Consequently, any  divestment,  pursuant  
to that order even for a  few  days,  would  
cease to be valid divestment, and  in such  
cases, the second proviso  to  the  new  section  
will not be attracted. After a  fresh  claim  is  
made by the owner or by his heir, the 
Government of  U.P.  is  entitled  to  examine  it  
on its merits. Hence, it does not appear 
necessary  to  make  any  further  modifications  
to   section   26   as   introduced.   Government o f 
U.P. may obtain appropriate relief from the 
Supreme Court in  the  petition  filed  by  them  
for review of the earlier court  order  in  that  
case. 
 
 

132   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
on which the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 
2010 receives the assent of the President, 
evidence to the satisfaction of the Central 
Government that he  is  a  citizen  of  India  
by birth and, in the case of lawful heir, he     
is the lawful heir of the owner in 
accordance with the law of succession 
applicable  to  the  owner;   or" 
 
(ii) in any other case, if the Central 
Government is  satisfied,  after  causing  to  
be held such inquiry  as  it  deems  fit  that  
the property had been returned to the 
owner of his lawful heir, it shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this 
clause, issue a  direction  under  section  18  
to the effect that such property shall 
revest in the owner or  his  lawful  heir,  as 
the  case  may   be. 
 
If we analyze this  section  it  is  apparent  
that spirit of  Tashkand  Peace  Treaty  1966 
is being violated and is  not  being  kept 
under   consideration. 
 
The objection raised for Section 18, is 
reiterated here. If an heir of Enemy is 
allowed to re-occupy the  property  at  least 
he must not be given  rights  superior  to  
what was originally  given  to  his  ancestor  
as mentioned in revenue record  looking  to 
the category according to U.P. Land 
Record  Manual. 
 
(iii) There are so many enemy properties 
where Government Institutes, Government 
Industries, Government Colleges, 
Government Offices, Officer's and Staff 
residence are situated Buildings or public 
utilities should not be allowed to be 
disturbed. During partition of India a large 
number of refugees (persons displaced 
from Pakistan) were given land for 
rehabilitation. This land  was  duly  acquired 
to establish and rehabilitate the  refugees  
who  are  living  at  that  place  for  more than 
 
 

133   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
six decades. Unfortunately, the land validly 
acquired and land which was validly 
disposed off by the ancestor of heir  of 
enemy will again be given to the heir of 
enemy who has no right or title over  the  
land. 
 
Bill No.124 of 2010 is against national 
interest and it contravenes provision of  
many  Acts   viz.   U.P.   Tenancy  Act  1939, 
U.P.  Land  Record  Manual  Ceiling  Act etc. 
 
(iv) Introduction of Bill No.124 of 201 0 
may result in giving under  benefits  to 
some individuals. For example one Raja 
Mohammad Amir Mohammad Khan 
commonly known as "Raja  Mahmudabad". 
In 1984 Raja Mahmudabad obtained 
decree by misleading the Civil Court in  a 
case in which the State was  not  made  
even party. The Ancestor of Raja 
Mahmudabad acquired Taluqdari in 1869 
from British Government besides title of 
Knight Commander of  Imperial  Empire.  
So far as regards Taluqdari rights of Raja 
Mahmudabad little historical background 
had  to  be   examined. 
 
In 1857 struggle for freedom  which  
was named by Britishers as “Mutiny” 
took place. This struggle was ruthlessly 
suppressed by East  India  Company  with  
the help of some individuals. The British 
confiscated the entire land  and  proposed  
that Taluqa should be given  to  the  men  
who have actively aided the British. The 
Indians loyal to the British executed  a  
Bond known as “Sanad Kabooliyat” in 
which the persons who had  actively  aided 
the British against the Indian freedom 
fighters and were desirous of enjoying 
British patronage and to become Taluqdar. 
Those persons took vow  which  meant  
that they shall be called upon  to  perform  
and of showing constant good faith, 
loyalty, real and attachment to the British 
Government  and  breach  of   any  one    of 
 
 

134   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
which at any time shall be held to annual   
the right and title now conferred on the 
person  and  his   heirs. 
 
Ancestor of Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. 
Khan namely Raja Mohd. Amir Hassan 
executed this sanad and acquired Taluqdari 
Rights. His name is mentioned at serial  
No.86  of  List  No.1  of    Taluqdars. 
 
As father of Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. 
Migrated  to  Pakistan  and  became  citizen  
of Pakistan so much so he acquired 
property in the enemy country and 
committed inimical acts towards Union of 
India. It is pertinent to mention  that  by  
virtue of Independence of India  Act  1947 
the word “British Government” where 
ever occur in the Statute  is  substituted  by 
the word “Union of India or State”. Thus 
when father of Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd.  
Khan became enemy to the country all  
rights in the Taluqdari property vested 
inhim automatically annulled and his some 
Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. Khan cannot  get 
any property in the Taluqdari property.  
Thus, Bill No.124/2010 is ultra vires and 
against  the  provisions  of   law. 
 
The  other  important  thing  which  has  
to be pointed out is that most of the 
properties proposed to be handed over to  
Raja Mohd.  Amir  Mohd.  Is  recorded  in  
the name of State  of  U.P.  or  Union  of 
India as owner and Raja Mohmudabad is 
mere non-occupancy tenant whose rights  
have already extinguished long back. If 
provisions of U.P. Land Record Manual 
especially Para A-124 are ignored 
thousands of acres of State land will slip  
away from the ownership of the State and 
thousands people will claim ownership 
over State land, thus State of  U.P.  will 
suffer irreparable loss.  Raja  Mahmudabad  
is recorded as lessee and nonoccupancy 
tenant in most of the land  which  was 
given  to  him  for  development  of township 
 
 

135   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
for providing residential facilities to civil 
servants living  in  European  Style.  Thus,  
no right of ownership  can  be  conferred 
upon him by way of provisions of Section    
18 & 26(1)(b) (i) (ii) of Bill  No.124  of  
2010. He cannot  be  given  rights  superior  
to what was originally conferred on  his  
letter. 
 
An apologue preposterous and 
incongruous story arose from a Civil Suit 
No.219 of 1984 instituted by Raja Mohd. 
Amir Khan without arraying State 
Government U.P. as party. Raja Mohd.  
Amir Mohd. Prayed for declaration over 
certain properties mentioned in the list 
attached with plaint. This suit was 
decreed by the Court of Civil Judge 
Lucknow. Later on Raja MOhd. Amir 
Mohd. Filed a writ petition  No.1524  of  
1997 giving list of different properties.  
Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. Furnished a 
wrong affidavit in the Supreme Court in 
contempt  petition  No.87  of  2006  settling  
to mislead the  court  and  stated  in  para  3  
of the affidavit that “Ex. A of Writ Petition    
is identical to the list filed in regular suit 
No.219   of  1984”. 
 
It is clear that Raja Mohd. Amir  
Mohd. Gave false affidavit in the Supreme 
Court in order to grab the  property  so  
much so leading devious route made all 
attempts to prove that he is owner of the 
properties which actually belong to the 
State of U.P. Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. 
raised claim over those properties too 
which were acquired by the State for 
rehabilitation of  refugees  during  partition  
of   the  country. 
 
When by virtue of effect of Oudh 
Estate Act all the properties of  person  and 
his heirs who  become  enemy  and  disloyal 
to the Government have vested in the 
State/Union of India, the proposed Bill 
No.l24/2010 is totally ultra vires and 
unconstitutional. 
 

136   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
State of U.P. strongly opposes Bill 
No.124 of 2010, specially insertion  of  
new section 5(3), 18 &  26(1)  (b)  (i)  (ii)  
and again emphasis to restore Ordinance  
No.4  of  2010  to  its  original   shape. 
 
State Government has, therefore, 
suggested deletion of two proviso to 
Section  26(1)(b)  of  the   Bill. 
 

137   
Sl.  Views/Suggestions  by  State Comments 
No. Government  of  NCT  of Delhi 
 
1 2 3 
 
 
 
1. Revised format needs to be formulated for 
issuance of certificate by the Custodian of 
Enemy Property declaring property as an 
enemy property under Section 5A  of  the  
Bill. 
 
2. The State Government has suggested that 
Section 8 (2)(ia) of the Bill may be 
modified  as  under: 
 
(ia) “Periodically fix and collect the rent, 
standard rent, lease rent, license  fee  or  
usage charges, as the case may be, in 
respect   of   enemy  property.” 
 
3. The word “receipt” in Section  10A(1)  of  
the Bill may be substituted  in  place  of 
word  “certificate”  
 
 
4. The State Government has proposed 
insertion of following additional sub- 
section under Section 10(1) of the Enemy 
Property  Act: 
 
“Pursuant to the  issue  of  such  certificate’ 
as mentioned at  Sub-section  (1)  above, 
the purchaser shall, within 90 days of  the 
date of issue of the certificate, get such 
immovable property registered in his name   
in the office of Competent Registering 
Authority after paying the requisite stamp 
duty, The aforesaid period of 90 days  
shall be extendable by the Custodian of 
Enemy Property by another 90 days on 
submission of reasonable cause to the 
satisfaction of the Custodian of Enemy 
Property.  On  the  expiry  of  the  period    of 
180 days from the date of the issue of 
certificate, in case the property  has  not 
been registered before the Competent 
registering Authority, the certificate shall 
lapse and a fresh  application  will  have  to 
be moved by the Purchaser before 
Custodian  of  Enemy  Property  for  issue  of 
The format of certificate to be issued by the 
Custodian would be worked out while framing 
Rules under the Enemy Property Act  after  the 
Bill  is  passed. 
 
 
The suggestion of the State Government 
would be kept in view while framing  Rules  
under the Act. However, it is not felt 
necessary to amend the Bill at this stage as 
suggested by the Government of NCT of  
Delhi. 
 
 
 
The word “receipt” has been used with 
reference to  the  “receipt  on  sale  proceeds”. 
On receipt of sale proceeds it would be 
necessary  to  issue  a  certificate  of    sale. 
 
The new sub-section proposed by State 
Government relates to procedure of 
registration of properties  by  the  purchaser  of  
the enemy property after the  same  is  sold  by  
the Custodian. The appropriate  procedure  in  
this regard would be incorporated in the Rules 
relating to disposal of immovable properties by 
the Custodian after the Bill is passed by the 
Parliament. 
 
 

138   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
a fresh certificate in accordance with the 
procedure  laid  down  in  Sub-section    1. 
 
5. In Section 17(1) of the Principal Act the 
word ‘Ten per centum’ may be 
substituted  in  place  of  ‘five  per  centum’.  
 
 
6. Section 20 of the Principal Act may be 
amended by substituting the word “five 
hundred rupees” with the word “ten 
thousand   rupees” 
“Five per cent” is provided  for  contribution  to 
the consolidated fund  for  running  the  office  
and administrative expenses of the  Custodian  
and   is   considered adequate. 
 
The amendment proposed by the State 
Government  has  been  included  in  the  Bill. 
 
 

139   
Sl. Views/Suggestions  by  State Comments 
No. Government  of  West Bengal 
 
1 2 3 
 
 
 
1. In Section 3, there is an  explanatory 
clause saying, “It shall not include 
transfers through oral  will  or  oral  gift.”  
The point is that all the transfers are then 
invalid. Is there any need for putting this 
explanatory  clause? 
 
2. In  the  original Act,  in  Sections  20  (1) and 
20 (2), there is no mention of the 
quantum of fine  that  can  be  imposed.  In  
all other cases,  the  quantum  of  fine  and  
the period of imprisonment have been 
mentioned. I think in the  legislation,  both 
the quantum of punishment and the 
quantum of fine that may be imposed for 
violation  need  to  be  mentioned 
The reason for  inserting  the  explanation  clause  
to Section 6 is to make it abundantly clear that   
the transfers falling under any of the 
categories mentioned in the explanation clause 
will  be  held invalid. 
 
 
In the Principal Act, in Sections 20  (1) 
and (2), there is  no  mention  of  the  fine  that   
can be imposed because this power can be 
exercised by the court in its direction for 
awarding punishment of imprisonment. Such 
matters are governed by the provisions of the 
Criminal   Procedure   code, 1973. 
 
 

 
140   
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-VI  
 
Comments of the Legislative Department, Ministry of  Law and Justice on the applicability of the 
Sanad  Taluqdari   in  view  of  the  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution  of        India 
 
This relates to a communication received from Rajya  Sabha Secretariat to  this  Department  
seeking  the  comments  of  this  Department  on  the  applicabil ity  of  the  Sanad  Taluqdari  in  view  of  
the  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution  of      India,  
2 . The subject matter relates to the Department  of  L egal  Affairs  as  per  the  Allocation  of  
Business (Government of India) Rules, 1961, However , as directed, the  requisite  information  is  
forwarded  in  the  Annexure  attached  hereto  for  doing  needful  in  the     matter. 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE DEBATES OF THE CONSTITUENT   ASSEMBLY:  
 
3 . The corresponding Article  to  Article  31  in  the   Constitution  debates  is  Article  24. 
While debating on this Article in the  Constant  As sembly  relating  to  property,  the  Hon’ble  Memb er 
Shri  Kala  Venkata  Rao  had  submitted  as    under:- 
“I really feel that  the  word  “Property”  should  not  be  applied  to  this  particular  
species at all, because when the sanad was  granted   in  1802,  or  earlier  than  that  in  Bengal 
when the Permanent  Settlement  was  introduced,  t he  sanad  milkiyat  intimrari  gave  the  right  
to the zamindars  to  collect  the  rent  only.  They  were  only  me re  agents  to  collect  the  rent  
and were asked to pay a portion of it as peshkash to the Government. Therefore, the belief          
that  the  zamindars  have  got  a  right  to  property  in  this  business  is  far  from  the  truth.  It  is 
a well-known maxim that nobody can confer  on  some one  what  he  does  not  himself  
possess. From the time immemorial  the  tradition  and  the  law  of  this  country  has  been  that 
the tiller of the soil or the society  of  which  h e  has  been  a  member,  is  the  owner  of  the  
village or the particular holding. Therefore, when only the right to  collect  the  rent  was  
conferred on the zamindar it can never be  said  that  a  kind  of  property  was  conferred  upon 
these  gentlemen  because  the  grantee  himself  had  no  proprietary  right  in  that     land”. 
4 . He further submitted that “we have to draw the conc lusion that while the sanad granted him       
the right to collect  the  rent,  another  regulati on  of  the  same  day  stated  that  the  rent  to   be  paid  by 
the  particular  pattadar ,  should  not  be  increased  by  the    zamindar . 
5 . He also submitted that “My submission is that ‘zamindari’ is  not  a  property  at  all  and  
therefore, it should be  discriminated  from  the  other  types  of  property.  From  our  knowledge  of  
history and the Zamindari legislation I assert that  it  was  never  deemed  to  be  real  property,  as  we 
know  it  to  be  in  some  other    categories”. 
6 . He finally submitted that “therefore, I  maintain  that  from  every  point  of  view  we  have  to  
treat this species of property called the zamindari right as one different from the  ordinary  type  of   
property, which we come across ordinarily…. I was o nly  trying  to  point  out  that  the  zamindari  
property is a different kind  of  property  and,  t herefore,  it  has  been  rightly  treated  so  in  clauses  (4) 
and  (6)  of  this   Article. 
7 . The  other  Hon’ble  Member  Mr.  Mahboob  Ali  Baig  had  submitted  as    under:- 
 
140 

141   
 
‘Mr.  Mahboob Ali Baig: I am just pointing out. My Friend Mr. Kala Venkata Rao is wrong         
in saying that that regulation did not vest the pro prietary rights in the Zamindar . The very 
expression “Sanad Milkiyat Istimrari” when translat ed. Means, sanad of permanent 
settlement of proprietorship in the  not  only  by  enactment,  but  the  highest  courts  have  held  
that the  Zamindar  is  the  owner,  as  I  said,  on  the  basis  of  legislation  which  according  to  
me was passed wrongly. On this basis several transa ctions have  taken  place:  sales, 
mortgages and all sorts of things. Over a period of  150 years these Zamindars  and  their  
transferees   have   acquired   substantive legal’. 
(A  copy  of  the  debates  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  is  enclosed  at     VI-A). 
 
8 . THE  ORIGINAL ARTICLE  31  BEFORE  ITS  OMISSION  IN  1978  IS  AS FOLLOWS:- 
“31. Compulsory acquisition of property.—  (1)  No  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  
property  save  by  authority  of   law. 
(2) No property, movable or immovable, including any in terest in, or in any company  
owning, any commercial or  industrial  undertaking,   shall  be  taken  possession  of  or  acquired  
for public purposes under any law authorising the t aking of such possession  or  such  
acquisition, unless  the  law  provides  for  compe nsation  for  the  property  taken  possession  of  
or acquired and either fixes the amount of the comp ensation, or  specifies  the  principles  on  
which,  and  the  manner  in  which,  the  compensation  is  to  be  determined  and      given. 
(3) No such law as is referred to in Clause (2) made by  the legislature of a State shall         
have  effect  unless  such  law,  having  been  res erved  for  the  consideration  of  the  President,   
has   received   his assent. 
(4) If  any  Bill  pending  at  the  commencement  of  this  Constitution  in  the  legislature  of  
a State has, after it has been passed by such legis lature, been reserved for the consideration            
of the President and has received his assent, the, notwithstanding anything in this  
Constitution, the law so assented to shall  not  be   called  in  question  in  any  court  on  the  
ground  that  it  contravenes  the  provisions  of  Clause     (2), 
(5) Nothing  in  Clause  (2)  shall   affect– 
(a) The provisions of any existing law other than a law  to which the provisions of Clause 
(6) apply;  or 
(b) The  provisions  of  any  law  which  the  State  may  hereafter      make– 
(i ) For  the  purpose  of  imposing  or  levying  any  tax  or  penalty,     or 
(i i) For  the  promotion  of public  health  or the  prevention  of danger  to life  or property,      or 
(i ii) In pursuance of any agreement entered into between the  Government  of  the 
Dominion of India or the Government of India and th e government of  any  other  
country or otherwise, with respect to property decl ared by  law  to  be  evacuee  
property. 
(6) Any law of the State enacted not more than eigh teen months before the 
commencement of this Constitution may within three months from such commencement be 
submitted to the President for his certification; a nd thereupon, if the President by public 
notification  so  certified,  it  shall  not  be  c alled  in  question  in  any  court  on  the  groun d  that  
it contravenes the  provisions  of  Clause  (2)  of   this  Article  or  has  contravened  the  provisi ons 
of  sub-section  (2)  of  section  299  of  the  Government  of  India  Act,       1935.”. 
(A  copy  of  the  original  article  31  is  enclosed  at   VI-B). 

142   
 
9 . ARTICLE 363 BARS THE INTERFERENCE BY COURTS IN DISP UTES ARISING OUT 
OF CERTAIN TREATY, AGREEMENT, COVENANT, ENGAGEMENT,  SANAD OR OTHER 
SIMILAR  INSTRUMENT  WHICH,  READS  AS UNDER:- 
“363. Bar to interference by courts in disputes ari sing out of certain treaties,  
agreements, etc.- (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution b ut subject  to  the 
provisions of article 143, neither the Supreme Cour t nor any other court  shall  have  
jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any prov ision of a treaty, agreement, covenant, 
engagement, sanad or  other  similar  instrument  which  was  entered   into  or  executed  before  
the commencement of this Constitution by any Ruler of an Indian State and to which the 
Government of the Dominion of  India  or  any  of  its  predecessor  Governments  was  a  party  
and which has or has been  continued  in  operation   after  such  commencement,  or  in  any  
dispute in respect of  any  right  accruing  under  or  any  liability  or  obligation  arising  out  of  
any of the provisions of this Constitution relating  to any such treaty, agreement, covenant, 
engagement,  sanad  or  other  similar    instrument. 
(2) In  this  article- 
(a) “Indian State” means any territory recognised befor e the commencement of this 
Constitution by His Majesty  or  the  Government  o f  the  Dominion  of  India  as  being  
such  a  State;   and 
(b) “Ruler” includes the Prince, Chief or other person recognised before such 
commencement by His Majesty or the Government  of  the  Dominion  of  India  as  the  
Ruler  of  any  Indian   State.”. 
 
EXTRACTS  OF THE  DEBATES  OF THE  CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY ON ARTICLE  302 AA:  
10 . The corresponding Article to Article 363 in the Con stitution debates is Article 302AA. While 
debating on this Article in the Constituent Assembl y the Hon’ble Member T.T. Krishnamachari had 
submitted   as  under:- 
“Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: ‘The idea is that the court shall  not  decide  in  this  particular 
matter. It is subject  only  to  the  provisions  o f  article  119  by  which  the  President  may  re fer 
the matter to the Supreme Court and ask for its  op inion  and  the  Supreme  Court  would  be  
bound to communicate its opinion to the President o n any  matter  so  referred  by  him.  The  
House will also remember that there are a few artic les in the Constitution specifically, 302A        
and 267 A where there are references to these  agre ements,  covenants,  sanads ,  etc.  and  even 
these are precluded from adjudication by any court.  The House will recognize that it is very 
necessary  that  matters  like  these  should  not  be  made  a  matter  of  dispute  that  goes  befo re   
a court and one which would well nigh probably upse t certain arrangements that have been 
recommended and agreed to by the Government of Indi a in determining the relation between       
the rulers of States and the Government of India in  the transitory period.  After  the  
Constitution is passed, the position will be clear.  Practically all the States have come within         
the scope of Part VIA and they will be governed by the provisions of this Constitution and, 
excepting  so  far  as  certain  commitments  are  positively  mentioned  in  the  Constitution,  and  
as I said the two articles 267 A and 302A, the cove nants will  by  and  large  not  affect  the 
working of the Constitution; and it  is  therefore  necessary  in  view  of  the  vast  powers  that  
have been conceded in this  Constitution  to  the  judiciary  that  anything  that  has  occurred  
before the passing of this Constitution and which m ight incidentally be operateable after the 
passing of the Constitution must not be  a  subject -matter  of  a  dispute  in  a  court  of  law.  I  
think that  Members  of  this  House  will  underst and  that  it  is  a  very  necessary  provision  s o  
as  to  save  unnecessary  disputes  by  people  who  might  feel  that  they  have  been  affected   or 

143   
 
injured and who would rush to a court to make  the  court  recognize  such  rights  and  other  
similar matters which have been paractically exting uished by the provisions of this 
Constitution  excepting  in  so  far  as  certain  articles  of  the  Constitution  preserve  them.  S ir,     
I  hope  the  House  will  pass  the  article  without  any    demur.” 
(A  copy  of  the  debates  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  is  enclosed  at     VI-C). 
 
EXTRACTS  OF  COMMENTARY OF SHRI  D.D.  BASU  : 
11 . D.D. Basu in his Commentary on the Constitution of  India  (Sixth  Edition  1989 
Volume-  0)  has  stated  at  pages  119   to  123  as     under-  
“While article 363 (1) postulates the continued ope ration  of  the  treaties,  agreements,  etc.,  
entered into  or  executed  before  the  commenceme nt  of  the  Constitution  and  giving  rise  to  d isputes,  
it does not require, as a condition of its applicat ion, that such disputes, should arise after the 
commencement of the Constitution. The  time  factor   is  related  to  the  instrument  and  not  the  
disputes. In order that the bar under Article 363 ( 1) is to apply, such  instrument  should  have  bee n 
executed before the Constitution came  into  force  and  has  to  be  in  operation  after  the  Const itution, 
but  the  dispute  which  is  the  subject  matter  of  the  litigation  may  arise  before  or      after. 
While the proviso to article 131  bars  the  origin al  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  
disputes arising  out  of  such  treaties  and  agr eements,  article  363  bars  the  jurisdiction  of   all  courts  
in  respect  of  all   proceedings. 
‘Notwithstanding anything ..... subject to article 143’ 1. This non-obstinate clause  at  the  
beginning of article 363 (l)  declares  that  notwi thstanding  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  
Court under Article 32 or of a High  Court  under  Article  226  of  the  Constitution  or  of  the 
Civil Courts under the ordinary law, to decide disp utes in  respect  of  the  obligations  of  the 
union, none of these courts shall have  jurisdictio n  to  decide  the  two  classes  of  disputes  
referred  to  in  this  article,   viz. :- 
(a) any disputes arising out of pre-Constitution treaty, agreement  etc.  entered  into  by  the  
Ruler  of  an  Indian  States  to  which  the  Government  of  India  was  a      party; 
(b) any disputes in respect of any right or liability arising out of the  provisions,  this  
Constitution  relating  to  treaty  as    aforesaid. 
2. Though the party aggrieved in either of the two cla sses of dispute cannot have any relief      
from the courts as litigant, Government of India it self may obtain advisory opinion  of  the  
Supreme Court on any of the questions involved  in  such  dispute  by  a  reference  to  the 
Supreme  Court  and  Article   143. 
Sanad - In the case  of  minor  states  the  relationship   of  the  Ruler  with  the  paramount  
power (the British Croun) depended upon a sanad (charter)  or  grant  of  title  by  the 
paramount power, or some other similar arrangement, - not amounting to a  treaty  as  it  is 
known  in  International   Law. 
The  expression  “which  has  or  has  been  continued  in  operation  after  commencement”  means  that   
in  order  to  attract  the  bar  imposed  by  the  first  part  of  article  363  (1)       - 
(a) the  treaty,  covenant  etc.  must  have  been  entered  into  before      26-1-1950; 
(b) such  treaty  etc  must  have  been  continued  in  operation  after  that      date; 
It follows that if the covenant or agreement in que stion  had  been  abrogated  or 
superseded  by  fresh  agreement  between  the  parties  prior  to  the  commencement  of        the 

144   
 
Constitution so that the superseded agreement did n ot exist at the commencement of the 
constitution, obviously, no dispute can possibly ar ise out of such agreement and, 
accordingly,  the  question  of  application  the  present  article  also  cannot     arise. 
Bar   to   interference   by Courts.  
1. While the  proviso  to  Article  131  bars  the  or iginal  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  
in disputes arising out of such treaties and agreem ents, Article 363  bars  the 
jurisdiction  of  all  courts  in  respect  of  all  proceedings     thereon. 
2. But when a plea of bar under Article 363 is raised by the Government, the Court shall       
have the power to interpret Article 363 and to give  effect to the plea only if it satisfied       
that the dispute before the Courts falls within eit her of the two parts of Article 363 (1). 
3. The bar imposed by the Article 363 (1) is not thus an absolute bar but only a limited           
bar and does not take away the power of the Court  to  determine  whether  the  
President’s  action  transgresses  the  limits  imposed  by  the      Constitution. 
4. On the other  hand,  the  Article  has  no  applica tion  unless  there  is  a  dispute  arising  out 
of treaty, agreement or Instrument of Accession etc . or relating to any right or liability  
arising thereunder. Where the  jurisdiction  of  th e  Court  is  questioned  under  this Article, 
the  Court  has  to  determine  whether  it  is  such  a     dispute. 
(A  copy  of  the  extracts  enclosed  at    VI-D) 
 
12 . ARTICLE 131 DEALS WITH ORIGINAL JURISDICTION OF THE  SUPREME COURT 
WHICH  READS  AS  FOLLOWS:- 
131. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  th e  Supreme  Court  shall,  to  the  
exclusion  of  any  other  court,  have  original  jurisdiction  in  any     dispute- 
(a) between  the  Government  of  India  and  one  or  more  States;     or 
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more        
other  States  on  the  other;    or 
(c) between   two   or   more States, 
if  and  in  so  far  as  the  dispute  involves  any  question  (whether  of  law  or  fact)  on  which  
the  existence  or  extent  of  a  legal  right    depends: 
Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not exten d to a  dispute  arising  out  of  any  
treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement,  sonod  or  other  similar  instrument  which,  having  
been entered into or executed before the commenceme nt of this Constitution, continues in  
operation after such commencement, or which provide s that  the  said  jurisdiction  shall  not  
extend  to  such  a   dispute. 
13 . The corresponding Article to Article 131 in the Con stitution debates is Article  109.  While  
debating on this Article in the Constant Assembly  the  Hon’ble  Member  T.T. Krishnamachari  had  
moved  the  above  proviso  which  is  as    under:- 
“Provided that the said jurisdiction shall  not  ex tend  to  a  dispute  to  which  any  state  is  a  
party, if the dispute arises out of any  provision  of  treaty,  agreement,  engagement,  sanad  or 
other similar instrument which provides that the sa id jurisdiction shall not extend  to  such  
dispute.” 
(A  copy  of  the  same  is    enclosed). 

 
145   
 
ANNEXURE-VI-A 
 
Constitution   Debates   on  Article   109   and 24  
Article  109 
The  Honourable  Dr.  B.  R.  Ambedkar  :  Mr.  President,  Sir,  I    move: 
“That in article 109, for the words ‘if in so far a s’ the words ‘if and in so far as’ be substituted.”  
(Amendment  Nos.  1896  and  1897  were  not     moved.) 
Shri T.  T.  Krishnamachari: Mr.  President, Sir,  I move amendment No. 1898 standing in my name, and      
in  amendment  thereof,  I  move  amendment  No.  147  of  List  III,  Third Week,  which  reads  as follows: 
“That with reference to amendment No. 1898  of  the   List  of Amendments  for  the  proviso  of  artic le 
109,  the  following  be  substituted   :- 
‘Provided that the  said  jurisdiction  shall  not  extend  to  a  dispute  to  which  any  state  is  a  party,  if  
the dispute arises our of any provision of treaty, agreement, engagement, sanad or  other  similar  
instrument  which  provides  that  the  said  jurisdiction  shall  not  extend  to  such      dispute. ’” 
Sir, amendment No. 1898 and the amendment that I  h ave  now  moved  are  more  or  less  the  same  
except that the amendment that I have moved states the whole proviso as it would stand if proviso 
(i)  is  deleted.  The  reason  why  proviso  (i)  is  to  be  deleted  is,  for  one  thing,  it  ref ers  to  disputes   
in which the State for the time being specified  in   Part  III  of  the  First  Schedule  is  a  party   which  
opens out a vista of agreements and disputes  which   are  to  be  prohibited  from  coming  within  th e  
scope of this article by this particular proviso. T he House will remember that right through our  
deliberations we have been trying to avoid a specif ic reference to  States  in  Part  III  of  the  Fi rst  
Schedule. As I have stated before–and it has also b een stated by Mr. K. M. Munshi and Dr. Ambedkar–
where it is necessary to provide  specifically  for   these  States,  if  the  need  still  exists  at  such time  as  
we  come  to  the  end  of  the  discussions  of  the  articles  in  the  Draft  Constitution,  it  will be provided 
for in a separate chapter, and, therefore, this pro viso  No.  (i)  is entirely unnecessary, and it is only to 
avoid  this  particular  provision,  which  will  p ut  these  States  on  a  different footing from ot her States 
which now form the provinces of India, that I have moved this amendment. Sir, it does not present any 
complications as it is merely an elimination of proviso (i).               I  hope  the  House  will  accept   it. 
(Amendment  Nos.  1899,  1900  and  1901  were  not     moved.) 
The  Honourable  Dr.  B.  R.  Ambedkar  :  I  do  n ot  think  it  is  necessary  to  say  anything.  I   accept  
Mr.   T.   T.   Krishnamachari’s  amendment. 
Mr.  President  :  The  question   is: 
“That  for  the  proviso  to  article  109,  the  following  be  substituted     :- 
“Provided that the said  jurisdiction  shall  not  extend  to  a  dispute  to  which  any  State  is  a  party,  if  
the dispute arises out of any provision of a treaty  agreement, engagement, sanad of other similar  
instrument  which  provides  that  the  said  jurisdiction  shall  not  extend  to  such      dispute. ” 
The  amendment   was   adopted. 
Mr.  President  :  The  question   is: 
“That in article 109 for the words ‘if in so far as ’ the words ‘if and in so far as’ be substituted.”                
The   amendment   was  adopted. 
Mr.  President  :  The  question   is: 
 
145 

146   
 
“That article 109, as  amended,  stand  part  of  the  Constitution.”  
The   motion   was adopted. 
Saturday,   the   10th   September, 1949  
With  these  words  I   move. 
Mr. President: Amendment No.  424  is  already  included  in  some  amendment.  No.  428.  
Shri  Kala  Venkata  Rao  (Madras:  General):  Sir,  I  move: 
“That in amendment No.  369  of  List VII  (Seventh  Week),  in  clause  (6)  of  the  proposed  articl e  24, 
for  the  words  ‘one  year’  the  words  ‘eighteen  months’  be       substituted.” 
I will give my reasons in the end after speaking ab out another matter which is connected with this     
clauses. I think it  was  Machiavelli  who  said  t hat  one  will  excuse  the  murderer  of  his  own   father  
but not the person who  will  take  away  his  prop erty.  Perhaps  that  is  the  reason  why  there  is  so  
much discussion about this subject here  and  elsew here.  Property  is  not  of  a  single  species;  
property is or various species.  I  may  particular ly  point  out  to  you  Sir,  and  the  honourable  
Members, that clauses (4) and (6)’  of  this  amend ment  refer  to  a  particular  species  of  proper ty,  
namely zamindari property. I really feel that the word “property” should not b e  applied  to  this  
particular species at all, because when  the  sanad   was  granted  in  1802,  or  earlier  than  that  in  
Bengal when  the  Permanent  Settlement  was  introduced,  the  sanad  milkiyat  intimrari,  gave  the  right 
to the zamindars to collect the rent only, They wer e only mere agents to collect the rent and were         
asked to pay a portion of  it  as  peshkash  to  th e  Government,  Therefore  the  belief  that  the 
zamindars have got a right of property in this busi ness is  far  from  the  truth.  It  is  a  well-kn own 
maxim that nobody can confer on someone what he doe s not himself possess. From  time  
Immemorial the tradition and the law of this countr y has  been  that  the  tiller  of  the  soil,  or  the 
society of which he has been a member, is the owner  of the village or  the  particular  holding.  
Therefore,  when  onlv  the  right  to  collect  th e  rent  was  conferred  on  the  zamindar  it  can   never  
be said that a kind  of  property  was  conferred  upon  these  gentlemen  because  the  grantee  hims elf 
had  no  proprietory  right  in  that    land.  
Secondly, even this  right  to  collect  rent  was  restricted  even  from  the  beginning.  Regulatio n  No.  25 
of 1802 in Madras granted the sanad Milkiyat Istimr ari on the 13th of July 1802. On the same day         
four other Regulations were issued.  Regulation  No .  30,  called  the  Patta  Regulation,  definitely   said  
that the rent that was to be, collected from the in dividual Pattadar should be the same as it existed             
on that date  and  should  not  be  altered.  The  word  “unalterable”  was  used  in  the  Regulation  No.  30 
of 1802. These Regulations, having been promulgated  on the same day  and  by the  same  
government, we  have  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  while  t he  sanad  aranted  him  the  right  to  
collect the rent, another Regulation of the same  d ay  stated  that  the  rent  to  be  paid  by  the 
particular pattadar, should not be increased by the  zamindar. This was  made  clear  after  a  long  
struggle,  by  Regulation  No.5  of  1802  which  definitely     said... 
Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar (Madras: General): O n a point of  order,  Sir,  are  we  just  now  
interested  in  going  into  the  whole  history  of  zamindari  with  reference  to  a  consideration  of clauses 
(4)  and  (6)  of  the  draft    article? 
Shri Kala Venkata Rao : The question has been asked   on  the  floor  of  this  House  as  to  why  the re 
should be any discrimination as is shown in clauses  (4) and (6) regarding zamindari property. My 
submission is that ‘zamindari’ is not  a  p roperty  at  all  and  therefore  it  should  be  discriminated  
from  the  other  types  of  property.  From  our  knowledge  of  history  and  t he  zamindari  legislation    
I assert that it was never deemed to  be  real  pro perty,  as  we  know  it  to  be  in  some  other  
categories.  

147   
 
I will illustrate this. And I am telling  you  what   His  Excellency  our  present  Governor-General  said 
when he took part in the discussion on the Estate L ands Committee report in the Madras Legislative 
Assembly in 1939. Say that I have a house in a  vil lage  near  Delhi.  I  passed,  say  B.L.,  and  wa s  
coming to Delhi for starting my practice.  I  gave  that  house  on  rent  to  Mr.  Munshi  saying  “y ou  
please pay me Rs. 8 as rent every month”. But as I was just leaving I met Mr. Krishnaswami Ayyar         
and I said to him “please collect Rs. 8 from Mr.  M unshi every month and send me Rs. 6 and for               
the trouble you take please take Rs. 2 as  commissi on”. After  ten  years  I  returned  to  my  place  and 
found that there were few tiles on the roof or no c ement  at  all  on  the  flooring.  Then  I  asked  Mr. 
Munshi “How is it you have kept my house in bad rep air though I gave it to you for a small rent                 
of Rs. 8 7” Mr. Munshi said to me “I was paying Rs.  24 as rent for this house all along and Mr. 
Krishnaswami Ayyar has all along been collecting it ”. This increase of rent from Rs. 8 to 24 was 
unauthorised and has  been  pocketted  all  along  by  the  gentleman  whom  I  requested  just  to  c ollect  
the rent. The result was  that  neither  the  owner   of  the  house  nor  the  tenant  thereof  got  a ny  benefit 
out of the  increase.  The  gentleman  who  was  me re  rent  collector  has  been  pocketing  this  di fference 
of Rs. 16. If Shri Krishnaswami Ayyar gets what  is   called  property  in  this  transaction  the  
zamindars  also  have   property. 
In Madras, in the year 1802 the total rental of all  estates was Rs. 72 lakhs of which 48 lakhs were           
paid  to  the  Government  as  peshkash.  Now  the  zamindars  of  Madras  are  collecting  Rs.  219  lakhs  
as rent, but pay the same 48 lakhs as peshkash even  today. I therefore say this is no real property                
as  we  ordinarily  know  it  and  so  should  be  treated  on  a  different      footing. 
Then I have to mention in this connection that the zamindar did not  also  always  discharge  his  
obligations as were fixed  in  the  sanad.  It  has   been  laid  down  that  he  must  maintain  irrig ation  
works, etc. He never did anything of the kind. All the  irrigation  works  are  in  disrepair  and  
everywhere rent was increased nonetheless without a ny benefit  coming  to  the  ryots.  Mr.  Veblan   
defined what a ‘vested interest’ in property means as “a  marketable  right  to  get  something  for  
nothing”.  We  could  have  terminated  this  autho risation  to  collect  rent  by  issuing  a  notice   but  we   
are giving compensation and therefore be ought to t hank us. Many of the zamindaries were created             
at the time of the decline of the Moghul  rule  whe n  jungle  law  prevailed,  We  want  today  to  
compensate them under  the  rule  of  law.  Bihar  has  to  pay  130  crores;  United  Provinces  has  to  pay 
an equally big sum and Madras has to pay about 15 1 /2  crores.  All  these  sums  will  go  to  the  
zamindars just because  they  possess  some  sanads .  We  are  not  treating  those  sanads  as  mere  scraps 
of paper. As a matter of fact are treating them  as   scrips.  We  are  paying  for  these  scrips  a  value  
related  to  their  history  and  based  on   equity. 
‘Therefore I maintain that from every point  of vie w  we have  to treat  this  species  of 
property called  the  zamindari  right  as  one  di fferent  from  the  ordinary  type  of  property,  
which  we  come  across   ordinarily.  
Section 299 of the adapted Government of Act  pract ically  been  redrafted  as  the  present  article  with 
only a few alterations. The only main  change  is  the  dropping  of  the  word  ‘payment’.  It  has  been  
held by an eminent jurist that as  long  the  word  ‘payment’  is  there,  we  have  to  pay  compensa tion 
only in the legal tender of the country and therefo re in cash. Therefore  many  of  the  provincial  
legislatures have to suffer. Now under this  clause   the  amount  can  be  paid  in  bonds.  So,  the 
provincial Governments  can  reconsider  the  quest ion  of  paying  the  first  instalment  of  compen sation  
at  an  early  stage.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it   will  benefit  the  provincial  governments  to  pay  like  this  
in bonds, particularly in Madras where section  50  makes  liberal  provision  for  interim  payments.   If 
there is an estate  with  an  income  of  6  lakhs,   the  sum  of  one  lakh  will  be  the  basic  an nual  sum.  
We have to  pay  this  one  lakh  till  we  pay  th e  total  compensation  without  counting  these  p ayments  
as  part  of  it.  If  we  pay  in  money  or  bond s  now  we  will  gain  much  in  the  shape  of  i nterest.      
Mr. President: I would remind the honourable Member   that  we  are  not  discussing  the  Madras  Bill   
here. 

148   
 
Shri  Kala  Venkata  Rao  :  I  am  only  illustrating Sir. 
 
Mr. President: I know that lie was Revenue Minister  there and  knows  more  about  that  Bill  than  
anybody here. But he need not give the benefit of t hat knowledge  to  this  House.  He  may  confine 
himself  to  the   article. 
 
Shri Kala Vetkata Rao : I will just conclude Sir. I nstead of paying at the rate of one lakh of rupees            
as  interim  payment  for  some  years  we  will  be  paying  Rs.  30,000  only  as  interest  on       bonds. 
 
I would like  to  say  one  thing  more.  The  righ t  of  Parliament  to  fix  compensation  or  the  principles 
of compensation  must  be  kept  sacrosanct.  Only  when  a  fraud  is  committed  on  the  Statute  t he 
courts  can  interfere  in  the    matter. 
 
Sir, as you pointed out, I am not justified in goin g into all these details.  I was only   trying to point           
out that the zamindari property is a different  kin d  of  property  and  therefore  it  has  been  rig htly  
treated  so  in  clauses  (4)  and  (6)  of  this     article.  
 
I want in  this  connection  to  tell  my  friends  what  Mr.  Fosdick  said  “History’s  current  is  sweeping  
us into the future and the illusion that security i s dependent upon the absence of change is perhaps            
the  most  dangerous  form  of  imbalance  which  p lagues  the  mind  of  men”.  With  these  few  wor ds      
I request the honourable Mover to accept  my  amend ment  to  substitute  ‘eighteen  months’  for  ‘one   
year’ in clause (6), for the simple reason that if the Constitution does  not  come  into  force  on  26th 
January 1950, there may be some  difficulty  for  t he  Madras  Bill  which  received  assent  in  Marc h  
1949. If the mover accepts my amendment that antici pated difficulty can be removed. Mine is only              
a  formal  amendment  and  I  request  the  honourable  Mover  to  accept      it. 
 
Thank you, Sir. The Honourable  Shri  Krishna  Ball abh  Sahay  (Bihar:  General):  Sir,  I  do  not  m ove 
my  amendment.  My  purpose  will  be  served  if  the  honourable  Mover  will  see  his  way  to  ac cept  
the  amendment  moved  by  Shri  Kala  Venkata  Rao . 
 
Shri  Jaspat  Roy  Kapoor  (United  Provinces:  General):  Sir,  I    move: 
 
“That in amendment No. 369  of  List  VII  (Seventh   Week),  after  clause  (6)  of  the  proposed  ar ticle  
24,  the  following  new  clause  be    added:- 
 
‘(7) The provisions of clause  (2)  of  this  artic le  shall  not  apply  to  any  property  belonging   to  
evacuees to the Territory now included in Pakistan and declared as evacuee property by any law 
promulgated to deal with such property in the event  of failure of any  agreement  being  arrived  at  
between India and Pakistan on the subject of proper ty belonging to evacuees  to both  the 
countries.’” 
 
Mr. Mahboob Ali Baig : I am just pointing out. My  Friend  Mr.  Kala  Venkata  R ao  is  wrong  in 
saying that that Regulation did not vest the propri etary rights  in  the  Zamindar.  The  very  
expression  “Sanad  Milkiyat  Istimrari”  when  tra nslated,  means,  Sanad  of  Permanent  Settlement  
of p roprietorship in the Not only by enactment,  but  t he  highest  courts  have  held  that  the 
Zamindar is the owner, as I said, on the basis of legislation which according  to  me  was  passed 
wrongly. On this basis several transactions have ta ken place:  sales,  mortgages  and  all  sorts  of  
things. Over a period of 150 years these Zamindars and their transferees  ha ve  acquired  
substantive  legal.  
 
I differ from  my  honourable  Friend  on  the  que stion  or  compensation.  said  that  compensation  must 
be given. I am not going to refer to the several in accuracies in the statement of law and facts made            
by them. Therefore, the question whether the compen sation that these Zamindari abolition  
enactments  have  given  is  just,  fair  or  equitable,  or  is  merely  illusory,  must  be  left  to  the  court  to 

149   
 
determine. As I have said, till we  change  the  st ructure  of  society  from  a  capitalistic  system   of  
society, to a socialistic society, where it is not  the  individual,  that  owns  the  property  but  it  is  the 
entire people or the State or  the  co-operative  a gency,  till  then,  we  cannot  get  away  from  t he  fact  
that  due,  proper  compensation  should  be,    gi ven. 
The   amendment   was  adopted. 
Shri  T.   T.   Krishnamachari  :  Mr.   President,  I  move 
‘That for the proviso to article 109 the following proviso be substituted: 
‘Provided  that  the  said  jurisdiction  shall  not  extend    to– 
(i) a dispute to which a State  for  the  time  being  specified  in  Part  III  of  the  First  Schedule  is  a  
party, if  the  dispute  arises  out  of  any  prov ision  of  a  treaty,  agreement,  covenant,  engag ement,  
sanad or other similar instrument which was entered  into or executed before the date of 
commencement  of  this  Constitution  and  has,  or  has  been  continued  in  operation  after  that       date, 
(ii) a dispute to which any State is a party, if the dis pute arises out  of  any  provision  of  treaty,  
agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad, Or other si milar instrument which provides that the said 
jurisdiction  shall  not  extend  to  such  dispute’    .” 
I would request honourable  Members  to  refer  to,   the  Draft  Constitution  before  this  article  was 
passed by the  House.  They  will  find  these  two   provisos  reproduced  there  word  for  word.  It   was  
felt at the time we moved this Draft Article 109  t hat  in  the  circumstances  in  which  we  were  t hen 
placed we could not ask the House to pass a proviso  like proviso (1) and hence there is no proviso              
in the article as accepted-by the House covering th e case of States  in  para  In  as  we  had  for  i ts  
omission and only the incorporation of proviso (2) in the terms in which it has been then accepted              
by  the  House.  But  now  circumstances  have  changed  and  we  find  that  a  proviso  similar  to  proviso 
(1) of the original  draft  has  to  find  a  place  an d  therefore  I  have  moved  this  amendment.  I  hope  
the  House  will  accept  it. 
Mr.  President:  The  question   is 
“That for the proviso to article 109 the following proviso be substituted: 
‘Provided  that  the  said  jurisdiction  shall  not  extend    to– 
(i) a dispute to which a State  for  the  time  being  specified  in  Part  III  of  the  First  Schedule  is  a  
party, if  the  dispute  arises  out  of  any  prov ision  of  a  treaty,  agreement,  covenant,  engag ement,  
sanad or other similar instrument which was entered  into or executed before the date of 
commencement  of  this  Constitution  and  has,  or  has  been,  continued  in  operation  after  that       date; 
(ii) a dispute to which any State is a party, if the dis pute arises out of any provision  of  a  treaty, 
agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad, or other si milar instrument, which provides that the said 
jurisdiction  shall  not  extend  to  such  dispute’.”    . 
The   amendment   was adopted 
Article  302AA  Shri  T.T.   Krishnamachari:  Sir,  I  move:  
“That  after  article  302A,  the  following  article  be    inserted:- 
302-AA.”Bar  of   jurisdiction  of   courts  with  respect  to   certain  treaties,  agreements,     e tc. 
(l) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Cons titution and subject to the provisions of article 1 19 
thereof, neither the Supreme Court nor any other co urt shall have jurisdiction in any dispute arising          
out of any provision of a treaty, agreement, conven ant, engagement,  sanad  or  other  similar  
instrument  which  was  entered  into  by  any  Ruler  of  an  Indian  State  and  to  which  the   Government 

150   
 
of  the  Dominion  of  India  or  any  of  its  pre decessor  Governments  was  a  party  and  which  h as  or  
has been continued in opt-ration after the  date  o f  commencement  of  this  constitution,  or  in  a ny  
dispute  in  respect  of  any  right  accruing  und er  any  of  the  provisions  of  this  Constitutio n  relating   
to  any  such  treaty,  agreement,  covenant,  engagement,  sanad  or  other  similar        instrument. 
(2) ln  this  article– 
(a) ‘Indian State’ means any territory recognised by Hi s Majesty or  the  Government  of  the  
Dominion  of  India  as  being  such  a  State;    and 
(b) ‘Ruler’ includes, the Prince, Chief or other person  recognised by His Majesty or the  
Government  of  the  Dominion  of  India  as  the  Ruler  of  any  Indian     State.’ 
Sir, so far as the article itself is concerned, it is self-explanatory. The idea is to bar the jurisdi ction            
of the courts including the Supreme Court in regard   to  adjudicating  in  respect  of  any  disputes  that 
might arise out of any treaty  agreement,  covenant ,  engagement,  sanad  or  other  similar  instrume nts  
that might have been entered into by the Government  of the  Dominion  of  India  or  by  any  
predecessor  Government. 

 
151  
 
ANNEXURE-VI-B 
 
Original   Article  31  
 
For the purpose of  following  the  bewildering  sequence  of  the  foregoing  amendments,  it  
would  be  useful  to  append  a  graphical  presentation  of  Art.  31,  as     follows: 
 
 
Before 27-4-1955 
Right to Property  
After 27-4-1955 & 20-4-1972 
Right to Property  
After 20-6-1979 
Right to Property  
 
1  2    3  
Compulsory   acquisition  of  Compulsory   acquisition  of  Art.  31   omitted  by  
property. 31. (1) No person 
shall be deprived of his 
property save by authority of 
law. 
 
(2) No property, movable 
or immovable, including any 
interest in, or in any company 
owning, any commercial or 
industrial undertaking, shall be 
taken possession of or 
acquired for public purposes 
under any law authorising the 
taking of such possession or 
such acquisition, unless the 
law provides for compensation 
for the property taken 
possession of or acquired and 
either fixes the amount of the 
compensation, or specifies the 
principles  on which,  and  
the manner in which, the 
compensation is to be 
determined  and  given. 
property. 31. (1) No person 
shall be deprived of his 
property save by authority of 
law. 
 
79 (2) No property shall be 
compulsorily acquired or 
requisitioned save for a public 
purpose and save  by  authority  
of a law which provides for 
acquisition or requisitioning of 
the property for an amount 
which may be fixed by such law 
or which may be determined in 
accordance with such principles 
and given in such manner as  
may be specified in such law;  
and no such law shall be called  
in question in any court on the 
ground that the amount so fixed 
or determined is not  adequate  
or that the  whole  or  any  part  
of such amount is to be given 
otherwise  than  in  cash.  
 
Provided that in making any  
law providing for compulsory 
acquisition of any  property  of  
an educational institution 
established and administered by  
a  minority, referred  to   in 
Cl. (1) of Art. 30, the  State  
shall be ensure that the    amount  
Constitution (44th Amendment) 
Act.   1978,   w.e.f. 26-6-1979. 
 
 
79 . Cl. (2) was first amended by the  Constitution  (Fourth Amendment) Act.  1955,  and  thereafter  substituted  by  the  Constitution 
(25th Amendment) Act,  1971  w.e.f.  20-4-1972. 
 
151 

152   
 
 
 
1 2 3 
 
 
 
fixed by or determined under 
such law for the acquisition of 
such property is such as would 
not restrict or abrogate the 
right guaranteed under that 
clause. 
80  
 
(2A ) Where a law does not 
provide for the transfer of the 
ownership or right to possession 
of any property  to  the  State  or 
to a corporation owned or 
controlled by the State, it  shall 
not be deemed to  provide  for  
the compulsory acquisition or 
requisitioning of property, 
notwithstanding that it deprives 
any  person  of  his property. 
81  
 
82 (28 )  Nothing  in  sub-clause  
(f) of Cl. (1) of Art. 19 shall 
effect any such law as is 
referred  to  in  Cl.   (2). 
 
(3) No such law as is 
referred to in Cl. (2)  made  by 
the legislature of a State shall 
have effect unless such law, 
having been reserved for the 
consideration of the President,  
has   received   his assent. 
 
(4) If any Bill pending  at  
the commencement of this 
Constitution  in  the  legislature 
of a State has, after  it  has 
been passed by such 
legislature, been reserved for 
the consideration of the 
President and has received his 
assent, then, notwithstanding 
anything in this Constitution, 
the law so assented to  shall  
not be called in question in    any 
(3) No such law as is 
referred to in CI. (2)  made  by 
the legislature of a State shall 
have effect unless such law, 
having been reserved for the 
consideration of the President,  
has   received   his assent. 
 
(4) If any Bill pending  at  
the commencement of this 
Constitution  in  the  legislature 
of a State has, after  it  has 
been passed by such 
legislature, been reserved for 
the consideration of the 
President and has received his 
assent, then, notwithstanding 
anything in this  Consitution, 
the law so assented to  shall  
not be called in question in    any 
 
 
80 . Cl. (2) was first amended by the  Constitution  (Fourth Amendment) Act,  1955,  and  thereafter  substituted  by  the  Constitution 
(25th Amendment) Act,  1971,  w.e.f.  20-4-1972. 
81 . Cl.  2A was  added  by  the  Constitution  (Fourth  Amendment) Act, 1955. 
82 . Cl.  2B  was  inserted  by  the  Constitution  (25t h Amendment) Act,  1971,  w.e.f. 20-4-1972. 

 
153 
 
 
 
1 2 3 
 
 
 
court on the ground that it 
contravenes the provisions of 
Cl.  (2). 
 
(5) Nothing in Cl. (2) shall 
affect— 
 
(a) the provisions of any 
existing law  other  than  
a law to which the 
provisions of Cl. (6) 
apply,  or 
 
(b) the provisions of any 
law which the State 
may   hereafter  make— 
 
(i ) for the purpose of 
imposing or levying 
any tax or penalty, 
or 
 
(ii ) for the promotion  
of public health or 
the prevention of 
danger to life or 
property,  or 
 
(ii i ) In pursuance of 
any agreement 
entered into 
between the 
Government of the 
Dominion of India 
or the Government 
of India and the 
government of any 
other country or 
otherwise, with 
respect to 
property declared 
by law to be 
evacuee  property. 
 
(6) Any law of the State 
enacted not more than eighteen 
months before the 
court on the ground that it 
contravenes the provisions of 
Cl.  (2). 
 
(5) Nothing in Cl. (2) shall 
affect— 
 
(a) the provisions of any 
existing law  other  than  
a law to which the 
provisions of Cl. (6) 
apply,  or 
 
(b) the provisions of any 
law which the State 
may   hereafter  make— 
 
(i ) for the purpose of 
imposing or levying 
any tax or penalty, 
or 
 
(i i ) for the promotion  
of public health or 
the prevention of 
danger to life or 
property,  or 
 
(i i i) In pursuance of 
any agreement 
entered into 
between the 
Government of the 
Dominion of India 
or the Government 
of India and the 
government of any 
other country or 
otherwise, with 
respect to 
property declared 
by law to be 
evacuee  property. 
 
(6) Any law of the State 
enacted not more than eighteen 
months before the 
 
 

154   
1 2 3 
 
 
 
commencement of this 
Constitution may within three 
months from such 
commencement be  submitted 
to the President for his 
certification; and thereupon, if  
the President by public 
notification so certifies, it shall 
not be called in question in any 
court on the ground that it 
contravenes the provisions of 
Cl. (2) of this Article or has 
contravened the provisions of 
sub-section (2)  of  section  299  
of the Government of India 
Act,  1935. 
commencement of this 
Constitution may within three 
months from such 
commencement be  submitted 
to the President for his 
certification; and thereupon, if  
the President by public 
notification so certifies, it shall 
not be called in question in any 
court on the ground that it 
contravenes the provisions  of 
Cl. (2) of this Article or has 
contravened the provisions of 
sub-section (2)  of  section  299  
of the Government of  India 
Act,  1935. 
 
 

ANNEXURE -VI -C 
 
155 
 
Constitution   Debates   on   Art. 302AA  
 
Shri T.  T.  Krishnamachari:  ‘The  idea  is  that  the  court  shall  not  decide  in  this  particul ar  matter.  It  
is subject only to the provisions of article 119 by  which the President may  refer  the  matter  to  t he 
Supreme  Court  and  ask  for  its  opinion  and  t he  Supreme  Court  would  be  bound  to  communica te   
its opinion to the President on any matter  so  ref erred  by  him.  The  House  will  also  remember  that 
there are a  few  articles  in  the  Constitution  specifically,  302A  and  267A  where  there  are  references 
to these agreements, covenants, sanads, etc. and ev en these  are  precluded  from  adjudication  by  a ny 
court. The House will recognize that it is very nec essary that matters like these should not be made              
a matter of dispute that goes before a court and on e which would well nigh probably upset certain 
arrangements that have been recommended and agreed to by the Government of India  in  
determining the relation between the rulers of Stat es and the Government  of  India  in  the  transito ry 
period. After the Constitution is passed,  the  pos ition  will  be  clear.  Practically  all  the  Sta tes  have  
come within the scope of Part VIA and they will be governed by the provisions of this Constitution       
and,  excepting  so  far  as  certain  commitments  are  positively  mentioned  in  the  Constitution,   and  as   
I said the two  articles  267A  and  302A,  the  co venants  will  by  and  large  not  affect  the  wo rking  of 
the Constitution;  and  it  is  therefore  necessary  in  view  of  the  vast  powers  that  have  bee n  conceded 
in this Constitution to the judiciary that anything  that has occurred  before  the  passing  of  this  
Constitution and which might  incidentally  be  ope rateable  after  the  passing  of  the  Constitutio n  must 
not be a subject-matter of a dispute in a court of law. I think  that  Members  of  this  House  will  
understand that it is a very necessary provision so   as  to  save  unnecessary  disputes  by  people  who 
might feel that they  have  been  affected  or  inj ured  and  who  would  rush  to  a  court  to  make   the  
court recognize such  rights  and  other  similar  matters  which  have  been  practically  extinguish ed  by  
the provisions of this Constitution excepting in so  far as certain articles of the Constitution preser ve      
them.  Sir,  I  hope  the  House  will  pass  the  article  without  any     demur. 
(Amendment   403   was   not moved.) 
 
Mr. President: There is no amendment to this. Does any Member wish  to  say  anything  about  this  
article”  I  will  put  this  straightaway  to    vote. 
The  question  is  : 
 
“That  after  article  302A,  the  following  article  he    inserted:- 
 
‘302AA.”Bar  of  jurisdiction  of  Courts  with  respect  to  certain  treaties,  agreements,       etc., 
 
(1) Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  Constitution  and  subject  to  the  provisions  of   article 
119 thereof, neither do Supreme Court nor any  othe r  court  shall  have  jurisdiction  in  any  dispu te  
arising out of any provision of a treaty, agreement , covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar  
instrument which was  entered  into  by  any  Ruler   of  an  Indian  State  and  to  which  the  Gover nment  
of  the  Dominion  of  India  or  any  of  its  pre decessor  Governments  was  a  party  and  which  h as  of  
has been continued in operation after the date  of  commencement  of  this  Constitution,  or  in  any   
dispute  in  respect  of  any  right  accuring  under  any  of  the  provisions  of  this  Constitution      relating 
 
 
155 

156   
 
to  any  such  treaty,  agreement,  covenant,  engagement,  sanad  or  other  similar        instrument. 
(2) In  this  article- 
(a)”Indian State” means any territory recognised by  His Majesty  or  the  Government  of  the  
Dominion  of  India  as  being  such  a  State;    and 
(b) “Ruler” includes the Prince, Chief or other per son recognised by His  Majesty  or the  
Government  of  the  Dominion  of  India  as  the  Ruler  of  any  India     State.’ 

ANNEXURE -VI -D 
 
157 
 
Extract   of   D.D.  Basu  
 
Accession, there was  no  Court  to  give  relief  to  that  State, 69  because  of  Art.  363(1),  which  barred  
the jurisdiction of the Court 70 to entertain a suit to enforce rights arising out o f an Instrument  of  
Accession. 69 But the bar will not operate where the dispute does   not  come  under  the  terms  of  Art. 
363(1),   as   properly  interpreted. 70  
Art. 363 has been authoritatively interpreted by a Bench of 11  Judges in the case of Madhav     
Rao  Scindia,  known  as  the  ‘Privy  Purse’    case. 70  
CLAUSE   (1). 
Scope of Art.  363(1).  1.  No  Court  shall  have  jurisdiction  to  entertain  a  dispute  arising  out 
of treaties, etc., entered into between Rulers of I ndian States and the Government of India.  The  
jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  is  also  ba rred  by  the  Proviso  to  Art.  131  [ see  Vol.  G, p.  252],   
if it is a State which  has  lost  its  integrity  by  reason  of  merger  or  otherwise,  the  jurisd iction  is  
barred by Art. 363 (1), and  the  remedy  provided  by  the  Constitution  is—a  reference  by  the 
President  to  the  Supreme  Court  under  Art.     143. 70-71  
2. While Art. 363(1) postulates the continued  operati on  of  the  treaties,  agreements,  etc.,  
entered into  or  executed  before  the  commenceme nt  of  the  Constitution  and  giving  rise  to  d isputes, 
it does not require, as a condition of its applicat ion, that such disputes, should arise after the 
commencement of the Constitution. The  time  factor   is  related  to  the  instrument  and  not  the  
disputes. In order that the bar under Art. 363(1) i s  to  apply,  such  instrument  should  have  been   
executed before the Constitution  came  into  force   and  has  to  be  in  operation  after  the  Cons titution, 
but  the  dispute  which  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  litigation  may  arise  before  or       after. 69  
3. Under the first part of Cl. (1), the exclusion of  jurisdiction  of  courts  relates  to  disputes 
arising from the provisions of any treaty i.e. , to  bar  a  suit  or  proceeding  for  enforcemen t  of  such  
treaty etc. Under the second part, the dispute must  be in respect of a right or liability arising unde r                
a  provision  of  the  Constitution  relating  to  such  treaty     etc. 70  
4. While the Proviso to Art. 131 bars the  original  j urisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  
disputes arising  out  of  such  treaties  and  agr eements,  Art.  363  bars  the  jurisdiction  of  a ll  Courts  
and  in  respect  of  all    proceedings. 69  
‘Notwithstanding anything.........subject to Articl e 143 .’ 1. This non obstante clause at the  
beginning of Art. 363(1) declares that  notwithstan ding  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  u nder 
Art. 32 or of a High Court under Art. 226  of  the  Constitution  or  of  the  Civil  Courts  under  t he  
ordinary law, to decide disputes in  respect  of  t he  obligations  of  the  Union,  none  of  these  Courts  
shall  have  the  jurisdiction  to  decide  the  two  classes  of  disputes  referred  to  in  this  Article,    viz. ,— 
(a) Any dispute arising out of a pre-Constitution treat y, agreement  etc.  entered  into  by  the  
Ruler  of  an  Indian  State  to  which  the  Government  of  India  was  a      party. 
(b) Any dispute in respect of any right or liability ar ising out of the provisions  of  this  
Constitution  relating  to  any  treaty  etc.  as  aforesaid  [para.     128]. 70  
 
 
69 State  of  Saraikella  v.   Union  of  India.  A.  1951  S.C.253        (258). 
70   Madhav  Rao   v.   Union  of   India,   A.   1971   S.C.   530[9:  2]   (paras.  75.77,  13 2.   134-35.  141,   143,   225-228,  309).   [See 
para.  309,   ibid.,   as  to  why  a  provision  in  the  Constitution  to  bar  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Courts  was  considered  necessary;         
see   also   paras.   367-69. abid. ]. 
71 Usmanali   v.   Sagar   Mal,   A.   1965   S.C.   1798 (1802).  
 
157 

158   
 
2. Though the party aggrieved in either of the two classes of dispute cannot have any relief      
from the Courts as a litigant, Government of India itself may obtain  the  advisory  opinion  of  the  
Supreme Court on any of the  questions  involved  i n  such  dispute  by  a  reference  to  the  Suprem e  
Court  under  Art.  143  [para.    196]. 70  
‘Jurisdiction’.—This word, having been  used  without  any  qualifi cation,  would  include  even  
the  advisory  jurisdiction  of  a  Court,  e.g.,  that  of  the  High  Court  on  a  reference  under   s.  66  of    
the  Income-Tax  Act, 72    1922,  excepting  the  advisory  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  under     Art. 
143  of  the  Constitution,  which  is  expressly  saved  from  the  bar  imposed  by  Art.       363(1). 
‘Dispute’ means any controversy  where  one  party  asserts  or  claims  a  right  and  another  
denies  it.  It  may  relate  to  a  question  of  fact  or  a  question  of  law,  e.g .,  as  to  the  interpretation     
of  an  agreement  or  of  some  provision  of  the  Constitution  [para.      228]. 70  
‘Treaty, agreement, covenant,  engagement,  sanad  or  other  similar  instrument………entered  
into  by  any  Ruler  of  an  Indian  State’.  As  to  the  history  of  Indian  States, 
Indian State. see Vol. J, pp. 48 ff. Briefly speaking, an Indian State was a ‘political  
community  occupying   a  territory  in  India……..subject  to  a  single      Ruler 
who enjoyed or exercised, as belonging to him, any of the functions  and  attributes  of  internal  
sovereignty, duly recognised by the  British  Crown   [para.  99]. 70  There  were  more  than  500  such  
Indian  States  during  the  British  regime.  [See,  further,  under  Cl.  (2)  (a),      below ]. 
After the British Crown assumed  suzerainty  over  India  from  the  East  India  Company  in  
1858, the  British  Crown  was  declared  to  be  t he  paramount  power  over  the  whole  of  the  territory  
of India, including the Indian States. But the poli cy of the British Government was not to interfere,            
as far as possible, with the internal administratio n of the Indian States by the  Rulers.  This  inter nal 
authority of  the  Rulers  was  safeguarded  by  en gagements  of  different  types  as  between  the  Ruler  
and  the  British.  Crown,  according  to  the  history  and  status  of  the  various       States. 
Treaties  were  entered  into  by  the  East  India  Company  with  the  Rulers  of  Indian  States  not 
Treaty. to interfere with their rule  in  those  States.  These  treaties  were  binding  on 
the  British  Crown  and,  hence,  on   the  Govern ment  of   India,     after 
assumption  of  suzerainty  over  India,  by  the  British     Crown. 
In the case of same forty of the Indian States,  the  relation  between  the  Ruler  and  the 
paramount   Power   was   founded   on treaties. 
Various  agreements  were  entered  into  between  the  Rulers  and  the  Agreement.  Governor 
 
Agreement. General of India subsequent to the execution of the  Instruments of 
Accession,  in  order  to  facilitate  the  adjustments  which  were  needed        in 
‘order  to  bring  these  States  into  the  Union  of  India,  e.g .,  the  Standstill  Agreement,  [para.  358]; 70   
an   agreement   of   cession; 73    Merger  Agreement   [para. 359]. 70  
These  Agreements  would  also  be  covered  by  Art.     363(1). 
In  the,  case  of  the  minor  States 74    the  relationship  of  the  Ruler  with  the  paramount    Power 
 
Sanad. depended upon a sanad (charter), or  grant  of  title  by  the  paramount   
Power,  or  some  other  similar  arrangement,—not  amounting  to  a  treaty    as 
it is known in International Law. Whether such a mi nor State would be taken to be an Indian State      
would next depend upon its recognition as  such  by   the  British  Crown  or  the  Government  of  Ind ia 
[see,   further,   under   Cl.   (2), post ]. 
 
 
72 Dalmia  Cement  Co.  v.   Commr.   of  I.T.,  A.  1958  S.C.  816  (para.        11). 
73 Cf.   State   of   Seraikella   v.   Union   of   India,   (1951)   S.C.R.   474 (477).  
74 E.g.,  in  the  case  of  a  Jagir  or  Estate  granted  by  the  Mahomedan  Rulers  of   Inda. 

159   
 
As  the  history  of  the  Indian  States  at  pp.  48  ff.  of  Vol.   J  shows,  the  Agreement     entered 
Covenant. into between the Rulers of those Indian States which intended to  form  a  
“Union  of   States”,  such  as   the  Saurashtra  Union  or   the  Union     of 
Travancore-Cochin, was called a ‘Covenant’. 
[See,   further,   under   Cl.   (2), below ].. 
These Covenants were, in the eye of law, in the  na ture  of  treaties  between  Rulers  of  
independent  States, 74a  because  the  Rulers  became  free,  from  the  suz erainty  of  the  British  Empire  
and fully sovereign Rulers by virtue of s. 7  of  t he  Indian  Independence  Act,  1947.  They  had,  
therefore, absolute authority to enter into such Co venants, But after divesting  himself  of  his 
sovereignty by a Covenant, any Supplementary Covena nt entered into  by  a  Ruler  by  way  of  
amending  or  modifying  the  original  Covenant  must  be  held  to  be   invalid. 75  
Apart from Art. 363, 76 the Covenant  is  an  ‘Act  of  State’  and  is  no t  enforceable  against  the 
new Sovereign who acquires the territory, of the ex -Ruler, unless the  new  Sovereign  chooses  to  
recognize  them 77    by  a  specific  and  unequivocal    act, 78  
‘Other instruments’ coming under this head in Art. 363(1) are  Instruments  of  Accession, 79  
Merger Agreements 76 Acts done there under are Acts of State, 72 but not  against  those  Rulers  who  
acceded  to  India  and  became  citizens  of  India  [paras.  39,  41,  129,       136]. 70  
‘Provisions of the Constitution relating to any  su ch  treaty……..’  These  words,  in  the  
second  part  of  Art.  363(1),  refer  to  those  provisions  of  the  Constitution  which  have  a  dominant  
and immediate connection with a treaty or a covenant, and not any  provision which merely ‘refers’             
to such treaty or covenant (paras. 75-76, 134). 70 By this  reasoning,  the  majority  in  the  Privy  Purse 
Case 70 excluded disputes under Arts. 291 (paras. 75,  140) 70  and  366  (22)  [para.  137) 70  from  the  bar 
under  Art.  363,  and  held  that  the  only  provision  coming  within  the  mischief  of  the  second  part of 
363  (1)  was  Art.  362  [para.  141) 70 ,  relating  to  the  personal  privileges  of  a     Ruler. 
 
2. But  since  Art.  362  has  been  subsequently  rep ealed  (see  p.  115,  ante ),  the  second  part   
of  Art.  363(1)  has  now  become    otiose. 
3. Art. 363(1) refers only to provisions of the ‘Const itution’.  Hence,  if  any  statutory 
provisions has given any  personal  rights  to  the   Ruler  (e. g.,  s.  87B  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure 
the jurisdiction of the Courts to entertain any  di sputes  as  to  such  statutory  provision  will  n ot  be  
barred   by  Art.   363   [paras. 141-142]. 
4. The erstwhile Rulers have thus been brought to the same level as other citizens of India,   
subject  only  to  statutory  exceptions,  if    any. 
‘What has or has been continued in  operation  afte r  commencement.’  This  expression  
means  that  in  order  to  attract  the  bar  imposed  by  the  first  part  of  Art.  363       (1)— 
(a) The  treaty,  covenant  etc.  must  have  been  entered  into  before      26-1-50; 
(b) Such  treaty,  etc.  must  have  been  continued  in  operation  after  that  date  [para       226]. 70  
 
 
 
74a Virendra  v.  State  of   U.P.   (1955)   1   S.C.R.   415   (429). 
75 Lachman Dass V. State of Punjab,  A.  1963  S.C.  222  (231) .  
76 Pravir  v.   State  of  M.P.   A.  1961  S.C.  775      (777) . 
77 Amar   Singhji   v.   State   of   Rajasthan,   A.   1955   S.C.   504 (523). 
78 Cf.   Sivaram  v.   State  of  A.P.,   (1962)   2   S.C.R.   535   (538).  
79 Cf.  Appendices  XXXIV,   XXXVII,  XXXIX,  XL,  XLII  of  white  Paper  on        India. 

160   
 
It follows that  if  the  covenant  or  agreement  in  question  had  been  abrogated  or  superseded  
by  fresh  agreement 80   between  the  parties  prior  to  the  commencement   of  the  Constitution  so  that   
the superseded agreement did not exist  at  the  co mmencement  of  the  Constitution,  obviously,  no  
dispute can  possibly  arise  out  of  such  agreem ent  and,  accordingly,  the  question  of  applica tion  of  
the  present  Article  also  cannot   arise. 
It seems clear, however, that the Covenants entered  into between a Ruler of an Indian State 
and the Government of India cannot be modified or abrogated by any agreement made after the 
commencement of the  Constitution,  between  an  erstwhile  Ruler  and  the  Union  of  India,  because 
even in International Law, a party to a treaty cannot modify or abrogate it after having  lost  its 
international personality. The former Indian States have lost  their  sovereignty  and  the  Ruler of any 
such  former  Indian  State  cannot  now,  in  his  personal  capacity,  modify  or  abrogate   an  agreement 
or  Covenant  entered  into  by  him  or  his  predecessor  while  the  Indian  State  had  its      Sovereignty. 81  
While Art. 363 (1) postulates  the  continued  oper ation  of  the  treaties,  agreements  etc., 
entered into  or  executed  before  the  commenceme nt  of  the  Constitution  and  giving  rise  to  d isputes, 
it does not require, as a condition of its applicat ion, that such disputes should arise after  the 
commencement of the Constitution.  The  time  facto r  is  related  to  the  instruments  and  not  the 
disputes. In order that the bar under Art. 363 (1) is  to  apply,  such  instrument  should  have  bee n  
executed before the Constitution  came  into  force   and  has  to  be  in  operation  after  the  Cons titution, 
but  the  dispute  which  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  litigation  may  arise  before  or       after. 82  
Bar   to   interference   by Courts.  
I. While the Proviso to Art. 131 bars  the  original  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  
disputes  arising  out  of  such  treaties  and  ag reements,  Art.  363  bars  the  jurisdiction  of  all  Courts    
in  respect  of  all  proceedings    thereon. 82  
II. But when a plea of bar under Art. 363 is raised by the Government, the Court shall have         
the power to interpret Art. 363 and to give effect to  the  plea  only  if  it  is  satisfied  that  t he  dispute 
before  the  Court  falls  within  either  of  the  two  parts  of  Art.  363  (1)  [paras.  132,  142 ]. 70  
III. The bar imposed  by  Art.  363  (1)  is  not  thus  an  absolute  bar 83  but  only  a  limited  bar  
and does not take away the power of the Court to  d etermine  whether  the  President’s  action  
transgresses  the  limits  imposed  by  the  Constitution  [paras.  138,  142,       143]. 70  
IV. On the  other  hand,  the  Article  has  no  applic ation  unless  there  is  a  dispute  arising  out  
of any treaty, agreement or Instrument of Accession 84 etc.. or relating to any right or liability arising 
thereunder. 84 Where the jurisdiction of the Court is questioned u nder this Article, the Court has  to  
determine  whether  it  is  such  a    dispute. 83  
It  is,  however,  not  always  easy  to  determine   whether  a  particular  dispute  is  of  such  a 
nature. 
I. Disputes  arising  out  of  a  Covenant    etc.  
 
 
 
 
80 Thus, the Supplementary  Covenants  (at  pp.  248,  249,  339,  373  of the  White  Paper  on Indian  States)  modified  the 
original   Covenants   in   certain respects. 
81 In  cases  like  Ram  Dubey  v.   State  of  M.B.,   A.  1952  M.B.  57,   Pirthi  Singh  v.   State  of  Pepsu,  A.  1953  Pepsu  161,  the  
question  has  been  discussed  with  reference  to   some  stage  intervening  between  a  Merger  Cov enant  and  the  commencement          
of   the   Constitution  and   not   to   the   pos ition  after  the   commencement  of   the  Constit ution. 
82 State  of  Seraikella  v.  Union  of  India,  (1951)  S.C.R.  474  (490);  ef.  Virendra  v.   State   of   U.P.   (1955)   S.C.R.   415   (430). 
83 Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  to  the  contra ry  in  a  number  of  cases  prior  to  the  Privy  Purse  Case  have  thus  been 
impliedly  overruled  by  the  11  Judge  Bench  in   the  Privy  Purse  Case  A.  1971  S.C.  530  [paras.  132,  135,  142]. 
84 Kulinchandra   v.   Himatbhai,   (1960)   S.C.   [C.A.   307/59,   d.   8-12-60];   Pravin   Chandra   v.   State   of   M.P.,   A.   1961   S.C. 775. 

161   
 
1. Where a term in an Agreement or Covenant with the e x-Ruler of an Indian State is relied    
upon either to found a right or to defeat a liabili ty, there is a dispute arising out of such Agreemen t             
or   Covenant,  e.g.— 
(i) A suit for a declaration that a law passed by  Parl iament  or  a  State  Legislature  is  void  
owing  to  contravention  of  the  terms  of  an  I nstrument  of  Accession 85   or  a  Letter  of  Guarantee 86    or 
a Covenant  as  between  the  Government  of  India  and  the  Ruler  of  an  Indian  State,  is  a  s uit  which 
is  barred  by  Art.   363. 
(ii) Where the liability arising under an Act of an Indi an State  which  is  continuing  as  an  
existing law is sought to be got rid of by recourse   to  the  terms  of  the  Supplementary  Covenant  
executed by the Ruler concerned, it  is  a  dispute   arising  out  of  the  Covenant  and,  hence,  Ar t.  363  
will apply. 87  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85 Dalmia  Cement  Co.  v.   I.T.  Commr.,  A.  1958  S.C.      816. 
86 State  of  Seraikella  v.   Union  of  India,  (1951)  S.C.R.  474  (490);  ef.  Virendra  v.   State  of  U.P.,   (1955)  S.C.R.  415  (430);   
Umegh   Singh   v.   State   of   Bombay,   A.   1955   S.C. 540. 
87 Lachman   v.   State   of   Punjab,   A.   1963   S.C.   222 (231).  

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.  