PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 137
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
REHABILITATION OF J & K MIGRANTS

25
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
REHABILITATION OF J & K MIGRANTS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 13 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-265

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(v)
2. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE S UB-COMMITTEE .............................................................................. (vi)
3. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (vii-viii)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—10
5. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................. 1 1—13
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF M EETING OF S UB-COMMITTEE AND C OMMITTEE ......................... 15—24

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2008)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sanjay Raut
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri T.K. Hamza
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
21. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
22. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
23. Shri Sachin Pilot
24. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
26. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
27. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
*28. Ms. Agatha K. Sangma
@29. V acant
#30. V acant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(i)
* Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  1st December, 2008.
@ Consequent upon change in nomination as Member and appointment as the Chairman of DRPSC on Agriculture, Shri Mohan
Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  5th December, 2008.
# Consequent upon vacation of his seat in Lok Sabha as a result of his election to Legislative Assembly of Chhattisgarh,
Shri Ajit Jogi ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  26th December, 2008.

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2007)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
Δ2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
@6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
8. Shri Sanjay Raut
**9. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
$10. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
#18. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
*22. Shri Amitava Nandy
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok-Kumar Pradhan
(ii)
Δ Renominated to the Committee w.e.f. 14th May, 2008 on expiration of his Membership from Rajya Sabha on 9.4.2008.
@ Renominated to the Committee w.e.f. 14th May, 2008 on expiration of his Membership from Rajya Sabha on 2.4.2008.
** Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  14.5.2008.
$ Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  21.5.2008.
# Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13.6.2008.
* Nominated w.e.f.  12 December, 2007 vice Shri T.K. Hamza who was nominated to Standing Committee on Commerce.
Shri V . Narayanasamy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 6.4.2008 consequent upon his induction in the Union
Council of Ministers.
Shri N. Jothi ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 27.3.2008 consequent upon the resignation from the membership
of the Rajya Sabha.
Shri Raghunath Jha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 6.4.2008 consequent upon his induction in the Union
Council of Ministers.
Shri G. Karunakara Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 3.6.2008 consequent upon his induction in the
State Council of Ministers.

26. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
27. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
28. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
29. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
30. Shri Mohan Singh
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(iii)

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2006)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri N. Jothi
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri T.K Hamza
19. Shri Raghunath Jha
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Ajit Jogi
22. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
*27. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
(iv)
* Nominated w.e.f. 10th October, 2006 vice Shri Rahul Gandhi who was nominated to Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development.

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
(v)

Composition of Sub-Committee on
Civil Defence and Rehabilitation of Jammu and Kashmir Migrants
(Constituted on 13 April, 2007)
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia— Convenor
*2. Shri N. Jothi
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Sachin Pilot
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
(Re-constituted on 9 August, 2007)
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia— Convenor
2. Vacant
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Sachin Pilot
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
(Revised Composition on 26 May, 2008)
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia— Convenor
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
4. Shri Sachin Pilot
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
* Shri N. Jothi ceased to be a Member of the sub-Committee w.e.f.  27th March, 2008 consequent upon resignation from
the membership of the Rajya Sabha.
(vi)

(vii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirty-seventh Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs constituted a
Sub-Committee on Civil Defence and Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants of on 13th April, 2007 for
in-depth examination of the subject. The Sub-Committee was reconstituted on 9th August, 2007.
3. The Sub-Committee heard the official presentation of the representatives of the Ministry of
Home Affairs on 2nd August, 2007. The Secretary, Border Management gave a detailed account of
various schemes implemented by the Government for rehabilitation of J&K Migrants. The
Secretary, Border Management informed the Sub-Committee about the major initiatives taken for
rehabilitation of J&K Migrants like enhancement in cash relief to Kashmiri Migrants periodically;
payment of ex-gratia relief of Rs. One lakh to the kins of victims of militancy; initiatives to protect
and restrain the distress sales of properties of migrants left in the valley, by enacting J&K Migrants
Immovable Properties (Preservation, Protection and Rehabilitation of Distress Sales) Act, 1997 and
J&K Migrants (Stay of Proceedings) Act, 1997; restoration of temples in the valley, etc. The Sub-
Committee was informed that an inter-ministerial team was constituted to prepare a plan to
rehabilitate Kashmiri Migrants as announced by Prime Minister during his visit to J&K in
November, 2004. The inter -ministerial team recommended for construction of two-room tenements
at Jammu to accommodate migrants’ families living in various camps/Government/semi-Government
accommodation at Jammu.
4. The Sub-Committee thereafter decided to hear the representatives of Kashmiri Migrants and
also the organizations representing them on the subject. In pursuance thereof, the Sub-Committee
in its sitting held on 30 October heard the oral evidence of Shri C.L. Gadoo, a journalist and on
7th November, 2007, heard the representatives of All India Kashmiri Samaj, All States Kashmiri
Pandit Conference, Panun Kashmir, Kashmiri Samiti, All India Kashmiri Pandit Conference, Jammu
Kashmir Vichar Manch, Kashmir Sikh Migrants Forum, Kashmiri Pandit Sabha and Jammu and
Kashmir National Panthers Party.
5. The Sub-Committee while preparing its report relied on the following:—
(i) detailed background note furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) the official presentation of the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iii) oral-evidence of non-official witnesses;
(iv) replies to the queries of members raised during its sittings; and
(v) report of an Inter-ministerial team headed by Ms. Sushma Choudhury constituted
by the Prime Minister during his visit to Jammu and Kashmir in November, 2004,
to prepare a rehabilitation plan for Kashmiri migrants.
6. The Convenor of the Sub-Committee presented the report to the Chairperson of the DRPSC
on Home Affairs for its consideration and adoption.

7. The Committee in its sitting held on 10th February, 2009 considered and adopted the
present report.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
NEW D ELHI; Chairperson,
10 February, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(viii)

1
REPORT
JAMMU AND KASHMIR MIGRANTS—AN OVERVIEW
The disturbed condition existing in the Kashmir V alley in the 1990’s due to the onset of
militancy led to the exodus of Kashmiri Pandits, Sikhs, Muslims and Punjabi Hindus to the Jammu
province, Delhi and some States/Union Territories. It is estimated that more than 56,000 families
migrated out of the Valley.
1.1 The migration continued over the years, although in a trickle, even in respect of the people
who stayed back initially for variegated reasons, like economic considerations, old age or a sense
of security derived from clustered population and the support given by their neighborhoods.
However, the stray incidents of attacks by militants and the killing targeted at the minority
habitations gave a spurt to the migration.
1.2 According to the representatives of J&K Migrants, the primary cause for the migration of
Kashmiri Pandits and other Minorities from the valley in the 1990’s was “insecurity of life and
honour” due to the total collapse of the structure of governance and the anarchy that prevailed in
the face of pro-Pakistani movement led by some sections of the people with covert support from
Pakistan in terms of indoctrination, training, arms and trained manpower. The pattern and manner
of killing of politicians, officials and common people reflected the tactics of creating terror among
the minorities by making a public exhibition of brutalized killings to paralyze the structures of
authority.
1.3 With due regard to the magnitude of the problem of migration and the overarching objective
to sub serve socio-economic, educational and security considerations, the Union Ministry of Home
Affairs and the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir initiated a number of measures in the
wake of the migration to provide succor to the affected families and secure their temporary
rehabilitation. According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, all these measures in effect had been
backed and endorsed by the overall policy espousal for creating a positive security environment in
the Valley for facilitating the safe return of the Migrants.
2.0 RELIEF MEASURES UNDERTAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
2.1 The Sub-Committee initially obtained a status note on the relief and rehabilitation of J&K
Migrants from the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Sub-Committee, thereafter, heard the presentation
of the Secretary, Border Management (BM) and other officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs in
its sitting held on 2nd August, 2007. The Secretary, Border Management gave a detailed account
of various schemes implemented by the Government for rehabilitation of J&K Migrants. The relief
operations undertaken by the Government, as indicated in the status note and explained in the
official presentation, are given in the succeeding paragraphs:—
2.2 Major Initiatives
2.2.1 The Secretary (BM), Ministry of Home Affairs stated that cash relief to Kashmiri Migrants
was being paid at the rate of Rs.1,000/- per head per month since 2006, which was earlier revised
to that level seven times initially from Rs.250/-. It was also stated that ex-gratia relief of
Rs.1,00,000/- to victims of militancy and Rs.75,000/-, Rs.5,000/- and Rs.1,000/- for permanent
disability, grievous injury and minor injury, respectively, were being paid. It was further stated that
for facilitating employment, the Government was providing relaxation of upper age limit of

2
five years to all persons who had ordinarily been domiciled in the State of J&K between 1.1.1980
to 31.12.1989. This relaxation was extended up to 31.12.2007.
2.3 Educational Facilities being provided to Kashmiri Migrants:—
2.3.1 The Sub-Committee was informed that the following concessions were being extended to
the J&K Migrants on the educational front:
(i) Extension in date of admission by about 30 days;
(ii) Relaxation in cut-off percentage up to 10 per cent, subject to minimum eligibility
requirement;
(iii) Increase in intake capacity up to five per cent – course-wise;
(iv) Reservation of at least one seat in merit quota in technical/professional institutions;
(v) Waiving of domicile requirements; and
(vi) Facilitation of migration in second and subsequent years.
2.3.2 It was also stated that besides Delhi, the States where the seats had been reserved for
migrant students in professional institutions were Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh. The Secretary (BM), during his presentation before the
Sub-Committee, stated that the migrants were entitled to both the Jammu and Kashmir quota and
the quota for Jammu and Kashmir Migrants. The guidelines were issued by the Ministry of Human
Resource Development that at least one per cent of seats should be reserved. He, however, added
that all the State Governments had not done it and only some had taken the initiative and provided
them the quota.
2.4 Preservation and Protection of Migrants’ Properties:—
2.4.1 The Ministry informed the Sub-Committee that in order to preserve, protect and restrain the
distress sale of migrants’ properties left behind in the Valley, Government of Jammu & Kashmir
enacted two important pieces of legislation, namely, The J&K Migrants Immovable Property
(Preservation, Protection and Restraint of Distress Sales) Act, 1997 and The J&K Migrants (Stay
of Proceedings) Act, 1997. The salient features of these Acts are given as under—
2.5 The J&K Migrants Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint on
Distress Sales) Act, 1997
2.5.1 The Act provides that the immovable property of a migrant cannot be alienated without the
prior permission of Revenue and Relief Minister or such officer as may be authorized by him on
his behalf.
2.5.2 It has been provided that the District Magistrate shall take over possession of immovable
property of the migrants within 30 days from the commencement of this Act and it shall be the
duty of the District Magistrate to take all the steps necessary for preservation and protection of
such property and that he cannot hand over the property without express consent of the migrant
in writing.
2.5.3 The com petent authority has been authorized to take action for eviction of unauthorized
occupants and can enter upon any immovable property of any migrant and make or cause to be
made any survey, including measurement and do any other act for carrying out the purposes of
this Act. But, it has been provided that no such surveyor measurement shall be done otherwise than
on a written complaint by a migrant.

3
2.5.4 The Civil Courts have been barred to settle, decide or deal with any question or to
determine any matter arising under this Act.
2.6 The J&K Migrants (Stay of Proceedings) Act, 1997
2.6.1 It has been provided that all the proceedings pending or hereinafter filed against a migrant
for recovery of loan raised in the Kashmir Division or relating to immovable property situated in
the Kashmir Division shall remain stayed from the commencement of this Act till the Government
notified otherwise. Provided that nothing shall apply to a dispute relating to recovery of money or
immovable property inter se migrants.
2.6.2 The Secretary (BM), explaining about the houses vacated, abandoned by migrants due to
militancy, stated that some of them were under occupation of security forces for which rent was
being provided and some of them were under unauthorized occupation. In regard to protecting the
property under the J&K Migrants Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint on
Distress Sales) Act, 1997, the Secretary stated that under the Act, the immovable property of
migrants could not be alienated without the prior permission of the Revenue Officer nor the
property could be sold out. In regard to the properties under illegal occupation, he stated that the
Competent Authority had the power under the Act to take action for eviction of unauthorized
occupants. He further stated that when the Collector took possession of a house, he would do it
only for the safety of the house or the safe custody of the house. He would not be using the house
unlike the security forces.
2.6.3 The Secretary in the presentation also stated that efforts were being made to restore the
temples in the Valley affected by militancy. The following are the details of the restoration efforts:
(i) No. of temples prior to 1989 – 436
(ii) T emples intact – 266
(iii) T emples got damaged – 170
(iv) Temples renovated – 90
(v) Expenditure incurred – Rs.32.50 lakh
2.7 Improvement of Facilities in Migrant Camps
2.7.1 The Sub-Committee was informed that the living conditions in the Migrant Camps were
closely monitored by the Ministry to make improvements. It was also stated that the following
measures had been taken towards improvement of facilities in Migrant Camps:
2.8 Prime Minister’s Relief Package
2.8.1 The Prime Minister in 1996 had announced a special package of Rs.6.6 crore for
improvement of facilities in Jammu Camps. The amount was utilised on the following items:—
– construction of 800 one-room tenements;
– construction of Sulabh-type toilet complex – 19 Nos.;
– drainage scheme in five camps; and
– 10-room pre-fabricated school buildings – 3 Nos.
2.9 Funds released under Security-Related Expenditure (SRE) of MHA:—
2.9.1 It was also stated that an expenditure of about Rs.70.00 crore was incurred annually

4
towards providing cash assistance and rations to the migrants at Jammu. The total expenditure
incurred for providing cash relief and ration since 1990 was Rs.689.21 crore. The expenditure was
reimbursed to the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir by the Central Government under
Security-related Expenditure (SRE). The expenditure for providing relief to the migrants at Delhi
was borne by the Government of NCT of Delhi and was about Rs.20.00 crore annually. It was
also stated that in addition to cash relief and ration, the details of expenditure incurred since 1990
for providing infrastructural facilities in the migrant camps at Jammu were:
(in Rs. Crore)
(i) Civic amenities – Rs.16.50
(ii) Grant for camps/schools – Rs.59.20
(iii) Construction of one-room tenements – Rs.20.15
(iv) Improvement in infrastructure – Rs.7.24
T
OTAL: Rs.103.09
2.10 Construction of two-room tenements at Jammu
2.10.1 The Ministry informed the Sub-Committee that in accordance with the announcements of
the Prime Minister and recommendations of an Inter-Ministerial team constituted by the Prime
Minister’s Office in December, 2004, the State Government submitted a proposal involving an
expenditure of Rs.185.00 crore (approx.) for construction of two-room tenements at Jammu. As
per the proposal, 5242 two-room tenements were to be constructed to accommodate all the
Migrant families presently living in the camps and those living in Government/semi-Government
accommodation at Jammu in a period of three years.
The covered area of each set would be 473 sq. ft. as under:
One bedroom – 10' x 12' (with balcony)
One living room – 10' X 14'
One kitchen – 8'4" x 6'
One toilet - 8’x4’9"
2.10.2 It was further stated that construction of 1024 TRTs had started at three different locations,
viz., Muthi, Nagrota and Purkhoo Phase-IV and were at various stages of completion. As regards
the remaining 4218 TRTs, the State Government took a decision to set up a separate township with
all infrastructural facilities at Jagti Nagrota and invited bids from reputed constructors/firms/
builders as per Tender Notice issued on 14.3.2007. The Secretary, during the course of his
presentation, further stated that everyone was to be provided two-room tenements because the
living conditions were very pitiable. Therefore, the Government had approved the scheme of two-
room tenements. He also stated that 1,024 tenements were in the advanced stage of construction
and likely to be completed soon.
2.10.3 As indicated by the State Government, the infrastructural facilities/allied items of the work
had resultantly increased the cost. The total cost was estimated as Rs.270.00 crore.
2.11 Establishment of a Corpus Fund of Rs.5.00 Crore for Catering to Miscellaneous
Development Needs of the Migrants:—
2.11.1 The Sub-Committee was informed that the State Government of J&K had constituted an

5
Empowered Committee headed by the Chief Secretary for administration of a corpus of Rs.5.00
crore to be established for catering to miscellaneous development needs of the Migrants, viz.,
health, education, vocational skill building, library facilities, sports facilities, etc. Rs.4.50 crore to
be provided as Additional Central Assistance and Rs.0.50 crore to be met by the State Government.
2.12 Issues/Problems of Migrants in Delhi:—
2.12.1 The Sub-Committee was informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs had constituted a
Standing Committee to review issues concerning Kashmiri Migrants on a quarterly basis. Further
clarifying, the Secretary informed the Sub-Committee that the Standing Committee was set up
under the Chief Secretary, Jammu and Kashmir for monitoring the progress of relief and
rehabilitation work only for the migrants residing in Delhi.
2.13 Inter-Ministerial Team:—
2.13.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Sub-Committee that as per the announcement
made by the Prime Minister during his visit to J&K in November, 2004, an Inter-Ministerial team
was constituted to prepare a rehabilitation plan for Kashmiri Migrants, particularly to cover their
development needs, especially those related to the living conditions in the camps, the means of
livelihood, education, health and the security of women. The important recommendations made by
the Inter-Ministerial Team were as under:—
❍ Construction of two-room tenements at Jammu to accommodate migrant families
living in camps/Government/semi-Government accommodations at Jammu;
❍ Creation of a corpus fund of Rs.5.00 crore for catering to miscellaneous
development needs of the migrants;
❍ Creation of job opportunities;
❍ Restoration and repair of temples/shrines;
❍ Establishment of self-help women’s groups;
❍ Entrepreneurial development programmes;
❍ Setting up of 1000 cottage/small-scale industries; and
❍ Provision of soft loans and other confidence-building measures.
2.14 Action Taken regarding Return of Kashmiri Migrants:—
2.14.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Sub-Committee that in order to enable safe and
honourable return of migrants to their native places in the Valley, the State Government constituted
an Apex Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Revenue, Relief and Rehabilitation Minister to
look into all the aspects of this problem and suggest solutions. The Secretary, (BM), Ministry of
Home Af fairs during his presentation before the Sub-Committee stated that the ultimate intention of
the Government was that the migrants should go back to the valley, to their respective places, and
re-settle there.
2.14.2 The M inistry, in their written note further stated that the Sub-Committee constituted under
the Apex Level Committee finalized an Action Plan for the return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri
Migrants in October, 2000 involving a total amount of Rs.2589.73 crore to enable them to return
to the Valley. The Action Plan envisaged return of migrants in phases. The Cabinet Committee on
Security in its meeting held in May, 2001 gave in-principle approval to the pilot project of
rehabilitating 200 families of Migrant Kashmiri Pandits at Srinagar under the Action Plan. The State

6
Government identified 166 houses forming 15 clusters in Srinagar and Budgam Districts, which
were considered safe for the return of the owners of these houses. The list of these clusters was
published in the newspapers and steps were taken to identify the families and find their willingness
to return to their homes. It was further stated that about 50 families who were registered with the
Relief Organisation, Jammu were contacted personally to give their consent for return to the Valley
on the basis of the package announced by the Government. Interaction meetings with some of
these families were also held but none of the families agreed to return to the Valley. As a result,
the Action Plan could not be implemented by the State Government.
2.14.3 The Ministry also informed the Sub-Committee that as indicated by the State Government,
the shrines in Mattan and Kheer Bhavani had been proposed to be developed into two model
clusters containing temporary shelters for Kashmiri Migrants, where the Kashmiri Migrants
displaced from these places could be settled temporarily, till such time they can repair their existing
residential houses. The Ministry of Finance provided a grant of Rs.10 crore to the State
Government in December, 2002 for the reconstruction/renovation of the houses and shrines at
Kheer Bhavani and Mattan.
2.14.4 The Sub-Committee was further informed that the Government of India also approved the
proposal for the return of the Kashmiri Migrants to the Valley, on an experimental basis.
2.15 Non utilisation of allocated amount
2.15.1 The Committee was given to understand that during 2005-06, Rs.153.11 crore was
allocated at BE stage, which was reduced to Rs.129.30 crore and the actual amount spent was
Rs.108.73 crore. In 2006-07 a provision of Rs.120 crore was kept at BE for rehabilitation schemes
and relief measures for Kashmiri Migrants and this amount had been retained in BE 2007-08 in spite
of projection of Rs. 130 crore for the same year. The officials of Ministry of Home Affairs during
their presentation stated that the amount of Rs.120 crore had been retained in BE 2007-08 due to
receipt of fewer claims for reimbursement from the State Government of J&K.
2.15.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated before the Committee that as it was a reimbursement
scheme, as soon as proposals for rehabilitation are received from the State Government, the grants
are provided accordingly. The Ministry further stated that the schemes were not forthcoming from
the State of J&K. As a result of this, though migrants were living in sub-human conditions in
rehabilitation camps, funds allocated for that purpose were not utilised fully. In view of this, the
Standing Committee on Home Affairs in its 119th Report presented to the Parliament in 2006, had
recommended that Government should impress upon the J&K Government to come forward with
schemes in time and implement them without delay. The Committee in its 126th Report presented
to the Parliament in 2007 once again strongly urged upon the Ministry to further impress upon the
J&K Government about the necessity of sending schemes expeditiously and implement them in time
so that all the J&K Migrants are rehabilitated without further delay. The Ministry in its Action
Taken Notes on the recommendation made in the 126th Report presented on 26th April, 2007,
stated as under:
“The concern expressed by the Parliamentary Committee has been noted and
conveyed to the State Government through letters dated June 8, 2006, October 5, 2006
followed by a demi official letter dated January 19, 2007 requesting State Government to
make efforts to utilize the funds provided for in the Budget under the head ‘SRE Relief and
Rehabilitation’. The issue was also discussed with the State Government officials in the SRE
Standing Committee meeting held on 25th July, 2007. The State Government was requested
to take necessary steps to expedite the expenditure under this Head.
The relief and rehabilitation schemes of the Ministry are meant for Kashmiri
Migrants, Border Migrants, ex-gratia  payment to the next of kin of security forces

7
personnel and civilians killed in terrorist violence and compensation for damaged civilian
property and incentives for surrendered militants.
The State Government has also made efforts to utilize the funds available under
this head. Since the State Government could not utilize the allocated amount, a sum of
Rs. 12 crore remained unspent last year under the sub-head for cash relief to Kashmiri
Migrants. The arrears of enhancement of the cash relief w.e.f. 1.7.2006 have been disbursed
at the revised rates by the State Government. There was a saving of Rs.10.50 crore on
ex-gratia and surrender of militants. Expenditure on this count is incident driven. The State
Government could not utilize the major portion of the allocated fund for rehabilitation of
Border Migrants in view of delay in acquiring land due to a stay granted by the Court which
led to a saving of Rs.27 crore on this account. It has now been informed by the State
Government that the stay granted by the Court has since been vacated and this will facilitate
the implementation of the rehabilitation scheme for the Border Migrants resulting in the
better utilization of funds this year.
To further facilitate the State Government in improving their fiscal management, a
special audit of SRE related expenditure has been undertaken. The ongoing scheme for
return of Kashmiri Migrants, such as two-room flats at Budgam are being expedited for
which Rs.18 crore has been released so far. The State Government has assured that this
scheme would be completed by November, 2007. The Ministry is conducting regular
reviews for monitoring the expenditure under SRE.”
The Committee, while considering the Demands for Grants for 2008-09, noted that
the actual expenditure during 2006-07 was only Rs.69.31 crores as against the allocation
of Rs.120 crores. The Committee also noted that though Rs.120 crores was kept for
2007-08 (BE), Rs.100 crore only was kept at RE 2007-08. It was also noted by the
Committee that since enough claims were not received from the Government of Jammu &
Kashmir, in the BE 2008-09 Rs. 110.00 crore only was kept.
3.0 VIEWS OF REPRESENTATIVES OF J&K MIGRANTS
3.1 The Sub-Committee decided to hear Kashmiri Migrants and also the organizations
representing them on the subject. In pursuance thereof, it heard Shri. C.L. Gadoo a journalist and
also the representatives of All India Kashmiri Samaj, All States Kashmiri Pandit Conference, Panun
Kashmir, Kashmiri Samiti, All India Kashmiri Pandit Conference, Jammu Kashmir Vichar Manch,
Kashmir Sikh Migrants Forum, Kashmiri Pandit Sabha and Jammu and Kashmir National Panthers
Party, in its sittings held on 30 October and 7 November, 2007.
3.2 The issues raised and demands made by the witnesses before the Sub-Committee are mainly
as under:—
(i) The migration of Kashmiri Pandits and other minorities from the Valley in the first
half of 1990 took place due to “insecurity of life and honour” felt by them. This was
because of the total collapse of the structure of governance and the anarchy that
prevailed in the face of pro-Pakistani movement led by some sections of the people.
This was done with the covert support from Pakistan through indoctrination,
training, arms and trained manpower.
(ii) The tactics of creating terror among the minorities by making a public exhibition of
brutalized killings to paralyze the structures of authority is reflected in the manner
and pattern in which politicians, officials and common people are killed.
(iii) There is apathy on the part of the Government in implementing rehabilitation
programmes for J&K Migrants and also in implementing directions of various High
Courts and the Supreme Court.

8
(iv) The condition of about 4000 Kashmiri Pandits living in the Kashmir Valley is pathetic.
Technically they are not migrants but their condition is worse than that of the
migrants.
(v) There should be special budgetary provision for Kashmiri Pandits left behind in the
valley for fulfilling genuine needs of housing, employment/self employment and
general living.
(vi) A White Paper on causes of sudden exodus of cent percent of a peace loving
minority Kashmiri Pandit community from their homes in 4-5 months from January
till May, 1990 should be issued by MHA, Government of India.
(vii) A Commission of Inquiry should be set up to look into all aspects relating to the
exodus, under the Chairmanship of a Supreme Court Judge.
(viii) There should be a constitutionally guaranteed rehabilitation plan (social, political and
economic) for displaced Kashmiri Pandits at their present dwellings, till their eventual
return to the valley.
(ix) Even though the National Human Rights Commission was of the view that the
conditions at the time of the mass exodus were akin to genocide but it did not
actually treat the condition as such, as the number of deaths which took place was
only 2000. The NHRC, did not even consider declaring the situation as “ethnic
cleansing”, whereas it is public knowledge that Kashmiri Migrants were targetted
because of their religion.
(x) Kashmiri Pandits may be declared as “Internally Displaced Persons’ as per the
guiding principles on Internally Displaced Persons adopted by office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR). The Government of India should
announce a rehabilitation package for them which fully addresses their internal
displacement.
(xi) Even though 2000 persons were killed during the exodus, not even a single person
responsible for the massacre has been convicted; not a single case has been
registered; cases were not investigated; FIRs were not lodged and no arrests were
made.
(xii) The investigation of all the cases of massacre and murder of Kashmiri Pandits be
made through CBI and trial thereof conducted through Special Courts set up for the
purpose. The accused be tried outside Kashmir Valley.
(xiii) Simultaneously, there should be grant of a liberal compensation package with interest,
to kith and kin of those killed in terrorist violence or those handicapped by injuries.
(xiv) An apex committee on relief under the Chairmanship of the Revenue Minister of the
J&K, had assured that within a period of three months, all encroachments would be
got vacated and the details of the Kashmiri Pandits’ properties, which had been taken
over by the Divisional Commissioner of each District, would be displayed on the
internet. However, not even one of those properties has been vacated till now.
(xv) There should be a Custodian of Kashmiri Pandits’ properties appointed by the
Department of Kashmir Affairs in the Ministry of Home Affairs.
(xvi) All houses of Kashmiri Pandits lying in dilapidated condition should be rebuilt by
Government or a liberal grant be offered to owners of the properties to rebuild them.

9
Further, all encroachments should be got vacated immediately by the State
Government. A report on the present status of the ownership of the properties in
respect of all the cases of encroachments should also be made available by the State
Government.
(xvii) The Government should declare all the properties, movable and immovable, sold by
the displaced persons after 1989-90 as “Distress Sales” and in consequence declare
the sales as null and void. As the District Collectors of respective districts are duty-
bound to protect these properties, they must ensure restoration of the properties
back to the respective Kashmiri Pandits who were the recorded owners. Security
Forces occupying the properties of Kashmiri Pandits may also be evicted
immediately.
(xviii) There should be a blanket ban on the acquisition of the properties of Kashmiri
Pandits by the State Government. The Jammu and Kashmir Migrant Immovable
Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint on Distressed Sales) Act, 1997
should be implemented in toto. It can act as a strong confidence building measure
for the community to return.
(xix) Either Kashmiri Pandits may be included within the purview of National Commission
for Minorities or a Separate National Commission for Kashmiri Pandits be set up.
(xx) A separate autonomous body for restitution and maintenance of temples destroyed
and desecrated after 1989-90 should be appointed. The Government should ensure
immediate passage of the Temples and Shrines Bill which is pending with the State
Government.
(xxi) Any amount which the Central Government allocates to the State Government is
placed under the composite head called “Security Related Expenditure (SRE)”. It is
lumpsum expenditure and would be difficult to find out how much has been spent
and what has not been. Central and State Governments, therefore, should earmark
corresponding amount in the budgetary allocation, exclusively for Kashmiri Pandits.
(xxii) Recommendations of the high powered inter-ministerial team appointed by Prime
Minister, regarding medical fund, immediate employment of 1000 persons and
construction of two room flats at existing places of dwelling in Jammu based camps
should be implemented. State Government should be advised to give a time-frame for
implementing the recommendations.
(xxiii) Central and State Government of Jammu & Kashmir should provide 10% reservation
for Kashmiri Pandits in recruitment to all jobs in or under the State Government, its
bodies and PSU’s as also the Central Government, its bodies and PSUs in the
Kashmir Region of the State. The process can start with recently announced 60,000
jobs proposed to be created by State Government in next six months.
(xxiv) In order to instil in Kashmiri Pandits a sense of belongingness to the State, the
Government of India and the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir should induct
prominent Kashmiri Pandit leaders in Union and State Cabinets.
(xxv) A mechanism should be evolved for enrolment of all migrant Kashmiri Hindus as
voters and provide reserved seats according to their numerical strength in the State
legislative bodies. The Government should also provide all displaced pandits their
constitutional rights to vote for the candidate of their choice for which a system on
the pattern of “constituencies in exile” may be created.

10
(xxvi) Kashmiri Pandits should be included in all multi pronged deliberations aimed at
restoring peace in the valley and facilitation of their return to their homes.
(xxvii) There are more than 2200 families of the Jammu Migrants who have not been
provided any relief. Because of poverty and hunger, several parents mortgaged their
children to ensure survival of the rest of the families.
(xxviii) The High Court of Jammu and Kashmir directed the State of J&K and Central
Government to provide relief to the Jammu Migrants at par with the Kashmiri
Migrants which were never implemented by any of the Governments. The Supreme
Court of India on July 12, 2006, on the appeal by the State Government, directed
that the Relief Commissioner may see whether they (Jammu Migrants) have been
provided with all relief measures to which they are entitled, as per the policy. The
Supreme Court also directed that any arrears to be paid to the migrants shall be
made available to them at the earliest. But no steps have been taken to provide relief
to the migrants. Immediate steps may be taken to implement the direction of
Supreme Court.
(xxix) The Sub-Committee should visit Jammu and see the appalling condition of the
migrants living in camps.

11
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMONDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
4.1 The Committee is moved by the pitiable condition of the migrants. Over the years
the conditions have only worsened as families have grown and there has been no addition
to their resources. The unhygienic environment in which migrants live is extremely
deplorable. The Committee is, therefore, of the strong view that the Government should
give a serious thought to the problems of Kashmiri displaced person and improve their
living conditions.
4.2 The Committee also expresses its deep concern over the pathetic condition of about
4000 Kashmiri Pandits living in the Kashmir Valley. The Committee feels that there should
be special budgetary provision for Kashmiri Pandits left behind in the valley for fulfilling
genuine needs of housing, employment/self employment and improving living conditions.
4.3 The Committee notes with concern that in the absence of adequate and
comprehensive policy for rehabilitation, the Kashmiri displaced persons are reportedly being
compelled to live in shanty-like camps set up in places like Udhampur, Nagrota, Jammu and
Delhi. The displaced persons had left behind their properties, household goods, business
establishments, agricultural land and other means of livelihood and continuing to lead their
lives in scarcity and insecurity. Neither the Central Government nor the State Government
has adopted a holistic approach to tackle the problems being faced by the displaced persons.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be clear directions by Central
Government to all the State Governments and Union Territories to provide relief and
rehabilitation on a uniform and holistic basis to Kashmiri Displaced Persons living in those
States and UTs. The Committee also feels that all State Governments should provide land
to them for construction of houses under group housing schemes and for construction of
cultural centres. To the extent possible, registration charges and stamp duty should be
waived as per a uniform policy throughout India.
4.4 The Committee is of the view that recommendations of the high powered inter-
ministerial team appointed by Prime Minister, regarding medical fund, immediate
employment of 1000 persons and construction of two room flats at existing places of
dwelling in Jammu based camps should be implemented without further delay.
4.5 The Committee feels that the Displaced Persons living out side the camps need
enhanced relief commensurating with the cost of living index and to countervail the burden
of rent payments and, therefore, desires that the Government should take appropriate steps
in that direction immediately. The Committee also desires that the Government should
implement the recommendations of the Sushma Chodhury Committee Report on Kashmiri
Displaced Person residing outside the camps for improving their condition of living.
4.6 The Committee feels that the Displaced Persons should be encouraged to undertake
self employment and micro and small scale industries. For this they require loans from the
banks. The Committee recommends that the Government should provide the Kashmiri
displaced persons the facilities of seeking soft loans from the banks to enable them to take
up self-employment projects for earning their livelihood.
4.7 The Committee understands that the purpose of monthly allowance given to Kashmiri
Displaced Persons is to ensure that difficulties and hardships faced by them are minimized
11

12
and the needy families are provided with a reasonable quantum of sustenance and support.
Keeping in view the requirement for a decent living and the expenditure needed to be
incurred, the Committee recommends that the Government should consider increasing the
monthly sustenance allowance from Rs.1000 per month per head to a reasonable amount
commensurate to the current cost of living.
4.8 The Committee strongly feels that the Government of Jammu and Kashmir and the
Central Government should take the matter of the health care of Kashmiri Pandits with
utmost seriousness and sanction them a reasonably enhanced medical allowance so that they
do not die of any ailments due to lack of medical attention. It would be appreciated if the
Government also make a provision for providing insurance coverage to Kashmiri Displaced
Persons who are leading a miserable life and many of them suffering from ailments.
4.9 The Committee is of the view that given the complexity of the situation, confidence-
building measures among the displaced persons are necessary which needs utmost attention
on the part of the Government.
4.10 The Committee expresses its serious concern about the criminal intent of vested
interests to alter the demography in the State of J&K by not only forcibly ousting the
minorities out of the State but also by changing the property rights in the revenue records,
so that the migrants are left with no stake to return back to the valley. The Committee
strongly feels that appropriate and effective action is required to safeguard the right to
properties of the Kashmiri Pandits who have been compelled to fled the state their homes
and hearths for fear of their lives and dignity.
4.11 The Committee was given to understand that an Apex Committee on Relief under
the Chairmanship of the Revenue Minister of the J&K, had assured that within a period
of three months, all encroachments would be got vacated and the details of the Kashmiri
Pandits’ properties, which had been taken over by the Divisional Commissioner of each
District, would be posted on the internet. However, no action appears to have been taken
on this front. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the authorities should
act forthwith with all seriousness, to remove the encroachments and instill the much needed
confidence in the migrants by undertaking suitable action in this regard in a time bound
manner.
4.12 The Committee recommends that all houses of Kashmiri Pandits lying in dilapidated
condition should be rebuilt by Government or a liberal grant be offered to owners of the
properties to rebuild them.
4.13 The Committee is also of the opinion that the Government should explore the
possibility of declaring all the properties, movable and immovable, sold by the displaced
persons after 1989-90, as “Distress Sales” and declare the sales as null and void and
accordingly restore possession of the properties back to the respective Kashmiri Pandits who
were the recorded owners through the custodian of properties duly constituted.
4.14 The Committee strongly feels that there should be a blanket ban on the acquisition
of the properties of Kashmiri Pandits by the State Government. The Jammu and Kashmir
Migrant Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint on Distressed Sales)
Act, 1997 should be implemented in letter and spirit.
4.15 The Committee is of the considered view that the word ‘migrant’ used in the context
of the Kashmiri Displaced Persons is not an appropriate expression because the affected
persons had been forced to give up their homes and hearths against their own will due to
the mayhem caused by the militants. The Committee is also of the view that those persons

13
cannot wait endlessly for normalcy to return to the valley and there is no harm if some
such people prefer to settle outside the valley for the sake of their lives and livelihood. The
Committee, therefore, desires that the Government should consider this aspect and
announce suitable and appropriate policy measures.
4.16 With the displacement of Kashmiri Pandits from the Valley, they not only lost their
homes but also means of livelihood which aggravated their agonies and miseries. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs to explore all avenues for
providing employment to them under the package announced by Prime Minister in 2004
with a time-bound programme.
4.17 The Committee was given to understand that the direction of the High Court of
Jammu and Kashmir to provide relief to the Jammu Migrants at par with the Kashmiri
Migrants has not been implemented either by the Central or State Governments. The
Committee also notes the order dated July 12, 2006 of the Supreme Court that the Relief
Commissioner may ensure whether Jammu Migrants were provided with all relief measures
to which they were entitled as per the policy and any arrears to be paid to the migrants
should be made available to them at the earliest. The Committee expresses its anguish that
no step have been taken to provide relief to the Jammu Migrants. The Committee
recommends that immediate steps may be taken to implement the directions of the
Supreme Court.
4.18 The services of Kashmiri Displaced Persons who have been appointed as Teachers on
ad hoc basis in MCD and Government of NCT of Delhi Schools, should be regularized. The
Committee was given to understand that there are cases where Kashmiri teachers have
been working on contract for the last thirteen years. The Committee is of the view that all
such cases should also be regularized as soon as possible.
4.19 The Committee recommends to the Government to examine the demand made by the
Kashmiri Displaced Persons for providing constitutionally guaranteed schemes for their
social, political and economic upliftment and come out with appropriate measures.
4.20 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the actual expenditure on
account of implementation of rehabilitation programmes for J&K displaced persons during
2006-07 was only Rs. 69.31 crore as against the allocation of Rs. 120 crore and against
Rs. 120 crore kept for 2007-08 in BE, only Rs. 100 crore was provided at RE 2007-08. The
Committee once again took serious note that as enough claims were not received from the
Government of Jammu & Kashmir, only Rs. 110.00 crore was kept in the BE 2008-09. The
Committee in its successive Reports, i.e. 119th, 126th and 130th Reports, urged upon the
Ministry to impress upon the J&K Government about the necessity of sending schemes
expeditiously and implement them in time so that all the J&K Displaced Persons are
rehabilitated without further delay. Inspite of those recommendations, it is unfortunate that
the Government of J&K has not taken requisite action.
4.21 At the same time, the role and responsibility of the Ministry of Home Affairs do not
end by merely requesting and advising the State Government. It has to play a proactive role
in the matter and vigorously pursue with the Government of J&K at the highest level so
as to convince the latter the need for formulating rehabilitation schemes and sending them
on time to the Central Government for further action.

MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 2 August, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia – Convenor
2. Shri N. Jothi
3. Shri Sachin Pilot
4. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri U.N. Panjiar, Secretary (BM)
2. Shri O. Ravi, Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Mitali Sen Gavai, Joint Secretary
2. The Convenor welcomed the Members to the first meeting of the Sub-Committee on Civil
Defence and Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants and informed that the Secretary, Border Management
would make a presentation on the subject. Then, he welcomed the Secretary, Border Management
along with his colleagues and invited them to make a detailed presentation on the projects
undertaken and the targets fixed and achievements made so far in that direction.
3. The Secretary, Border Management made a powerpoint presentation on the Rehabilitation of
J&K Migrants.
4. The Convenor then sought clarifications about the Government's policy in regard to
settlement of J&K migrants as to whether the Government wanted to settle them in Jammu or send
them back to the valley after creating peaceful environment and about the implementation of
J&K quota in the admissions to Engineering colleges, Medical colleges and other institutions.
5. The Secretary, Border Management replied that the intention of the Government was to
create a peaceful environment in the valley and send the migrants back. Two-room tenements have
been provided to them till they return. On the issue of J&K quota, he informed that the migrants
were entitled for two type of quotas: one was J&K quota and the other was quota for J&K
migrants. He further informed that the HRD Ministry had issued a guideline to reserve one per cent
17

18
seats at this quota. He however, admitted that all the State Governments were not following the
guidelines and assured the sub-Committee to provide a list of persons who availed of the facility.
6. One Member expressed his dissatisfaction over the work done by the Ministry and said that
the J&K Migrants residing in Delhi were not satisfied with the work done by the Government. He
also wanted to know whether the total amount of Rs. 804 crore as mentioned in the presentation,
was spent only in Jammu or elsewhere also.
7. The Secretary, Border Management replied that the Rs. 804 crore was provided only for
the migrants residing in Jammu. He conceded that there was no guideline regarding uniformity in
all the State Governments’ expenditure on J&K migrants. He, however, expressed satisfaction over
the work done by the Government for rehabilitation of J&K migrants.
8. The Convenor expressed serious concern over under-utilization of funds by the Home
Ministry which were allocated for J&K migrants.
9. One member expressed his concern over the illegal occupation of the abandoned houses of
the migrants. He also wanted to know about the situation in Kargil, where the migrants (who
migrated during Kargil war) were not willing to return.
10. The Secretary, Border Management replied to the queries raised by the Convenor and other
Members and assured to provide the relevant information on various issues sought by the sub-
Committee at the earliest.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 4.16 
P.M.

19
II
SECOND MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 30th October, 2007 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia — Convenor
2. Shri N. Jothi
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Sachin Pilot
4. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
SECRETARIAT
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Shri C.L. Gadoo, Individual Witness
Shri Upendra Sood, Individual Witness
2. The Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised them the agenda
for the day. He also extended a welcome to Shri C.L. Gadoo and Shri Upendra Sood and asked
the former to express his views on the problems being faced by Kashmiri Pandits in the wake of
mass exodus due to the disturbed condition prevailing in the Kashmir valley in the 1990s. The
Convenor asked the witnesses to be precise and succinct in his presentation.
3. Shri C.L. Gadoo informed the Sub-Committee that despite part of Jammu and Kashmir the
pandit community in Kashmir suffered the most and got very little share in the development
programmes/projects started by the Central Government for Kashmir. He further informed the
Committee that young Kashmiri Pandits were facing severe unemployment and various Central
Government agencies and Departments like the Railways, Telecommunications, State Bank of India,
Post and Telegraphs etc. had recruited a lot of people in Kashmir but the Kashmiri Pandit youths
remained shunted out of development process.
4. Shri C.L. Gadoo further stated that the Pandit Community in Kashmir was living in a semi-
humane condition as diseases were rampant in the community resulting in high death rate and the
fertility rate went down. He expressed his apprehension that there was an attempt to change the
demographic profile of the states by deleting names of Kashmir pandits from the voting list.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 3.15 
P.M.
19

20
III
THIRD MEETING
The Sub-Committee met at 12.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 7th November, 2007 in Main
Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri N. Jothi
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Sachin Pilot
4. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
(a) All State Kashmiri Pandit Conference
(i) Shri A.N. Vaishnavi
(ii) Shri H.L. Chatta
(b) Panun Kashmir Movement and Panun Kashmir
(i) Shri Ashwani Kumar Chrango
(ii) Shri Kundan Kashmiri
(c) All India Kashmiri Samaj
(i) Shri M.K. Kaw, President
(ii) Shri H.L. Wangroo, Vice President
(iii) Shri T.N. Khosa, Vice President
(iv) Shri Rajinder
(v) Shri Shibam Dudha
(d) Kashmiri Samiti, Delhi
Shri L.N. Dhar
(e) All India Kashmiri Pandit Conference
Shri H.N. Jattu
20

21
(f) Jammu Kashmir Vichar Manch
(i) Shri T.N. Razdan, National President
(ii) Shri Ajay Bharti, General Secretary
(g) Kashmir Sikh Migrants/Displaced Forum
(i) Sardar Harmohinder Singh, General Secretary
(ii) Sardar K.C. Singh Mehta
(iii) Sardar Prem Singh
(h) Kashmiri Pandit Sabha
Shri T.N. Kosha, President
(i) Jammu and Kashmir National Panthers Party
(i) Prof. Bhim Singh, Chairman-JKNPP
(ii) Ms. Anita Thakur, General Secretary-JKNPP
(iii) Shri H.C. Jhalmeria, Advocate
(iv) Shri P .K. Ganjoo, Sr. Journalist
(v) Shri Lal Singh, President, Talwara Migrants Action Committee
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the representatives of the above mentioned
organizations and asked them to make their presentations.
3. Shri M.K. Kaw, President, All India Kashmiri Samaj informed the Sub-Committee that as a
result of a sudden and mass exodus of kashmiri pandits, the number of kashmiri pandits in the
valley has reduced to four thousand from seven lakhs. He requested the Sub-Committee to make
recommendations specifically for those who have been left behind in the valley so that their
problems pertaining to housing, employment, self-employment and general living conditions and
safety could be addressed. He further stated that till date no High Court Judge or a Commission
of inquiry was appointed to look into the matter relating to the exodus of Kashmiri Pandits by the
Government of India.
4. The President, All India Kashmiri Samaj further informed the Committee that National
Human Rights Commission declared the conditions prevailing in the valley were akin to genocide.
He stressed the need for the constitutionally-guaranteed Rehabilitation Plan for the displaced
Kashmiri Pandits at their present places of living till they eventually return to the valley. He also
emphasized for need for creation of Special Education Fund for providing scholarship towards of
Pandits who cannot afford education.
5. Shri M.K. Kaw brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee that 2000 people were killed
before and after the exodus but not a single has been registered against the perpetrators of the
crime. He also informed the sub-Committee about the encroachment of Kashmiri Pandits’ properties
and suggested that custodian of such properties should be appointed under the aegis of the Ministry
of Home Affairs. He also suggested that the following steps could be taken to address the
grievances of the Kashmir Pandits:—
(i) Ban on acquisition of Pandits' properties and declaring all sales of such properties
after 1989-90 as distress sales.
(ii) 10% reservation for Kashmiri Migrants in Central and State Governments.
(iii) Constitution of a separate National Commission for Kashmiri Pandits.
(iv) Restitution and maintenance of temples desecrated and destroyed after 1989-90.

22
6. Shri Kundan Kashmiri, the representative of Panun Kashmir Movement and Panun Kashmir
suggested that constituencies in exile should be created for Pandits so that unwarranted changes
could not be made in the demographic situation of the valley. When a Member objected to the use
of the word Migrant for Kashmiri Pandits, Shri Ashwani Kumar Chrango, another representative of
Panun Kashmir Movement and Panun Kashmir was of the view that the words like ‘displaced
persons’ or ‘refugees’ should be used instead of calling them as ‘migrants’.
7. The Convenor, thereafter, thanked the representatives who made the presentations and told
them the Sub-Committee will also hear the Chief Secretary of Jammu and Kashmir and Government
of India before submitting its report.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 2.30 
P.M.

23
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 10 February, 2009, in Room No. 074,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Sanjay Raut
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them that Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted extension of time to it for presenting its Report on the Land
Ports Authority of India Bill, 2008 upto 31st March, 2009.
3.1 The Committee, then, took up for consideration following draft Reports:—
(i) 137th Report on the Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants;
(ii) 138th Report on the Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008; and
(iii) 139th Report on the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007.
3.2 A Member of the Committee suggested some changes in the draft 138th Report which were
briefly discussed. The Committee adopted the draft report with some modifications in paras 3.4.2
and 3.10.2.
3.3 The Committee adopted draft 137th and 139th Reports without any change.
23

24
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports in both Houses of Parliament on
13th February 2009. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence, Shri S.S.
Ahluwalia, Member, Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, Member
Rajya Sabha, to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Biren
Singh Engti, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence, Shri Baju Ban Riyan, Member, Lok Sabha,
to lay the Reports on the Table of that House.
5. The Chairperson put on record the invaluable contribution made by the Convenor of the
erstwhile Sub-Committee on Civil Defence and Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants, Shri S.S. Ahluwalia,
in the drafting of the 137th Report. She also thanked other Members of the Committee for their
co-operation and active participation in completing the examination of the Bills within a short period
of time and finalizing the reports thereon. On behalf of the Committee, she also placed on record
her deep sense of appreciation for the excellent work done by the Secretariat while assisting it.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.