 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
254 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT 
CYBER CRIME - RAMIFICATIONS , PROTECTION AND PREVENTION  
 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  20TH AUGUST, 2025) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 20TH AUGUST, 2025) 
 
 

 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
CYBERCRIME -RAMIFICATIONS , PROTECTION AND PREVENTION  
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 20TH AUGUST, 2025) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 20THAUGUST, 2025) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                (i) 
2.  PREFACE (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iii) – (vii) 
4.  REPORT      1-94 
 CHAPTER - I  
 Background 
 
1-6 
 CHAPTER - II 
 Ramifications of Cybercrime 
 
7-15 
 CHAPTER - III 
 Existing Protection Mechanisms and Role of Key Institutions 
 
16-64 
 CHAPTER - IV 
 Prevention Strategies 
 
65-94 
5.  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE – 
AT A GLANCE 
 
95-110 
 
 
6.  NOTE OF DISSENT        111-126 
7.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE             127- 162

 
 
(i) 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
1. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Haris Beeran 
3. Shri Samik Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Ajay Makan 
5. Shri Derek O'Brien 
6. Shri Nabam Rebia 
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
8. Shri Kapil Sibal 
9. Shri G.K.Vasan 
10. Shri Sanjay Yadav 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
12. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
13. Shri Ashish Dubey 
14. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
15. Shri Naveen Jindal 
16. Shri Saumitra Khan* 
17. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
18. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
19. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shrimati Delkar Kalaben Mohanbhai 
21. Shri Jai Parkash 
22. Shri B Y Raghavendra 
23. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Muhammed Hamdullah Sayeed 
26. Adv. Chandra Shekhar 
27. Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
28. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
29. Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti 
30. Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra† 
31. Shri Amrinder Singh Raja Warring 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
2. ShriRakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
4. Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Anku Sharma, Security Assistant Gr. - II 
7. Shri Rohit Janghu, Security Assistant Gr. -II 
 
  
                                                           
*Shri Saumitra Khan, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 29th January,  2025 in place of Shri Sukhjinder Singh 
Randhawa, MP, Lok Sabha. 
†Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 29th January, 2025. 
 

 
 
(ii) 
 
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Fifty Fourth Report on “ Cyber Crime - Ramifications, Protection and 
Prevention”. 
2. The Committee, in its meeting held on 16 th October 2024 selected the subject “Cyber Crime - 
Ramifications, Protection and Prevention” for examination and subsequently held six meetingson 9 th 
January, 2025 and on 2 nd, 3 rd, 10 th, 11th and 22 nd July, 2025.During these meetings, the Committee 
heard the views of representatives from the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and Indian Cyber 
Crime Coordination Centre (I4C), Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY), 
Ministry of External Aff airs (MEA), Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), Department of School 
Education & Literacy (DoSEL), Department of Higher Education (DoHE), Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI), Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI), National Investigation Agency (NIA), Department of Financial Services (DFS), 
Financial Intelligence Unit -India (FIU -IND), Reserve Bank of India (RBI), State Bank of India 
(SBI), Punjab National Bank (PNB), HDFC Bank, Securities and Exchange Board o f India (SEBI), 
National Stock Exchange (NSE), National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), National Critical 
Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC), Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing (C -DAC), Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In), National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) and Domain experts on the subject, “ Cyber Crime - Ramifications, 
Protection and Prevention”. In addition, the Committee sought views/suggestions on the subject from 
individual/organisations/institutions/experts. 
 
3. The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the 
following documents:- 
i. Background Notes furnished and Presentations made by the representatives of MHA and I4C, 
MeitY, MEA, MCA, DoSEL, DoHE, DoT, TRAI, CBI, NI A, DFS, FIU -IND, RBI, SBI, 
PNB, HDFC Bank, SEBI, NSE, NPCI, NCIIPC, C -DAC, CERT -In, NIC, and Domain 
experts on the subject during the meetings of the Committee;  
ii. Replies furnished by the concerned Ministries/Departments and Organisations in response to 
the questionnaire forwarded by the Secretariat; 
iii. Replies to the queries/comments/suggestions of the Members, raised during the Committee's 
meetings, as furnished by the Ministries/Departments/Organisations and other stakeholders 
during various meetings of the Committeee; and 
iv. Verbatim transcripts of the meetings of the Committee held on 9 th January, 2025 and on 2nd, 
3rd, 10th, 11th and 22nd July, 2025. 
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Fifty Fourth Report and adopted the same 
in its meeting held on 18thAugust, 2025. 
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. For further convenience, 
abbreviations used in the Report have been compiled in a table under the acronyms section. 
 
18thAugust, 2025 
27 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                                                                  
New Delhi 
Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 

 
 
(iii) 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ACTD Anti-Cyber Terrorism Division  
AePS Aadhaar-enabled Payment System 
AFA Additional Factor of Authentication  
AFP Australian Federal Police  
AI Artificial Intelligence  
AML Anti-Money Laundering  
APIs Application Programming Interfaces  
APT Advanced Persistent Threat  
ASCom Anti-Scam Command  
ASPs Application Service Providers  
ATDP Automated Threat Dissemination Platform  
ATS Anti-Terror Squad  
BBPS Bharat Bill Payment System 
BFSI Banking, Financial Services and Insurance  
BNS Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 
BSA Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 
BSE Bombay Stock Exchange 
CaaS Cybercrime-as-a-Service  
CAPs Consumer Awareness Programmes  
CBC Central Bureau of Communication  
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation   
CBoM Cryptographic Bill of Material  
CCI Cyber Capability Index  
CCID Cyber Crime Investigation Division  
CCMP Cyber Crisis Management Plan  
CCPWC Cyber Crime Prevention Against Women and Children  
CCSE Counter Child Sexual Exploitation  
CCTNS Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems  
C-DAC Centre For Development of Advanced Computing  
CDD Customer Due Diligence  
CEF Cyber Enabled Fraud  
CEIR Central Equipment Identity Register 
CenCOPS Centre for Cyber Operations and Security  
CERT-In Computer Emergency Response Team  
CERT-MH Computer Emergency Response Team- Maharashtra  
CEWs Consumer Educational Workshops  
CFCFRMS Citizen Financial Cyber Fraud Reporting and Management System  
CFLs Centres For Financial Literacy  
CFMC Cyber Fraud Mitigation Centre  
CFT Combating the Financing of Terrorism  
CII Critical Information Infrastructure  
CII SECEX Critical Information Infrastructure Security Exercise  
CIOR Centralized International Out Roamer  
CISOs Chief Information Security Officers  
CMLS  Cybercrime and Anti Money Laundering Section  
COE Centre of Excellence  
CPFIR Central Payment Fraud Information Registry  
CSAM Child Sexual Abuse Material  

 
 
(iv) 
 
CSB Cyber Surakshit Bharat  
CSCMM Cyber Security Capability Maturity Model  
CSCRF Cybersecurity and Cyber Resilience Framework  
CSIRTs Computer Security Incident Response Teams 
CSK Cyber Swachhta Kendra  
DDoS Distributed Denial of Service  
DEA Department of Economic Affairs 
DEP Digital Europe Programme  
DFS Department of Financial Services  
DIP Digital Intelligence Platform  
DND Do Not Disturb  
DoCA Department of Consumer Affairs  
DoHE Department of Higher Education  
DoS Denial-of-Service  
DoSEL Department of School Education &Literacy  
DoT Department of Telecommunications  
DPAW Digital Payment Awareness Week  
DPI Digital Public Infrastructure  
DPIP Digital Payment Intelligence Platform  
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organisation  
DSCI Data Security Council Of India  
DSPE Act Delhi Special Police Establishment Act  
DST District Special Team  
DTH Direct-To-Home  
e-BAAT Electronic Banking and Awareness Training  
EC3 European Cybercrime Centre  
ECCC European Cybersecurity Competence Centre  
ECSF European Cybersecurity Skills Framework  
EMMC Electronic Media Monitoring Centre  
FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation  
FIDD Financial Inclusion and Development Department  
FLCs Financial Literacy Centres   
FRI Financial Fraud Risk Indicator  
FRM Fraud Risk Management  
GGE Group of Governmental Experts  
GovTech Government Technology Agency  
I4C Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre  
IBA Indian Banks' Association  
IC3 Internet Crime Complaint Center  
ICACCOPS Internet Crimes Against Children Child Online Protection System  
ICP Internet Content Provider  
IDRBT Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology  
IEPFA Investor Education & Protection Fund Authority 
I-GRIP Global Rapid Intervention of Payments  
IMPS Immediate Payment Service  
INTERPOL International Criminal Police Organisation 
IoCs Indicators of Compromise  
IoT Internet of Things  
IPDR IP Detail Record  
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India  

 
 
(v) 
 
ISACs Information Sharing and Analysis Centres  
ISEA Information Security Education and Awareness  
ISMS Information Security Management Systems  
ISSCs Information Security Steering Committees  
IT Act Information Technology Act, 2000  
ITSARs Indian Telecom Security Assurance Requirements  
J-CAT Joint Cybercrime Action Taskforce  
JCoR Joint Committee of Regulators  
JPC3 Joint Policing Cybercrime Coordination Centre  
LLPs Limited Liability Partnership 
LRs Letters Rogatory  
MAC Multi Agency Centre  
MCA Ministry of Corporate Affairs  
MDR Managed Detection and Response  
MEA Ministry of External Affairs  
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs  
MIB Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
MIIT Ministry of Industry and Information Technology  
ML Machine Learning  
MLATs Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties  
MNRL Mobile Number Revocation List  
MNVS Mobile Number Validation Service  
MoUs Memorandum of Understanding 
NASC National Anti-Scam Centre  
NCA National Crime Agency  
NCAC National Copyright Administration  
NCAER National Council of Applied Economic Research 
NCB National Central Bureau  
NCCC National Cyber Coordination Centre  
NCCs National Coordination Centres  
NCCU National Cyber Crime Unit  
NCIIPC National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre  
NCoE National Centre of Excellence  
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau 
NCRF National Cybersecurity Reference Framework  
NCRP National Cybercrime Reporting Portal  
NCSC National Cyber Security Coordinator  
NCTC National Cybercrime Training Centre  
NCW National Commission For Women  
NEP National Education Policy  
NETRA Network for Evidence Tracing, Research and Analysis  
NIA National Investigation Agency  
NIC National Informatics Centre  
NIPS Network Intrusion Prevention System  
NMEICT National Mission on Education Through ICT  
NOC Network Operations Center  
NPCI National Payments Corporation of India  
NPPA National Press and Publication Administration  
NSCS National Security Coordination Secretariat  

 
 
(vi) 
 
NTRO National Technical Research Organisation  
OEWG Open-Ended Working Group  
ORBIOs Offices of the Reserve Bank of India Ombudsmen  
OSINT Open Source Intelligence 
OTPs One-Time Passwords  
OTT Over-The-Top  
OVDs Officially Verifiable Documents  
PACs Public Awareness Campaigns  
PAs Payment Aggregators  
PFRDA Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority  
PMGDISHA Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital Saksharta Abhiyan  
PMLA Prevention of Money Laundering Act 
PQC Post-Quantum Cryptography  
PSPs Payment Service Providers  
PSs Protected Systems  
R&AW Research and Analysis Wing  
RaaS Ransomware- as-a-Service  
RAT Recovery Asset Team  
RBI Reserve Bank of India  
RBIH Reserve Bank Innovation Hub  
RB-IOS Reserve Bank-Integrated Ombudsman Scheme  
REs Regulated Entities  
ROs Regional Offices  
RRBs Regional Rural Banks  
RST Range Special Team  
S4C State Cybercrime Coordination Centres  
SaaS Software- as-a-Service 
SEBI Securities and Exchange Board of India 
SFG Special Focus Group  
SIEM Security Information and Event Management  
SIP Session Initiation Protocol 
SLAs Service Level Agreements 
SLL Special and Local Laws  
SMEs Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises  
SMIs Small and Medium Intermediaries  
Smishing SMS Phishing 
SOCs Security Operations Centres  
SSMIs Significant Social Media Intermediaries  
SSMs Senior Supervisory Managers  
STQC Standardization Testing and Quality Certification  
TAI Technology Assisted Investigation  
TAT Turnaround Time  
TCCCPR Telecom Commercial Communication Customer Preference Regulation  
TGCSB Telangana State Cyber Security Bureau  
TICAT Triage, Incident Coordination & Tasking  
TIUEs Telecommunication Identifier User Entities  
TPAPs Third Party Application Providers 
TRAI Telecom Regulatory Authority of India  
TSPs Telecom Service Providers  
UAPA Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 

 
 
(vii) 
 
UCC Unsolicited Commercial Communication  
UGC University Grants Commission  
UMANG  Unified Mobile Application for New - Age Governance 
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
UPI Unified Payments Interface  
UTMs Unregistered Telemarketers 
VAPT Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing  
V-CIP Video-Based Customer Identification  
Vishing Voice Phishing 
VoIP Voice Over Internet Protocol  
VPNs Virtual Private Networks  
VR Virtual Reality  
WAF Web Application Firewall  
XSS Cross-Site Scripting 
 

 
 
1 
 
Part I: Background 
1.1 Introduction 
1.1.1 The evolution of cybercrime in India is deeply intertwined with the country’s 
remarkable digital transformation over the past two decades, especially during the last decade 
with the launch of Digital India Mission , India quickly embraced widespread internet 
connectivity, mobile technology and digital financial systems . The nature of criminal activity 
underwent a profound shift, the  traditional crimes began to give way to sophisticated, 
technology-driven offences, marking a significant change in the criminal landscape. In the 
early 2000s, cybercrime in India was relatively limited in scope and sophistication. Offenc es 
typically involved isolate d incidents such as hacking, online defamation and basic forms of 
financial fraud. These early cybercrimes were often perpetrated by individual hackers or 
small groups using rudimentary technological means. At that time, India’s legal and 
institutional frameworks to combat cybercrime were still in the early stages of development. 
The enactment of the Information Technology Act in 2000  laid down the essential 
groundwork by establishing the first comprehensive set of laws aimed at addressing the 
emerging challenges posed by cyber offences. This legislation served as the cornerstone for 
regulating electronic transactions and penalizing cybercrimes.  Considering the evolving 
nature of cyber threats, the Government made major amendments to  the Parent Act in 2008 
and 2023, to further strengthen its provisions and ensure continued relevance and 
effectiveness. However, as India’s internet user base expanded exponentially, the 
opportunities for cybercriminals grew correspondingly. Over time, th e surge in cybercrime 
has become increasingly apparent, reflecting a sharp upward trend as more people and 
organisations embraced digital technologies. With the rapid expansion of digital platforms, 
cybercriminal activities diversified well bey ond their or iginal scope. Offenc es such as 
financial scams, identity impersonation, ransomware incidents and widespread data breaches 
began to occur more frequently, impacting not just individuals and companies, but also vital 
national systems and infrastructure. 
1.1.2 By the mid -2010s, the cyber threat landscape had evolved further. Organised 
cybercriminal groups, often with international connections, began to emerge. These groups 
employed advanced tactics and tools to exploit vulnerabilities in financial institutions , 
corporate networks and Government systems. The rise of sophisticated cyber -espionage and 
ransomware attacks underscored the growing complexity and scale of the threat. The 
COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 marked another pivotal moment in India’s digital journey . 
With a surge in digital adoption due to lockdowns and remote work, there was a 
corresponding spike in cybercrime incidents. The increased reliance on digital platforms for 
banking, commerce and communication exposed new vulnerabilities and created fresh 
opportunities for cybercriminals. Online fraud, phishing scams, identity theft and data 
breaches became more prevalent, highlighting the risks associated with rapid digitalization. 
1.1.3 In response to these mounting challenges, the Indian Government took significant 
steps to strengthen its cyber security framework. Amendments to the Information Technology 
Act, 2000, the establishment of the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) and the 
launch of the National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal were key measures aimed at 
empowering law enforcement agencies and citizens alike. Despite these efforts, 
cybercriminals continue to adapt and innovate, leveraging advanced techniques such as social 
engineering and artificial intelligence to exploit both technological and human vulnerabilities. 

 
 
2 
 
1.1.4 Considering the current scenario, the Committee has sele cted the subject of Cyb er 
Crime – Ramifications, Protection and Prevention due to its growing relevance and impact on 
society. With the increasing dependence on digital platforms for communication, business 
and daily life, incidents of cyber attacks have surged dramatically. The  rise in sophisticated 
threats such as ransomware, data breaches and online fraud poses significant risks to 
individuals, organisations and even national security. Moreover, the quick advancements in 
technology, including artificial intelligence, have enab led cyber criminals to develop more 
complex and harder -to-detect methods. These developments have resulted in substantial 
financial losses and have eroded public trust in digital systems. Given these pressing 
concerns, it is crucial to understand and addre ss the challenges posed by cyber crime. By 
focusing on this subject, the Committee aims to promote awareness, encourage preventive 
measures and contribute to the development of effective strategies to combat cyber threats in 
today’s digital age. 
1.1.5 The Committee presents its findings and recommendations in the following chapters, 
drawing upon a wide range of inputs collected from various Ministries, organisations, banks, 
expert opinions and other key stakeholders. Throughout the course of its work, the 
Committee engaged in detailed consultations, held multiple rounds of discussions and 
carefully reviewed relevant data and policy documents to ensure a comprehensive 
understanding of the issues involved. By incorporating diverse perspectives and expert 
insights, the Committee aimed to address the complexities of the subject matter in a holistic 
manner.  
India’s Digital Revolution: A Decade of Transformation 
1.1.6 Over the past decade, India has undergone a remarkable digital transformation, 
positioning itself as a global leader in technology -driven growth. The launch of the Digital 
India initiative in 2015 marked a turning point, aiming to bridge the digital divide by building 
robust digital infrastructure, promoting digital literacy and making Government serv ices 
accessible online. Today, with nearly 970 million internet connections and 5G coverage in 
99.6% of districts, high-speed connectivity is a reality even in remote villages. The BharatNet 
project has played a pivotal role in this journey, connecting ove r 2,18,000 Gram Panchayats 
with high -speed internet and ensuring that the benefits of digitalization reach rural 
populations, thus fostering inclusive growth.  
1.1.7 A cornerstone of India’s digital journey is the adoption of digital payments and e -
governance. The Unified Payments Interface (UPI) has revolutionized financial transactions, 
recording nearly 1,867.7 crore transactions worth ₹24.77 lakh crore in April 2025.  UPI’s 
reach now extends to seven countries (Bhutan, France, Mauritius, Nepal, Singapore,  Sri 
Lanka and UAE ) demonstrating the global impact of India’s digital public infrastructure. 
Initiatives such as DigiLocker and UMANG (Unified Mobile Application for New –age 
Governance) have enabled millions to access essential documents and government se rvices 
online, breaking barriers of geography and bureaucracy. As a result, presently, the digital 
economy is estimated to contribute over 13% to the national GDP, with projections indicating 
it could account for nearly one-fifth of the economy by 2030. 
1.1.8 Central to this transformation is the Government’s focus on leveraging emerging 
technologies like artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things (IoT) and blockchain. These 
technologies are revolutionizing sectors such as agriculture, healthcare, fint ech and 
education. The establishment of AI Centres of Excellence and the integration of AI into 
public services reflect a commitment to not just keeping pace with global advancements but 

 
 
3 
 
setting new benchmarks in innovation and digital governance. Increase d budget allocations 
for digital transformation and skill development underscore the priority placed on creating a 
future-ready workforce and fostering a culture of innovation. 
1.1.9 Strategic initiatives such as Aadhaar, UPI and DigiLocker have collective ly 
established an extensive, resilient and secure digital public infrastructure, facilitating 
seamless online service delivery. The "Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital Saksharta Abhiyan 
(PMGDISHA)" has been instrumental in fostering digital literacy across rura l areas, 
empowering millions with the skills needed to participate in the digital economy. With a 
telephone subscriber base of 1.19 billion and the lowest average mobile data cost globally, 
India has ensured digital affordability and accessibility for all.  These efforts reflect the 
Government’s unwavering commitment to digital inclusion, technological advancement and 
ensuring that the benefits of digitalization permeate every segment of society, firmly 
establishing India as a leader in the global digital ecosystem. 
1.2  Understanding Cybercrime 
1.2.1 The National Cyber crime Reporting Portal (NCRP) defines the Cyber crime as any 
unlawful act where  computer, computer network, or electronic device is used as a tool or 
target to commit or facilitate a crime. This definition includes both traditional crimes that are 
facilitated by technology, as well as new age crimes that specifically target digital systems.  
Traditional crimes in cyber space include theft, fraud, forgery, defamation and mischief, all 
of which can be committed using electronic devices or networks.  There are some new -age 
crimes that are emerging,  these offenc es are specifically enabled by technology, such as 
hacking, denial-of-service attacks, phishing, malware distribution, cyber terrorism, etc. 
1.2.2 Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) in its replies to the Committee stated 
that the National Crime Records Bureau  (NCRB) in its report "Crime in India 2022" 
categorise cybercrime under three broad legal domains: 
Offences Under the Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000 
i. Ransomware 
ii. Other offences under the IT Act 
iii. Tampering with computer source documents (Sec. 65) 
iv. Computer-related offences (Sec. 66) 
 Dishonest receipt of stolen computer resources (Sec. 66B) 
 Identity theft (Sec. 66C) 
 Cheating by personation using computer resources (Sec. 66D) 
 Violation of privacy (Sec. 66E) 
v. Cyber terrorism (Sec. 66F) 
vi. Publication/transmission of obscene/sexually explicit acts (Sec. 67, 67A, 
67B) 
 Obscene material (Sec. 67) 
 Sexually explicit acts (Sec. 67A) 
 Child sexual exploitative and abuse material (CSEAM) (Sec. 67B) 
 Other subsections including retention by intermediaries (Sec. 67C) 
vii. Interception/monitoring/decryption (Sec. 69) 
viii. Unauthorised access to protected systems (Sec. 70) 
ix. Abetment to commit offence (Sec. 84B) 
x. Attempt to commit offence (Sec. 84C) 
xi. Other sections of the IT Act  

 
 
4 
 
 
BNS Crimes (involving communication devices as medium/target or r/w IT Act, 2000) 
i. Online abetment of suicide (Sec. 107/108 BNS) 
ii. Cyberstalking/Bullying (Sec. 74 BNS) 
iii. Data theft (Sec. 303-306 BNS) 
iv. Cheating (Sec. 318 r/w Sec. 336, 340 BNS) 
 ATM fraud 
 Online banking fraud 
 OTP fraud 
 Other cheating 
v. Forgery (Sec. 336, 340 BNS) 
vi. Defamation/Morphing (Sec. 336 BNS, r/w Indecent Representation of 
Women Act) 
vii. Fake profiles 
viii. Counterfeiting (Sec. 179,180,181,182 BNS) 
 Currency 
 Stamps 
ix. Cyber blackmailing/threatening (Sec. 351/308 BNS) 
x. Fake news on social media (Sec. 353 BNS) 
xi. Other IPC offences involving IT 
 
Offences under Special and Local Laws (SLL) Involving Use of IT 
i. Online gambling (Gambling Act) 
ii. Online lotteries (Lotteries Act) 
iii. Copyright Act, 1957 
iv. Trade Marks Act, 1999 
v. Other SLL involving IT 
1.3  Evolving Types of Cyber Crime 
1.3.1 Cybercrime encompasses a wide range of illegal activities carried out through 
computers, networks or the internet. Among the most common types are phishing, where 
attackers impersonate trusted entities to deceive individuals into revealing sensitive 
information such as bank details or login credentials. Related to this are vishing (voice 
phishing) and smishing (SMS phi shing), which use phone calls or text messages to trick 
users. Identity theft remains a major threat, involving the misuse of someone's personal data 
for fraudulent purposes. Ransomware attacks have increased significantly in recent years, 
where cybercriminals encrypt a victim’s files and demand payment to restore access. These 
often target institutions like hospitals, schools and businesses, leading to major operational 
and financial disruptions. Malware in various forms is also widely used to steal data o r 
damage systems. Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, which flood a network with 
traffic to make it inaccessible, are another serious concern for businesses and Governments. 
1.3.2 Beyond these, cyber crime is evolving rapidly with the growth of t echnology. Newer 
forms like cryptojacking , secretly exploit a user’s devices to mine cryptocurrency, often 
without the victim even realizing it. Fileless malware operates in memory rather than being 
stored on disk, making it harder to detect. Social engine ering attacks which manipulate 
human behaviour rather than relying on technical flaws, continue to be highly effective, 
especially when combined with AI. Developers of malicious software increasingly use AI -
powered cyberattacks, including deepfakes to carr y out more convincing and hard -to-detect 

 
 
5 
 
crimes. Cyber criminals are also targeting Internet of Things (IoT) devices and automotive 
systems, raising safety and privacy concerns. The rise of cybercrime -as-a-service (CaaS) 
makes it easier for less -skilled in dividuals to launch powerful cyberattacks by purchasing 
tools and services from the dark web.  
1.3.3 Geopolitical tensions have intensified, with cyber tools increasingly being used to 
attack critical infrastructure, spread misinformation and disrupt essen tial public services. As 
cyber threats continuously grow in number and sophistication, staying informed, adopting 
preventive measures and building strong digital defen ces have become essential for 
individuals, organisations and Governments worldwide. 
Intricacies of Cyber crime  
1.3.4 Cyber crime encompasses a wide range of illegal activities conducted through 
computers and networks. It includes offences such as hacking, phishing, Denial-of-Service 
(DoS), cyber stalking, digital arrest scams , identity theft, online fraud, malware attacks, etc. 
Among these, ransomware attacks have emerged as particularly damaging, often targeting 
critical infrastructure and demanding substantial ransoms for data recovery. The rise of 
Ransomware-as-a-Service (RaaS) platforms shows how easily cybercriminals can access 
advanced tools to launch attacks, even with minimal technical expertise. The increasing 
complexity and interconnectivity of systems have provided cyber criminals with 
unprecedented opportunities to exploit vuln erabilities. The growing threat of Cyber crime is 
continuously expanding, day -by-day.  Cyber criminals now operate in a global marketplace 
where they can easily acquire sophisticated tools and services that facilitates their illegal 
attacks. The World Economic Forum has ranked Cyber crime among the top ten global risks.  
The overall cyber security environment is marked by rising volumes of attacks and increasing 
sophisticated technology, leaving many organisations feeling ill -equipped to effectively 
address these threats. 
1.4  Growing Importance of Cyber Crime Prevention 
1.4.1 Cybercrime prevention and protection have become increasingly vital as digital 
technologies permeate every aspect of life. With the rapid growth of internet use, cyber 
criminals exploit vulnerabilities to steal sensitive information, disrupt services and commit  
fraud, causing financial and reputational damage to individuals, businesses and Governments. 
The Government of India recognises this critical challenge and has launched multiple 
initiatives such as the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C), which f osters 
coordination between law enforcement agencies to investigate and curb cyber threats 
effectively. Efforts also include spreading awareness through social media campaigns, SMS 
alerts and public outreach programs targeting cyber safety for women, child ren and the 
general public. Technical measures like the Cyber Swachhta Kendra for malware detection 
and free removal tools, mandatory reporting of cybersecurity incidents and regular training 
programmes for officials to strengthen the country’s cyber resil ience. Additionally, the 
Government’s National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre  (NCIIPC) 
safeguards vital digital infrastructure, while schemes like Cyber Crime Prevention against 
Women and Children (CCPWC) focus on cyber crimes agains t women and children groups. 
These comprehensive actions emphasize prevention, timely response and capacity building 
across India’s cyber defence landscape. 
1.4.2 On the international front, collaboration and updated legal frameworks are essential to 
confront cybercrime, which often transcends national borders. Many countries have revised 

 
 
6 
 
their cyber laws to impose stricter penalties and enhance enforcement. India’s  rise to Tier 1 
status on the Global Cybersecurity Index in 2024 reflects its commitment to global standards 
and cooperation. Indian organisations and security agencies are increasingly adopting 
artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies to detect and counter sophisticated 
cyber threats, while adversaries also exploit these technologies, necessitating continuous 
vigilance and innovation. Global dialogues focus on harmonising cybersecurity policies, 
sharing threat intelligence and promoting ca pacity building, ensuring a coordinated response 
to cyber threats worldwide. Ensuring cybersecurity is no longer just about protecting data but 
is central to maintaining public trust, economic stability and national security in a highly 
connected digital world. 
***** 
 
  

 
 
7 
 
Part II: Ramifications of Cybercrime 
2.1  Financial Consequences for Individuals and Organisations 
2.1.1 Cybercrime in India has evolved into a threat with serious financial consequ ences for 
individual and organis ations, as highlighted by various Ministries and organisations. At the 
national level, the scale of financial losses is immense. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
in it s background note informed the C ommittee that National Cybercrime Reporting Portal 
(NCRP), since its inception on  30th August 2019 to 28 th November 2024, received an 
aggregate of over 53.93 lakh complaints, these reported incidents collectively account for a 
defrauded amount of around ₹31,594 crore. Cyber Financial Crimes form the largest 
component of the crime repor ted accounting for about 85% of the cases reported on NCRP. 
There is a growing pattern of cybercrime being used for funding organised criminal networks, 
fake job rackets and even human trafficking operations overseas. The Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI) highlighted that Indian citizens have been trafficked abroad and coerced 
into committing cybercrimes from foreign -controlled "scam factories", especially in 
Southeast Asia. This includes fake loan apps, call center -based extortion rackets and even 
human trafficking using cryptocurrency payments. 
2.1.2 India’s vast and rapidly growing digital  economy has created enormous 
vulnerabilities. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) and 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) highlighted the rise of AI -generated 
misinformation, deepfakes used for financial manipulation and defa mation and mass -scale 
SIM-based fraud. SIM swaps and header spoofing, allow impersonation of legitimate services 
like banks, Government agencies, or police, which enable cyber criminals  intimidate and 
extort money from victims under the pretext of fabricat ed legal action and keep them under 
digital arrests. The I4C team highlighted multiple cases of “digital arrests” where 
cybercriminals pretended to be Government officials and coerced victims to transfer money 
by creating fear. CBI has registered cases of targeted impersonation scams where fraudsters 
pose as law enforcement officers to intimidate and extort money from victims under the 
pretext of fabricated legal action and keep them under digital arrests. 
2.1.3 The MHA highlighted that the ransomware has e merged as one of the most 
debilitating forms of cybercrime, with attackers encrypting sensitive data and demanding 
exorbitant ransoms for its release from organisations and individuals both. The cross -border 
nature of these attacks complicates law enforcem ent efforts, highlighting the need for robust 
international cooperation and legal frameworks. Similarly, distributed denial -of-service 
(DDoS) attacks, which overwhelm online services with malicious traffic, continue to target 
businesses, Government service s and critical infrastructure, causing significant operational 
disruptions. 
2.1.4 Organisationally, financial institutions are facing substantial operational disruptions. 
The RBI highlighted the risk posed by mule accounts and lack of end -to-end transactio n 
monitoring in small banks and cooperative institutions. The Department of Financial Services 
(DFS) revealed gaps in fraud, response time and inadequate internal escalation mechanisms 
among many banks. Additionally, National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) pointed to 
an uptick in frauds involving UPI, QR codes and payment gateways due to compromised 
APIs, third-party aggregators and absence of robust customer education. 
2.1.5 Centre for Development of Advanced Computing ( C-DAC) highlighted that data 
breaches are also major concern, with hackers targeting businesses, healthcare institutions 

 
 
8 
 
and Government databases to leak personal and financial information on the dark web. High -
profile breaches have exposed millions of Indians to identity theft and fin ancial fraud, 
highlighting weak cybers ecurity measures in many organis ations. It also apprised the 
Committee of online investment and trading scams luring victims with promises of high 
returns through fake stock tips, cryptocurrency schemes or Ponzi apps. 
2.1.6 The consequences of cyber crimes extend deeply into individuals’ lives. The 
Department of School Education  & Literacy (DoSEL)  and the Department of Higher 
Education (DoHE) both flagged a sharp rise in cyberbullying, digital extortion and image -
based abuse among teenagers, especially girls. Deepfake misuse for generating obscene 
material, social media impersonation and sextortion were cited as recurring issues. 
2.1.7 Further, SIM swap/SIM closure frauds allow criminals to take control of victims' 
mobile numbers, enabling un authorised access to bank accounts and OTPs. The Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) and Department of Telecommunications (DoT) flagged 
misuse of telecom infrastructure for executing cyber frauds, including SIM swapping, header 
spoofing and anonymous international calls routed via spoofed domestic networks. These 
attacks not only lead to financial theft but also compromise nationa l security and trust in 
digital platforms. Cybercrime today has become a multi-layered threat affecting the economy, 
organisational integrity and individual well -being. The urgency to treat it as a systemic issue 
requiring inter-ministerial, international and technological response cannot be overstated. 
2.2  Social and Psychological Effects of Cybercrime 
2.2.1 Cybercrime extends far beyond financial or institutional loss. It has profound and 
lasting social and psychological impacts on individuals, families and communities. The 
inputs received from the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) , Ministry of Education (DoSEL 
and DoHE), MeitY and law enforcement agencies such as CBI and I4C underscore the 
severity of these consequences. 
Psychological Trauma and Victim Shaming 
2.2.2 Victims of cyberstalking, identity theft, sextortion, and deepfake obscene content 
often suffer anxiety, depression, and trauma. Individuals are targeted through social media 
platforms using morphed or AI-generated explicit materials, frequently leading to self-blame, 
social withdrawal, and limited access to psychological support services. The Ministry of 
Home Affairs highlighted that artificial intelligence and machine learning are expected to 
shape the future of cyber threats, with technologies like deepfakes posing serious risks to 
public trust and democratic institutions. 
2.2.3 In its responses, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
emphasized that while social media and digital platforms commonly facilitate unlawful 
activities, cybercrimes are not limited to specific platforms and can occur across diverse 
digital environments. The misuse of the constitutional right to freedom of speech and 
expression enables the proliferation of vulgar, indecent, slanderous, and obscene  content, 
including fabricated narratives and morphed images, which adversely affect societal norms 
and public perception. 
2.2.4 Inputs from the Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL) noted a rise 
in cyberbullying among school children, contributing to emotional distress and declining 
academic performance. Harassment in online spaces, especially when ignored by platform  

 
 
9 
 
moderators, leads to a breakdown in trust and discourages open communication. Many 
victims avoid reporting due to stigma or fear of disbelief. 
2.2.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs has also highlighted the investment and trading scams 
including fraudulent st ock market schemes, cryptocurrency frauds, and online job traps that 
exploit individuals financially. Digital arrest scams, wherein fraudsters impersonate law 
enforcement officers to fabricate accusations and extort funds, not only cause psychological 
harm but also diminish public confidence in legitimate institutions. These techniques fall 
under broader social engineering practices, where scammers exploit fear, urgency, and 
emotional vulnerability to manipulate targets. Dating and romance scams further com pound 
this harm, destabilizing personal relationships and undermining trust in online interactions. 
Collectively, such cyber threats result in financial and emotional distress, diminish 
interpersonal engagement, and contribute to the erosion of institution al credibility and social 
trust across digital ecosystems. 
Youth Involvement in Illegal Digital Activities 
2.2.6 As informed by  DoSEL, the effects of cybercrime on children can vary from poor 
academic performance to serious mental health issues. School stu dents may face mental 
health issues like anxiety, depression, low self -esteem due to cyberbullying. Student’s online 
addiction may affect their studies leading to academic performance drop, distraction and fear. 
Their privacy may be compromised due to shar ing of personal data leading to identity theft. 
Children who engage in hacking or abusive behaviour may not only face juvenile legal 
consequences but also risk becoming socially isolated from real-world interactions. 
2.2.7 It was revealed to the Committee by MHA that, unemployed youngsters both men and 
women are recruited by international cyber crime gangs for illegal activities such as 
managing mule accounts or sharing pirated content. C -DAC informed the Committee that 
fake job scams exploit unemployed youth by offering fraudulent employment opportunities in 
exchange for registration fees or personal data. Call centre and crypto frauds operate through 
illegal call centres that dupe people into investing in fake crypto schemes or fake refund 
scams, causing massive financial losses. When caught, youth suffer reputational damage and 
are psychologically impacted by legal action and social isolation.  
2.2.8 Cybercrime increasingly contributes to mental health deterioration, disempowerment 
and social marginalizati on. Addressing this requires integrated victim support systems, 
psychological counseling and sensitised cybercrime reporting mechanisms. 
2.3  National Security and Cross-Border Implications 
2.3.1 Cybercrime today is no longer a mere law - and -order challenge but has evolved into 
a major concern for national security, with implications that go beyond borders. Various 
agencies such as the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), Central Bureau of Investig ation 
(CBI), Department of Telecommunications (DoT) and I4C have highlighted that transnational 
cybercriminal syndicates pose serious threats to sovereignty and internal stability. These 
syndicates along with cyberterrorism and geopolitical threats are res haping the cybercrime 
landscape as a full-fledged national security concern.  
  

 
 
10 
 
Transnational Nature of Cybercrime 
2.3.2 In today’s hyper -connected digital environment, cybercrime has evolved into a 
transnational threat that challenges conventional notions  of jurisdiction and sovereignty. 
Malicious actors exploit asymmetries across national legal frameworks, regulatory systems 
and law enforcement capacities to conduct a wide range of illicit operations including 
hacking, financial fraud, data breaches and d isinformation campaigns. The transnational 
dynamics of cybercrime can be analyzed through four principal dimensions: 
a)  Cross-Border Operations 
2.3.3 Cybercriminals commonly operate across multiple jurisdictions, leveraging regulatory 
gaps and uneven enfo rcement capabilities. These actors may deploy infrastructure (e.g., 
command- and-control servers) in one country, initiate attacks from another and target 
victims located elsewhere creating substantial barriers to timely and coordinated legal action. 
b)  Convergence of Criminal Enterprises 
2.3.4 There is increasing convergence between cyber -enabled crimes and traditional 
criminal enterprises. The latest United Nation Office on Drugs and Crime ( UNODC) report 
on Southeast Asia underscores how organized crim e syndicates combine digital fraud 
schemes with underground banking and sophisticated money laundering mechanisms. 
Cybercriminals often utilise unregulated virtual asset service providers and informal financial 
channels to obfuscate the origin and movement of illicit funds. 
c)  Jurisdictional Complexities 
2.3.5 Disparities in legal definitions, investigatory frameworks and extradition 
arrangements among nations obstruct the seamless prosecution of cyber offenders. These 
challenges have contributed to the proliferation of safe havens jurisdictions where criminals 
operate with relative impunity due to the absence of harmonized cybercrime laws and limited 
cross-border cooperation. 
d)  Emergent Transnational Threats 
2.3.6 The increasing use of cryptocurrencies  to facilitate anonymous financial flows, the 
expansion of dark web marketplaces and the commercialization of cybercrime services 
(cybercrime-as-a-service or CaaS) have intensified the international scope of digital 
criminality. Southeast Asia, in particul ar, has emerged as a hotspot for new illicit service 
ecosystems offering phishing kits, ransomware variants, deepfake technologies and even 
“Money Laundering-as-a-Service” to transnational criminal networks. 
e) Case Illustrations of Transnational Dimensions of Cybercrime 
2.3.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs has highlighted several instances of cyber -enabled 
fraud with clear transnational implications: 
 September 2023 (Assam): In collaboration with the I4C, Assam Police dismantled 
eight i llegal call centers inv olved in multi -crore scams targeting domestic and 
international victims via fake pop-ups and toll-free numbers. 

 
 
11 
 
 May 2024 (Punjab): Punjab Police dismantled five unauthorised call centers operating 
in SAS Nagar which were involved in fraudulent schemes that targeted U.S. citizens. 
The operation led to the arrest of 155 individuals and led to the identification of 336 
victims in the United States based on digital forensic evidence. 
 April 2024 (Jharkhand): With I4C support, Cyber Crime Police Station Ranchi 
exposed a fraudulent scheme targeting elderly citizens in the United Kingdom and 
Australia. Criminals impersonated representatives of British Telecom and Telstra to 
deceive victims. 
 October 2024 (Odisha): Cyber PS Bhubaneswar, aided by I4C, intercepted an 
international tech support scam involving impersonation of Norton and McAfee 
representatives. The operation resulted in arrests and seizure of key digital assets. 
2.3.8 Cybercrime Networks and Human Trafficking: Implications for India 
1. Human Trafficking via Employment Fraud 
Recruitment of Indian nationals, primarily unemployed youth, with basic digital and 
language proficiency, through job advertisements circulated on platforms such as 
Google, Facebook, Instagram and Telegram. Recruits are lured with employment 
offers in South East Asia region, charged substantial fees for travel arrangements and 
subsequently coerced into digital fraud operations under exploitative conditions. 
Reports confirm physical abuse, confiscation of identity documents and ransom -like 
extortion for release. 
2. SIM Procurement and WhatsApp Fraud Infrastructure 
Fraudsters acquire Indian SIM cards through intermediaries operating shell entities, 
enabling bulk activation of WhatsApp accounts. These devices are couriered to scam 
centers abroad for impersonation -based fra ud. Foreign SIM cards are also used to 
engage Indian targets, further complicating traceability. 
3. Recruitment of Mule Account Operators 
Indian citizens are solicited via Telegram and WhatsApp to provide bank accounts for 
use in laundering proceeds. These accounts are misused to route fraud funds, typically 
in exchange for a commission. 
4. Financial Layering and Laundering Mechanisms 
Proceeds from fraud are laundered through multi -modal financial infrastructure, 
including: 
 Peer-to-peer cryptocurrency transactions 
 Purchase of physical assets (e.g., gold) 
 Offshore cash withdrawal points  
 International fintech platforms  
 
  

 
 
12 
 
Cross-Border Financial Laundering and Mule Accounts 
2.3.9  Cyber fraud proceeds are laundered through mule accounts and international 
channels. Funds are rapidly transferred abroad using crypto wallets or foreign shell 
companies. According to CBI, law enforcement agencies face delays due to lack of reciprocal 
data access agreements and divergent legal frameworks. 
Threats to Critical Infrastructure 
2.3.10 Multiple agencies including MeitY, CERT-In (Indian Computer Emergency Response 
Team) and I4C highlighted attacks on Critical Infrastructure via ransomware. These attacks 
aim to paralyse essential services and extract cryptocurrency ransoms. Some originated from 
IPs traced to foreign hostile actors, raising alarm over cyber warfare risks. 
Use of the Dark Web and Encrypted Channels for Illicit Trade 
2.3.11 Inputs from CBI and NIA point to an increase in use  of the dark web for narcotics, 
arms, fake IDs and child exploitation material. Messaging apps with end -to-end encryption 
and virtual private networks (VPNs) are used to plan illicit activitie s, including recruitment 
into extremist networks. This undermines law enforcement visibility and complicates 
evidence gathering. The misuse of cryptocurrencies to purchase weapons, conduct payments 
for illicit jobs and pay ransomware has blurred the line b etween economic crime and national 
threat. 
Diplomatic and Legal Challenges 
2.3.12 While the MEA has signed several MoUs (Memorandum of Understanding) on cyber 
cooperation, coordination on investigations and data access but extradition remains slow. It 
was acknowledged in the Committee meeting that the lack of standardised global frameworks 
makes it difficult for countries or organisations to work together quickly and effectively in 
real time. Cybercrime suspects often escape justice due to loopholes in juri sdiction and 
protocol. Cybercrime now intersects with national sovereignty, critical infrastructure safety 
and international diplomacy. India must invest in cyber diplomacy, cross -border treaties and 
real-time intelligence exchange to protect its digital borders. 
2.4  Erosion of Trust in Digital Services 
2.4.1 The rising frequency and complexity of cybercrimes in India may erode citizens' trust 
in digital platforms, e -governance services and even mobile -based financial infrastructure. 
The growing consumer fear and perception of vulnerability could stall the progress of Digital 
India if not adequately addressed. 
2.4.2 India’s digital economy has witnessed transformative growth through initiatives like 
Digital India, Unified Payments Interface (UPI) and mobile -first public services. However, a 
parallel and alarming rise in cybercrime now threatens to undermine this progr ess. 
Increasingly sophisticated scams ranging from phishing and QR code frauds to deepfake -
based harassment are instilling fear and mistrust in digital platforms among Indian citizens. 
Unless cybersecurity becomes a foundational aspect of the nation’s digi tal architecture, the 
ambitious goal of inclusive digital empowerment could falter. Frauds in the UPI ecosystem 
have potential to reduce user confidence in QR code payments, especially among the elderly 
and less digitally literate populations and hence sma ll merchants and senior citizens are 
reverting to cash due to distrust in UPI security. 

 
 
13 
 
2.4.3 Instances of fake websites impersonating Government portals as well as manipulated 
images on social media platforms can damage perceptions of digital safety. In p articular, the 
harassment of women through deepfake-based image distortion and social extortion has led to 
increased cyber trauma and privacy anxiety and hence it damages trust in social media and 
public communication. 
2.4.4 School-going children have beco me targets of inappropriate content and fake 
educational resources, leading to parental reluctance to engage with online learning solutions.  
Similarly, higher education institutions have been victims of ransomware attacks. Parents are 
increasingly hesitant to allow online learning or app -based schooling. Universities and public 
research institutes have faced ransomware and data breach attacks. Weak cyber hygiene and 
under-resourced IT infrastructure make institutions easy targets. 
2.4.5 According to RBI, ba nks and financial institutions face a trust deficit when OTPs or 
transaction alerts fail to prevent unauthorised debits. In many cases, the customer support 
systems in these institutions are either overburdened or ineffective in promptly reversing 
damages, thereby compounding the erosion of trust. 
2.4.6 A significant contributor to this phenomenon is the lack of visible accountability or 
swift enforcement. While victims may report to helplines such as 1930 or portals like 
cybercrime.gov.in, follow-ups are often delayed due to inter -jurisdictional challenges or lack 
of real -time investigation frameworks. As a result, citizens feel that justice in cybercrime 
cases is slow and uncertain. Online grievance mechanisms are often slow, under -coordinated 
and difficul t to access. Women and youth, key drivers of digital uptake, are especially 
impacted by safety concerns.  Unless cybersecurity becomes a fundamental element of user 
experience, the promise of inclusive digital growth will remain limited. 
2.4.7 The National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP) serves as the primary national 
platform for reporting cybercrime incidents, enabling citizens to register complaints through 
two key channels: the online portal accessible at www.cybercrime.gov.in and the Nat ional 
Cybercrime Helpline, reachable via the toll-free number 1930. The F igure below represents 
the overview of cybercrime complaints reported on NCRP and corresponding FIRs registered 
(*till 28th November 2024) 
 
NCRP Complaints  
Corresponding FIRs  
Total Complaints 53.93 lakh 
 
 
 
Figure 01: Overview of Cybercrime Complaints reported on NCRP and Corresponding FIRs 
Registered (*till 28 November 2024) 

 
 
14 
 
2.4.8 Citizen Financial Cyber Fraud Reporting and Management System (CFCFRMS) is a 
platform to facilitat e the reporting and management of financial fraud incidents. The  figures 
below shows the CFCFRMS complaints reported per year (*till 28 th November, 2024) and 
the total amount reported and amount put on hold (lien marked). 
Figure 02: CFCFRMS Complaints reported per year (*till 28 November 2024) 
 
 
Amount Reported 
Lien Marked  
*In Crores 
 
 
 
Figure 03: Total amount reported and amount put on hold (lien marked) 
 
2.5 Emerging Threats – CaaS, AI-Based Tools, Cloud Vulnerabilities 
2.5.1 India’s digital transformation has ushered in unprecedented growth  and connectivity, 
but it has also exposed the nation to a new wave of cyber threats. Cybercrime has evolved 
from isolated acts of online fraud into an industrial-scale, service-driven ecosystem supported 
by technological advances like Crime -as-a-Service (CaaS), generative AI, deepfakes, botnets 
and cloud computing vulnerabilities. Inputs from key Government agencies including MeitY, 
C-DAC, I4C, MHA, DoT, DoHE and CERT -In underline, the urgent need to realig n India’s 
cybersecurity framework to changing need. 


 
 
15 
 
2.5.2 Cybercrime-as-a-Service (CaaS) has significantly changed how cybercriminals 
function. Much like Software -as-a-Service (SaaS) where companies offer software tools 
online for easy access, CaaS platfor ms provide ready -made cybercrime tools to anyone 
willing to pay. These services ranging from ransomware kits and phishing -as-a-service 
platforms to AI -driven deepfake generators and DDoS attack tools allow individuals with 
minimal technical skill to launch  sophisticated and large -scale attacks . By lowering the 
technical barriers, CaaS has made cybercrime more scalable, and harder to trace intensifying 
threats to personal privacy, institutional integrity and global cybersecurity. According to 
MeitY and CERT-In, this has lowered the barrier of entry for cybercriminals, allowing even 
technologically ill-equipped actors to commit large-scale frauds. 
2.5.3 Artificial Intelligence (AI), especially generative models is increasingly used to 
mimic voices and faces to perpetrate fraud. There are cases in which people are being tricked 
into transferring funds by video call with an AI -generated voice and image of a known 
contact. These attacks are extremely difficult to detect and challenge conventional forensic 
approaches. 
2.5.4 MHA emphasized that  the growing use of cryptocurrency for money laundering, the 
rise of dark web marketplaces and the increased deployment of crime -as-a-service (CaaS) 
models have amplified the international dimension of cybercrime. Southeast Asia, in 
particular, has become a testing ground for new criminal service economies, where 
specialized services such as phishing kits, ransomware tools, deepfake generators and Money 
Laundering as a service are readily available to transnational criminal groups. 
2.5.5 Moreover, the educa tion sector has inadvertently enabled some of these threats. As 
per the Department of Higher Education (DoHE), coding bootcamps and unsupervised digital 
learning platforms may unintentionally equip youth with advanced technical skills, some of 
which are diverted towards malicious activities. Thus, the role of digital ethics in curriculum  
is more important than ever. 
2.5.6 Cloud computing, which underpins a large part of India’s digital infrastructure, is also 
a growing target. CERT -In reported multiple data  breaches at hospitals and universities that 
were caused by misconfigured cloud settings or lack of encryption. These vulnerabilities are 
compounded by the lack of in -house cybersecurity teams in most public and semi -public 
institutions. 
2.5.7 Additionally, botnet attacks targeting IoT devices, routers and mobile networks were 
flagged by DoT and TRAI. As 5G expands, the number of attack vectors increases 
exponentially. Cybercriminals can potentially hijack autonomous vehicles, smart homes and 
connected industrial machines, posing both physical and economic threats. 
2.5.8 The nature of cybercrime is shifting rapidly and unpredictably. India’s regulatory and 
technical readiness must evolve to incorporate real -time intelligence, ethical AI regulation, 
cloud security auditing and cross -border enforcement mechanisms. Strong measures need to 
be taken, so that emerging technologies will not be vulnerable to exploitation and may not be 
taken over by criminals before security systems can catch up to protect against such misuse. 
***** 

 
 
16 
 
Part III: Existing Protection Mechanisms and 
Role of Key Institutions 
 
3.1.1 India’s cybercrime response relies on a multi -institutional framework where each 
institution plays a specialized role. At the forefront, the Indian Cyber Crime  Coordination 
Centre (I4C) under the Ministry of Home Affairs coordinates national law enforcement 
efforts, manages the National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP) and drives investigative 
support for complex offences. The Ministry of Electronics and Infor mation Technology 
(MeitY) is instrumental in policy formation, digital governance regulations and overall 
cybersecurity strategy. Under MeitY, the Indian  Computer Emergency Response Team 
(CERT-In) acts as the nodal agency for handling and responding to cyb ersecurity incidents, 
issuing guidelines and ensuring rapid reporting and mitigation of breaches. The National 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) focuses on safeguarding 
critical digital infrastructure in s ectors like energy, fi nance, telecom, etc . Key sectoral 
regulators such as the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) supervise cybersecurity norms for banks 
and financial institutions, while the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) and the 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) u phold cyber resilience across the telecom 
sector. Financial and capital markets are further protected by SEBI, the roles and mandates of 
the organisations, along with the contributions of relevant Ministries, are explained in detail 
in the following paragraph. 
3.2 The Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) 
3.2.1 The Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) has been at the 
forefront of India’s efforts to prevent and address cybercrime. MeitY has implemented a 
multi-pronged s trategy centered on strengthening the national cyber ecosystem, increasing 
public awareness and fostering institutional capabilities. MeitY spearheads nationwide cyber 
hygiene and online safety campaigns such as the extensive ‘Safer Internet Day’ initiativ e 
reaching lakhs of beneficiaries through workshops, expert sessions and targeted messaging in 
regional lan guages. It partners with organis ations like National Informatics Centre (NIC), 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C -DAC) and other key institutions to 
promote responsible digital behaviour, introduce cybersecurity best practices and disseminate 
information about reporting mech anisms like the national cybercrime helpline. Further, 
MeitY develops policies and frameworks such as the National Cyber Security Policy to 
secure information infrastructure, support sectoral crisis response, enhance law enforcement’s 
response capabilities and oversee indigenous security technology development. It also leads 
projects like the Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) programme to build 
a skilled cybersecurity workforce and empower Government, industry and society against 
emerging threats. MeitY’s initiatives include the establishment of Cyber Swachhta Kendra 
(CSK) for malware and botnet detection and tools for safe digital practices. 
3.2.2 Recognizing the evolving nature of cyber threats, MeitY has adopted a proactive 
approach to c ybercrime prevention and enhancing digital safety. It regularly consults with 
various Ministries, Departments, Commissions, intermediary platforms/social media 
platforms and industry bodies to ensure effective implementation and compliance with the 
provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act) and the related rules. MeitY 
also continuously reviews the existing legal framework to identify and address gaps, 
emphasizing the role of the IT Act and the Information Technology (Intermediary Guideline s 
and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (IT Rules, 2021) as key instruments in 
regulating harmful and unlawful online content and promoting a safer digital environment. 

 
 
17 
 
Legal Framework for addressing Cybercrimes under IT Act, 2000 
3.2.3 IT Act, 2000 a nd its rules provide a robust legal structure to safeguard users from a 
wide range of cyber offences in India. The Act lists 18 specific cybercrimes, of which six are 
non-bailable and twelve are bailable, with punishments ranging from one year to life 
imprisonment depending on the nature and severity of the offence. IT Act, 2000 applies 
uniformly to offences involving digital information, whether generated by users or through 
AI tools, without making any distinction between the two. Offences covered include  
tampering with computer source documents (Section 65), hacking (Section 66), identity theft 
(Section 66C), cheating by impersonation (Section 66D), violation of privacy (Section 66E), 
cyber terrorism (Section 66F) and publishing or transmitting obscene or  sexually explicit 
material (Sections 67, 67A and 67B), among others. Further, the Act addresses non -
compliance with Government directions on interception, monitoring and blocking of 
information (Sections 69, 69A and 69B) and unauthorised access to protect ed systems 
(Section 70). Section 77B clarifies the bailable and cognizable nature of offences based on 
the prescribed punishment and Section 78 provides that a police officer not below the rank of 
Inspector is empowered to investigate any offence under the IT Act, 2000.  
Cybersecurity issues addressed under the IT Act, 2000 
3.2.4 India’s cybersecurity framework is rooted in the IT Act, 2000 which, along with its 
various rules, continues to adapt to the ever -evolving challenges in the digital realm. A 
significant aspect of this category is designating any computer resource as a “protected 
system” and the obligations to be followed by organisations thereto once a computer resource 
is recognised as a protected system. Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) m eans 
“Computer Resource, the incapacitation or destruction of which, shall have debilitating 
impact on National Security, Economy, Public Health or Safety”. Protected systems are a 
subset of CII and are notified by the Government, with the National Critica l Information 
Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) serving as the nodal agency for their protectio n. 
NCIIPC supports these organis ations by providing threat intelligence, risk assessments, 
advisories, vulnerability reports, incident response, capacity  building and cross -sectoral 
knowledge sharing.   
3.2.5 The protection of cyber security in India is primarily overseen by the Indian 
Computer Emergency Response Team ( CERT-In) for addressing cybersecurity incidents, 
issuing preventive directions and opera ting platforms like the National Cyber Coordination 
Centre (NCCC) and Cyber Swachhta Kendra for real -time threat detection and user 
awareness. These agencies have wide-ranging powers to secure India’s cyberspace, including 
prescribing best practices and ca lling for information from digital entities. As cyber threats 
grow more sophisticated, such as through phishing and malicious applications impersonating 
banks, India’s cybersecurity apparatus responds by evolving its strategies, enforcing 
regulations and d isseminating timely warnings to protect both organis ations and individual 
users. 
Regulating Intermediaries and Enhancing Online Safety through the IT Rules, 2021 
3.2.6 The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021, notified by MeitY under the IT Act, 2000 establish a comprehensive 
regulatory framework to ensure accountability and safety on digital platforms in India. These  
rules impose specific legal obligations on intermediaries, especially social media platforms, 
to prevent the misuse of technology including AI for spreading unlawful content such as 
obscenity, misinformation, impersonation, hate speech and content threate ning India’s 

 
 
18 
 
sovereignty. Key provisions include prohibiting certain types of content, mandating 
immediate account termination for violators and requiring time -bound removal of unlawful 
information. The rules empower users, especially women and children, b y facilitating 
grievance redressal mechanisms with strict timelines and appellate Committees for 
unresolved complaints. They also require significant social media intermediaries to enable 
traceability of the first originator of unlawful messages, deploy au tomated tools to detect and 
curb harmful content and appoint designated officers in India to ensure regulatory 
compliance. Failure to comply causes intermediaries to lose safe harbour protection, exposing 
them to legal action. The Government has recently g iven clear instructions to intermediaries, 
such as social media platforms, to take strong action against unlawful content, including fake 
and malicious material created using AI, like synthetic media and deepfakes. These 
instructions remind intermediaries that they are responsible for preventing the spread of 
unfair and harmful content. They must also make it simple for users to report such content 
and respond quickly by removing it. 
Measures to address Misinformation and Deepfakes under IT Rules.  
3.2.7 MeitY has issued advisories on 26.12.2023 and 15.03.2024 under the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (IT Rules, 
2021) to address issues of misinformation, particularly AI -generated deepfakes and illega l 
loan and betting apps. MeitY emphasized a zero -tolerance policy on unlawful content, 
requiring intermediaries and platforms to ensure compliance with Rule 3(1)(b) of the IT 
Rules, which requires the intermediary to inform their rules and regulations, pri vacy policy 
and user agreement to the user in English or any language specified in the Eighth Schedule to 
the Constitution in the language of user’s choice and to make reasonable efforts to prevent 
users from publishing certain categories of unlawful conte nt, such as misinformation, 
obscene or content that promotes viol ence based on religion or caste. These advisories 
mandate intermediaries to clearly communicate prohibited content to users at registration and 
login, enable easy reporting of violations including deepfakes, promptly remove 
misinformation or impersonation content, comply with grievance committee orders, etc. 
Further, intermediaries must label synthetic or deepfake content with unique metadata for 
identification, restrict unlawful advertisements such as those for illegal loans and betting apps 
and inform users of legal consequences under the applicable laws.  
3.2.8 A subsequent advisory on 03.09.2024, following a Bombay High Court directive, 
required intermediaries to proactively and swiftly remove or disable morphed videos and fake 
profiles related to specific litigation without waiting for prescribed time limits, enhancing 
responsiveness to fake content on platforms. The relevant part of advisory is as following: 
 
“Hon’ble High Court of Bombay in INTERIM APPLICATION (L) NO. 21456 of 2024 in 
COM IPR SUIT (L) NO.21111 of 2024 in the matter of National Stock Exchange of India Ltd. 
vs. Meta Platforms, Inc. & Ors. has taken note of this. The court, while emphasising the duty 
of intermediaries under IT Rules 2021 to take prompt action on the complaints of ent ities like 
the National Stock Exchange of India about unauthorised use of their trademark on dubious 
webpages, profiles, accounts, content, social media groups and /or channels, directed the 
concerned intermediaries to delete or disable the fake informatio n such as morphed videos 
and profiles circulating on their platform relating to the plaintiff promptly within ten hours of 
receiving such complaint.” 
 

 
 
19 
 
3.2.9 Further, on 25.10.2024, MeitY issued an advisory addressing malicious hoax bomb 
threats to airlines , underlining intermediaries' due diligence obligations to promptly remove 
such misinformation that threatens public order and state security. This advisory stressed that 
failure to act removes the safe harbor protection under Section 79 of the IT Act, 200 0. 
Moreover, intermediaries must report offences related to threats against India's unity, 
integrity, security, or economic security under the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 
and provide timely information to authorised Government agencies for inv estigation and 
cybersecurity purposes, within stipulated timeframes (not later than 72 hours).  
Public-Private Partnerships Initiatives for Strengthening Cybersecurity 
3.2.10  In response to a question by the Committee, MeitY has given that it has undertaken 
several strategic initiatives in recent years to foster robust public -private partnerships (PPPs) 
aimed at strengthening cooperation with private sector companies, international partners and 
stakeholders to combat cyber threats. Among these init iatives, MeitY launched the Cyber 
Surakshit Bharat (CSB) programme in a PPP mode to educate and empower Chief 
Information Security Officers (CISOs) and broader IT community across Central and State 
Governments, banks and PSUs to address cybersecurity chall enges effectively. So far, a total 
of 1,662 CISOs and senior IT officers from various entities have been trained under this 
programme, enhancing the cyber readiness of critical Government and public institutions. 
3.2.11  Further, MeitY has established the National Centre of Excellence (NCoE) in Cyber 
Security in collaboration with the Data Security Council of India (DSCI). The NCoE’s 
primary objective is to position India as a leading cybersecurity hub by accelerating the 
identification and development of c ybersecurity technologies, catering to current market 
demands and preparing for future challenges. The Centre has significantly contributed to the 
growth of the cybersecurity ecosystem by accelerating 153 startups across multiple 
cybersecurity domains. The se initiatives collectively demonstrate MeitY’s commitment to 
building national cyber resilience through strategic partnerships and capacity building. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.2.12  The Committee appreciates the comprehensive legislative framework prov ided 
by the Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act) and its associated rules, which 
collectively serve as the cornerstone for regulating digital platforms and safeguarding 
Indian cyberspace.  
3.2.13  The Committee observes that currently the existing law does not differentiate 
between synthetically generated and user -created content. Considering the increasing 
misuse of deepfakes and AI tools for generating harmful or misleading content, the 
Committee recommends that the legal framework be further strengthened to include 
express provisions in the legislation for handling content generated using Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and similar emerging technologies. The Committee further 
recommends that to address issues of deepfake or obscene content being uploaded in the 
social media, MeitY should consider developing an innovative technological framework 
mandating all photos, videos and similar content shared on digital platforms to have a 
watermark as it would help to prove the origin of the content and make it more difficult 
to fake or edit/manipulate. The Committee is of the view that to make this initiative 
functional, MeitY should set up uniform technical standards for media provenance, 
while CERT -In would act as the coordinator for monitoring and issuing detection 
alerts.    

 
 
20 
 
3.2.14  The Committee is of the view that the grievance redressal system should be 
made more user -friendly and transparent to enhance public trust and ensure effective 
resolution of complaints. The Committee, therefore, recommends establishing a uniform 
format for filing complaints, setting clearly defined timelines for acknowledgment and 
resolution, and ensuring public disclosure of grievance statistics, including the number 
of complaints received, resolved and pending. The Committee further recommends that 
integrating the grievance redressal mechanism system with emerging data protection 
frameworks would help to create a more holistic regulatory environment that addresses 
concerns relat ed to privacy, content moderation and cybersecurity in a cohesive and 
coordinated manner. 
3.2.15  Recognising the challenges posed by technologies such as the metaverse, 
blockchain and generative AI, the Committee recommends the development of forward-
looking, flexible regulatory guidelines. The Committee is of the view that the safe 
harbour protections available to intermediaries under the IT Act, 2000 should be 
reviewed periodically to strike a balance between their liability immunity and the need 
for gre ater accountability, especially where platforms fail to act on unlawful content. 
The Committee also recommends a periodic review of enforcement mechanisms and 
penalty provisions under the IT Act, 2000 to ensure their deterrent effect remains 
robust.  
3.2.16  The Committee has observed that certain social media intermediaries at times 
fail to cooperate with law enforcement agencies and legal provisions in promptly 
removing unlawful content, including morphed videos, fake profiles, misinformation 
and content promoting violence based on religion or caste, thereby potentially abetting 
criminal activities and undermining public order. To address this critical gap, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
in consultatio n with the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice, 
should consider amending the Information Technology Act, 2000, to introduce specific 
provisions that hold social media intermediaries legally accountable as when they fail to 
comply with lawful takedown orders within prescribed timelines. Such amendments 
should include graded penalties, including monetary fines and potential suspension of 
operations for persistent non -compliance, while ensuring that due process and appeal 
mechanisms are pr eserved to maintain the balance between content regulation and 
freedom of expression. 
3.2.17 The Committee notes that the OTT platforms have emerged as a primary source 
of entertainment in India, with a reach that surpasses traditional cinema, including a 
substantial audience of minors. The Committee believes that unlike films, which require 
mandatory pre -certification under the Cinematograph Act, OTT content currently 
operates under a self -classification system with post -release grievance redressal as per 
the IT (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021. The 
Committee fur ther believes that although the rules require age ratings, parental 
controls and a grievance mechanism, the lack of pre-release checks and weak age 
verification still leave minors exposed to harmful content. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Go vernment may consider establishment of a recognized panel of 
experts comprising child development specialists, educators, legal experts, social 
scientists and community representatives who will monitor the new OTT releases. The 
Committee is of the view tha t the Post Release Review Panel will watch the flagged or 
trending content post release based on user complaints submitted through a 
standardised grievance mechanism. The Committee recommends that the Panel shall 

 
 
21 
 
devise suitable norms and guidelines keeping in view the cultural ethos and sensitivity of 
the country. The Committee further recommends that the panel may also workout 
suitable penalties in case of infringement of these norms/guidelines. The Committee also 
recommends that OTT platforms must be req uired to adopt more strong technology 
enabled age verification systems and effective parental control  mechanisms, going 
beyond simple self -declaration, to better restrict minors' access to age -inappropriate 
material. The Committee is of the view that regio nal language content classification and 
parental guidance notices should be mandated to offer better protection for rural and 
semi-urban viewers. 
3.2.18  The Committee is of the view that enhanced coordination between 
Governmental agencies, regulators, tec hnology platforms and civil society would be 
beneficial to strengthen the country’s ability to respond to cyber challenges. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the establishment of formal ways for these groups 
to work together for knowledge sharing, joint  decision-making and capacity building in 
the cyberspace domain. 
3.2.19  The Committee recommends that all apps should comply with a strict data 
protection and security standards as prescribed in applicable laws and regulations. The 
Committee also suggests  setting compliance requirements for app stores, including 
regular audits to prevent malicious or harmful apps from being distributed. The 
Committee also recommends for development of an indigenous app store to facilitate 
Indian startups. 
3.3  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) 
3.3.1 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) plays a crucial role in 
combating cybercrimes through its regulatory oversight and public awareness initiatives 
within the digital media environment. By enforci ng the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021, MIB regulates 
publishers of news and current affairs on digital platforms as well as Over -the-Top (OTT) 
content providers. This regulatory framework ensures that digital content complies with 
ethical standards, preventing the spread of unlawful or harmful material that may promote 
cybercrime. 
3.3.2 To address grievances related to digital content, MIB has implemented a three -tier 
redressal mechanism. This syst em begins with self -regulation by publishers, followed by 
supervision from self -regulating bodies and finally oversight by a Government -led 
Committee, ensuring timely resolution of complaints and fostering safe digital media usage. 
Further, MIB’s regulatio n of online advertisements enhances transparency and helps curb 
misleading or harmful content that could contribute to cybercrimes. 
3.3.3 In addition, MIB actively promotes cyber safety awareness through mass media 
campaigns conducted via television, radio and digital platforms. These initiatives aim to 
educate the public on safe internet practices and the importance of cyber hygiene. Within the 
broadcasting sector, MIB ensures compliance with the Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act , 1995, thereby preventing the transmission of content that might incite 
cybercrime or spread misinformation. The Ministry’s oversight of licensing for Direct -to-
Home (DTH) and cable operators serves as an additional preventive measure against the 
misuse of broadcast networks. Further support from the Central Bureau of Communication 
(CBC) bolsters these initiatives by encouraging the responsible use of digital media. The 

 
 
22 
 
Electronic Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) monitors broadcast content to ensure 
compliance with content standards and to detect materials that could facilitate cybercrime.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.3.4 The Committee is of the view to introduce a strong verification system for 
offshore advertisers. The Committee recommends that the offshor e advertisers must 
undergo a thorough digital verification process, like uploading official documents, 
completing a live video identification, etc., to prove their identity and must use zero -
trust frameworks during verification, where every access request from offshore 
advertisers (including changes to ads, payment details, or identity information) must be 
continuously authenticated and monitored to curb fraudulent and deceptive advertising 
targeting Indian users. 
3.4  Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
3.4.1  The Department of Telecommunications (DoT) has taken significant measures to curb 
the rising misuse of telecom resources in cybercrime and financial fraud. Cybercriminals 
have been found exploiting mobile connections, often obtained through fake documents or 
rented from unsuspecting individuals, to send fraudulent calls, impersonate officials on 
platforms, like WhatsApp and conduct social engineering scams. These mobile numbers are 
sometimes linked with bank accounts to facilitate illicit financial transact ions, allowing 
fraudsters to deceive citizens and siphon off money.  
3.4.2  To tackle this growing threat, the DoT focused initially on enabling citizens to report 
such fraudulent activities easily. As a part of this effort, the Government launched the 
Sanchar Saathi portal and mobile app, a citizen -centric initiative that empowers mobile users 
to take control of their digital identities. Available on both  android, iOS and via a web portal, 
Sanchar Saathi offers various services including the ability to re port suspected fraud 
communications and unsolicited commercials; identify and deactivate unauthorised mobile 
connections issued in the user’s name; report lost or stolen mobile phones to block or trace 
them; verify the authenticity of new or second -hand  m obile devices; flag international calls 
appearing with Indian caller IDs; and find details about wireline internet service providers. 
By crowdsourcing data on suspected fraud, this platform has become an important tool in the 
national strategy against tele com-related frauds. Beyond empowering individuals, the DoT 
also brought together over 620 key stakeholders on a common platform called the Digital 
Intelligence Platform (DIP). This platform now connects law enforcement agencies, Central 
and State -level authorities, banks, telecom service providers (TSPs), digital apps and other 
relevant partners to enable seamless data sharing and collaborative analytics. 
3.4.3 In a reply submitted to the Committee, DoT has mentioned that currently there is no 
legal framework in place to verify whether a mobile number seeded for availing a service 
(such as in a bank account) actually belongs to the person in whose name the account is 
opened. This gap is often exploited for fraudulent activities. To address this, DoT has 
proposed draft amendment rules to amend the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber 
Security) Rules, 2024, seeking public consultation. The proposed amendment aims to 
establish a Mobile Number Validation (MNV) platform, which will enable authorised entities 
and licensees those using telecommunication identifiers for customer identification or service 
provisioning to validate that the mobile number corresponds to the person recorded in their 
database. 

 
 
23 
 
3.4.4 This initiative is expected to bridge the current verificatio n gap and help prevent the 
misuse of telecom resources in cyber fraud and crimes. In terms of enforcement, DoT has 
specified that any violation of KYC and validation requirements by telecom operators will be 
addressed in accordance with the Telecommunicati ons Act, 2023. To ensure a balance 
between enhanced security measures and protection of user privacy, the proposed amendment 
mandates that Telecommunication Identifier User Entities (TIUEs), authorised entities and 
licensees must comply with applicable dat a protection laws for mobile number validation 
purpose.  
3.4.5 To bolster its anti-fraud measures, DoT has implemented the Centralized International 
Out Roamer (CIOR) system, which identifies and blocks international spoof calls that falsely 
display Indian  caller IDs. CIOR had an immediate impact of blocking 1.35 crore spoofed 
calls within just 24 hours of its launching and has achieved a 98.5% reduction in such 
deceptive calls. Additionally, an indigenous AI -based solution namely Artificial Intelligence 
and Facial Recognition powered Solution for Telecom SIM Subscriber Verification (ASTR) 
helps prevent misuse of SIM cards by identifying SIMs obtained through fake identities. 
Another tool, the Financial Fraud Risk Indicator (FRI), launched in May 2025, uses multi-
source analysis to classify mobile numbers into risk categories such as medium, high or very 
high enabling banks, NBFCs and UPI providers to take timely preventive actions. 
3.4.6 To further secure mobile identity, a Mobile Number Validation Service ( MNVS) is 
also being piloted, which aims to verify mobile number ownership and prevent use of mobile 
connections in mule accounts. The DoT has backed all these digital interventions with large -
scale public awareness campaigns across languages and platforms,  partnering with banks, 
telecom service providers and Government institutions to maximize reach. Together, these 
innovative steps form a robust defence framework against the misuse of India’s telecom and 
financial systems. 
 
3.4.7 As per the data provided by the DoT to the Committee, the broad outcomes of various 
initiatives of DoT are as under: - 
Table 3.1 
 
S. 
No. 
Item Description Outcomes 
1. Total mobile number disconnections 4.22 crores 
a. Total fraudulent connections disconnected based upon ASTR analysis 78.33 lakhs 
b. Mobile connections disconnected based on inputs from other stakeholders 72.42 lakhs 
c. Mobile connections disconnected for exceeding individual limit 1.46 crores 
d. Mobile connections disconnected based on citizens feedback on Sanchar Saathi 
(Not My Number + Not Required) 
1.26 crores 
2. No. of mobile handsets traced for ‘Block Your Lost/Stolen Mobile’ and flagged to 
State Police 
20.49 lakhs 
3. Mobile handsets recovered by State Police and returned to citizens 4.72 lakhs 
4. IMEIs of mobile handsets blocked for involvement in cyber-crime/financial frauds 5.1 lakhs 
5. Action on bulk SMSs sender through data analytics and citizen reporting 
a. Principal Entities blacklisted who were sending phishing SMSs 20,282 
b. SMS Headers blacklisted 34,608 
c.     SMS templates blacklisted 3.31 lakhs 
6. Action by Banks and Payment Wallets for freezing of bank accounts or debit/credit 
restrictions on accounts Linked to fraudulent disconnected mobile numbers 
20.89 lakhs 
7. Profiles/accounts disengaged by WhatsApp associated with shared mobile numbers 19.72 lakhs 
8. PoS/SIM seller blacklisted 74,250 
9. FIR registered against PoS 507 FIRs & 1038 Police complaints 
10. WhatsApp groups &communities disengaged 1,03,585 groups & 280 communities 

 
 
24 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.4.8 The Committee commends the DoT for its significant initiatives to tackle 
cybercrime using telecom resources, highlighting the successful Sanchar Saathi portal 
that engages citizens in protecting digital identities. The Committee notes the strong 
impact of technologies like the Centr alized International Out Roamer (CIOR) system 
blocking over 1.35 crore spoofed calls in a day and reducing such incidents by 98% 
along with the use of AI, facial recognition and the Financial Fraud Risk Indicator 
(FRI) for innovative prevention. The Commit tee also acknowledges the Digital 
Intelligence Platform (DIP) for fostering real -time collaboration among key sectors to 
fight cybercrime. To keep pace with evolving fraud techniques, the Committee 
recommends deeper integration and automation of data flow between existing systems 
such as the Sanchar Saathi portal, Digital Intelligence Platform and law enforcement 
databases. 
3.4.9 Considering the importance of public awareness in cybercrime prevention, the 
Committee observes that sustained multilingual and c ross-platform campaigns should 
be intensified particularly in regional and rural areas so that more citizens know how to 
report fraud and reclaim control over their mobile credentials. The Committee 
recommends that it would be valuable to take the Mobile N umber Validation Service 
(MNVS) beyond the current stage and implement it nationwide in collaboration with 
banks, NBFCs and fintech platforms to limit the use of mobile numbers in fraudulent or 
mule accounts. 
3.4.10  The Committee notes that the regulatory  frameworks governing the use of 
telecom channels such as automatic calls, bulk SMSs and Voice over Internet  Protocol 
(VoIP) to be strengthened in order to prevent misuse of these services for phishing 
campaigns. The Committee recommends continued investment in indigenous AI 
technologies like Artificial Intelligence and Facial Recognition powered Solution for 
Telecom SIM Subscriber Verification (ASTR) to ensure that SIM card issuance with a 
focus on preventing identity fraud at the point of issue.  
3.4.11 The DoT informed the Committee that about 570 banks and financial 
institutions (FIs) use the Digital Intelligence Platform (DIP) to access Mobile Number 
Revocation List (MNRL) and financial fraud indicators for acting on suspicious bank 
accounts, leading to action on 20.89 lakh accounts. The Committee commends these 
efforts to tackle telecom-linked financial fraud and recommends that efforts should also 
be made to ensure swift sharing of risk alerts and revocations from all these institutions, 
thus minimizing manual delays in addressing fraud. 
3.5  Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) 
3.5.1 India’s telecom landscape has not only become one of the largest in the world but also 
one of the most dynamic, giving rise to unprecedented opportunities as well as complex 
cybercrime challenges. As connectivity spread rapidly growing from just over 14.5 million  
phone connections in 1997 to more than 1,200 million by March 2025, the scope and 
sophistication of cyber threats targeting telecom networks also multiplied. The wide 
proliferation of the internet, with over 944 million subscribers by 2025 and the afforda ble 
availability of smart phones have turned the mobile network into an essential highway for 
commerce, governance, finance, education and public services. However, this digital 

 
 
25 
 
revolution has opened new avenues for misuse and cybercrime, including spam, f raudulent 
calls and digital scams. 
3.5.2 Addressing these threats, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) has 
consistently acted to protect consumers and the integrity of the telecom network. One of 
TRAI’s most significant efforts in cybercrime p revention is the Telecom Commercial 
Communication Customer Preference Regulation (TCCCPR) of 2018. This regulation marks 
a paradigm shift in the regulatory approach to unsolicited commercial communication. It not 
only clearly defines what constitutes spam and fraudulent communications but also 
establishes concrete mechanisms to identify and punish offenders. To empower the public, 
TRAI has enabled users to specify preferences regarding commercial communications and to 
report violations swiftly, notably thro ugh the TRAI Do Not Disturb (DND) App, which 
makes it easier for citizens to report spam or suspected fraud directly. 
Combating Telecom Misuse  
3.5.3 Recognizing that cybercriminals frequently alter their methods, TRAI has informed 
the Committee that it has carried out regular amendments to strengthen the framework. In 
February 2025, TRAI amended TCCCPR (Telecom Commercial Communications Customer 
Preference Regulation) to strengthen consumer protection against Unsolicited Commercial 
Communication (UCC). T hese amendments set out stricter criteria for commercial 
communications, enhanced complaint redressal systems, imposed higher accountability on 
senders and telemarketers, introduced tighter thresholds for identifying misuse and enacted 
stricter controls to  prevent the use of 10 -digit numbers by unregistered telemarketers for 
illegal activities. The regulations also require Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) to actively 
monitor telecom resources, promptly disconnect and blacklist offenders and maintain 
comprehensive records of their actions for regulatory review. 
3.5.4 Technological innovation has been a key player in TRAI’s cybercrime prevention 
strategy. It informed the Committee that the implementation of a blockchain based regulatory 
framework for spam cont rol under TCCCPR represents a significant technological leap, 
making tracking and accountability in commercial messaging far more robust. This system 
creates a tamper -proof digital ledger of messaging transactions, enabling authorities to trace 
and act aga inst violators with much greater efficiency and transparency. However, as 
malicious actors continue to innovate, TRAI remains vigilant by actively soliciting 
suggestions from the ecosystem, as seen in the 2024 consultation paper on further refining the 
TCCCPR framework. 
3.5.5 In addition to regulatory and technological measures, TRAI understands that 
cybercrime and fraudulent communications are multi -sectoral threats demanding 
collaboration. As such, it established the Joint Committee of Regulators (JCoR), comprising 
regulatory agencies from domains like finance, securities, insurance, consumer affairs and IT, 
along with supporting Ministries. This body facilitates information sharing and coordinated 
strategies to deal with spam, scams and cybercrimes that c ut across regulatory jurisdictions. 
For example, JCoR’s focus on creating a joint action plan to fight fraudulent calls and 
messages has led to synchronized responses and policy formulation among diverse agencies. 
3.5.6 Concrete enforcement actions have fu rther underlined TRAI’s commitment to 
cybercrime prevention. Consequent to release of TRAI’s direction dated 13 th August, 2024, 
Access Service Providers are now empowered to disconnect all telecom resources such as 
voice lines and network access used by un registered senders and Unregistered Telemarketers 

 
 
26 
 
(UTMs) engaging in spam and fraud. Access Providers have taken widespread actions which 
have led to a significant reduction in the complaints registered  against the spam calls (Table -
3.2). 
Table 3.2 
 
Unsolicited Commercial Communication (UCC) complaints received by Access Providers 
 
Period Complaints against 
Registered 
Telemarketers 
(RTMs) 
Complaints against 
Unregistered 
Telemarketers 
(UTMs) 
Jan 2021 to Dec-2021 4,28,290 8,55,771 
Jan 2022 to Dec- 2022 1,78,690 9,04,359 
Jan 2023 to Dec 2023 1,39,886 12,22,946 
Jan 2024 to Dec 2024 1,91,430 17,47,327 
Jan 2025 to May 2025 1,04,001 6,91,758 
 
3.5.7 The directive mandates that any entity found to be making promotional voice calls in 
violation of regulations would face severe consequences including disconnection of all 
telecom resources for a period up to two years, blacklisting for up to two years, during which 
there will be complete ban on acquisition of new telecom resources etc. Consequent to t his 
Direction, Access Providers have taken widespread actions which led to a significant 
reduction in the complaints registered against the spam calls, details of the action taken and 
reduction in complaint is given in Table -3.3 and 3.4 respectively. 
Table 3.3 
Details of entities blacklisted and Telecom Resources Disconnected  
 
Number of entities/individuals 
blacklisted after the issuance of 13th 
August 2024 Direction 
Number of/DID/Landline numbers, 
Mobile numbers disconnected 
More than 1150 More than 18.8 Lakh 
 
Table 3.4 
UTM complaints registered by Access Providers  
 
Month Complaints against 
Unregistered 
Telemarketers 
(UTMs) 
Change 
August 2024 1,89,419  
September 2024 1,63,167 13% less as compared to August 24 
October 2024 1,51,497 20% less as compared to August 24 
November 2024 1,31,300 30% less as compared to August 24 
December 2024 1,41,294 25% less as compared to August 24 
January 2025 1,34,821 29% less as compared to August 24 
February 2025 1,05,102 44% less as compared to August 24 
March 2025 1,16,221 38% less as compared to August 24 
April 2025 1,24,105 34% less as compared to August 24 
May2025 2,11,509 11% more as compared to August 24 

 
 
27 
 
Enhanced Message Traceability 
3.5.8 TRAI also informed the Committee that  to strengthen the fight against spam and 
misuse of telecom services, TRAI introduced several important measures. First, to enhance 
message traceability, a directive issued on 20 th August 2024 required that the entire trail of 
every message from sender or principal entity to  the end recipient must be traceable from 1 st 
November 2024 onwards. Access Providers were given time to upgrade their technical 
systems and full implementation was accomplished from 11th December 2024.  
Guidelines for Senders 
3.5.9 To sensitize the Sender s about the regulatory requirement before making commercial 
communications through Voice Calls or SMS, important aspects of guidelines as per 
TCCCPR-2018 Regulations were circulated to all the Senders in June 2024 through RBI, 
SEBI, Insurance Regulatory an d Development Authority of India (IRDAI), Department of 
Financial Services (DFS), Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Department of Consumer 
Affairs (DoCA)  and all Access Providers  for effective implementation of these guidelines in 
letter and spirit for prevention of UCC as well as potential misuse by fraudsters. 
Collaborative Regulatory efforts through Joint Committee of Regulators 
3.5.10  Collaboration across different regulators has been boosted through the Joint 
Committee of Regulators (JCoR), esta blished in December 2021. The Committee consists of 
members from SEBI, RBI, TRAI, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, IRDAI, Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) and MeitY, focuses to study regulatory 
challenges in the digital world. Conside ring the increasing menace of financial scams, the 
focus of the last few meetings has been on joint action plans to curb unsolicited 
communications using telecom resources. 
Stringent Measures against Spammers/ Senders 
3.5.11  To effectively combat spam and  Unsolicited Commercial Communications (UCC), 
TRAI has mandated strict measures for Access Providers. If a sender is found repeatedly 
violating regulations, all their telecom resources must be suspended. For a first -time breach, 
outgoing services from all telecom connections of the sender will be barred for 15 days. For 
further violations, all telecom resources, including PRI (Primary Rate Interface)/SIP (Session 
Initiation Protocol) trunks, will be disconnected for one year across all providers and the 
sender will be blacklisted.  
3.5.12  In addition, any call or message intended to deceive customers is now officially 
classified as UCC related to telecom misuse. This designation empowers swift regulatory 
intervention including prompt disconnection and black listing, especially since blockchain 
technology enables faster tracing and enforcement. Further, senders are now prevented from 
using normal 10 -digit numbers for telemarketing. Instead, all commercial communications 
must use specific headers or designated number series. The existing “140” series will be used 
for promotional calls and the new “1600” series will be used for transactional and service 
calls. This change will help recipients easily recognise the nature of the commercial call from 
the caller ID, offering enhanced transparency and consumer protection. 
  

 
 
28 
 
Public Awareness Programmes 
3.5.13  In a reply to a question, TRAI has stated to the Committee that as part of its ongoing 
mission to enhance consumer protection and cyber hygiene, TRAI has undertaken a series of 
wide-ranging initiatives aimed at educating the public on telecom -related cyber threats and 
preparing for emerging risks in the digital communication ecosystem. Between 2024 and 
2025 alone, TRAI has conducted a remarkable 654 consume r awareness activities across 
India. These included 46 Consumer Outreach Programmes (COPs), 6 workshops and 6 
seminars by regional offices. In addition, 261 Consumer Awareness Programmes (CAPs) 
were held through registered consumer organisations, while Tel ecom Service Providers 
(TSPs) organised 335 Consumer Educational Workshops (CEWs). TRAI’s awareness 
campaigns further incorporated mass outreach mediums such as promotions of the Do Not 
Disturb (DND) app, radio and media interviews, active social media cam paigns, SMS 
advisories on spam and fraud and special regional programs all of which emphasized the 
growing threat of telecom-based fraud and how users can safeguard themselves. 
3.5.14  On collaborative engagements, TRAI has involved various NGOs and educat ional 
institutions to support spam prevention, header misuse awareness and UCC (unsolicited 
commercial communication) reporting. It regularly engages NGOs through regional offices 
and consultation processes designed to includ e feedback from consumer organi sations. 
Further, awareness programs are routinely conducted in schools and colleges and TRAI is 
currently exploring a partnership with the National Commission for Women (NCW) for joint 
initiatives. TRAI has not yet directly collaborated with MeitY's Infor mation Security 
Education and Awareness (ISEA) project, but will explore such collaborations in the future. 
3.5.15  Looking ahead, TRAI is actively responding to the rising sophistication of cyber 
threats emerging from advancements in 5G, satellite interne t and AI/ML technologies. It 
supports AI-based spam filters, promotes digital consent and traceability pilots and advocates 
for regulatory collaboration to fill systemic gaps. Nonetheless, TRAI acknowledges 
constraints stemming from its stagnant workforce strength. Despite exponential growth in 
telecom and broadcasting ecosystems, TRAI continues to operate with only 273 employees a 
number unchanged since 2012. TRAI has submitted a proposal to the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) to enhance the sanctio ned strength to 396 to better address 
complex, technology -driven policy challenges. Further, TRAI has also mentioned to the 
Committee that there is urgent requirement of new verticals to address critical issues such as 
telecom/cybersecurity including quant um safe communication and to develop an economic 
analysis wing to effectively assess policies related to emerging technologies. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.5.16  The Committee appreciates TRAI’s commendable efforts in organizing over 650 
consumer awarenes s initiatives and driving proactive public outreach to promote 
telecom cybersecurity awareness. The collaborative efforts involving Telecom Service 
Providers (TSPs), NGOs and educational institutions reflect a strong commitment to 
inclusive digital literac y. Since TRAI has not yet directly collaborated with MeitY's 
Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) project,  the Committee 
recommends that TRAI should be encouraged to partner with MeitY’s  ISEA project to 
expand digital safety outreach through role -based learning modules and online self -
learning platforms. Further, the Committee recommends that in order to strengthen its 
capacity in dealing with emerging regulatory and technological issues, the Ministry of 

 
 
29 
 
Communications may be approached to expedite the proposal to enhance TRAI’s staff 
strength.  
3.5.17  With respect to the awareness programmes conducted by TRAI, the Committee 
is of the view that TRAI can also work with universities and rese arch groups to create a 
system to check how effective its awareness programs are working, especially for people 
in rural areas and other vulnerable groups. The Committee feels that a dedicated 
budget may also be considered for cyber literacy pilot projects  in schools and 
communities, with regular reviews jointly conducted by DoT, MeitY and TRAI. 
Further, the Committee suggests that the Government may consider the creation of new 
expert verticals within TRAI to address cyber threats, quantum -safe networks an d the 
economic challenges of fast -developing telecom technologies, enabling a secure digital 
transition for the country. 
3.5.18  Considering the steady increase in complaints related to Unregistered 
Telemarketers (UTMs), the Committee is of the view that i t is essential to focus on 
targeted actions to address this challenge more effectively. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that measures should be taken to enhance real -time detection mechanisms 
to identify and block UTMs proactively. The Committee sugge sts that a centralized 
blacklist database should be maintained and it needs to be shared across all telecom 
service providers to ensure swift disconnection of offending numbers. 
3.6  Reserve Bank of India 
Transformation and Emerging Risks 
3.6.1 India’s rapid expansion of digital financial services has significantly enhanced 
financial inclusion and consumer convenience. However, this growth has also triggered a rise 
in cyber -enabled frauds, especially those driven by social engineering tactics, limited 
customer awareness, and the exploitation of technological vulnerabilities. In response to this 
evolving threat landscape, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) continues to reinforce its 
regulatory and supervisory frameworks to protect consumers and ensure the int egrity of the 
financial system. 
Regulatory and Prevention Measures 
3.6.2 RBI has issued targeted directives to curb cyber -frauds across the financial sector. In 
January 2025, the RBI issued a circular directing all regulated entities (REs) to cleanse their  
customer databases by cross -referencing against the Department of Telecom’s Mobile 
Number Revocation List  (MNRL) and to implement dedicated numbering series for official 
outbound calls, thereby reducing the risk of caller-ID spoofing. Compliance with the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India’s ( TRAI’s) communication standards is compulsory, and 
institutions must prominently feature their customer -care contact details across all public 
channels. Complementing these technical safeguards, the RBI has intensi fied its customer -
awareness initiatives. Under its July 2024 update, supervised entities (SEs) are also required 
to heighten scrutiny of suspicious transactions, with a particular focus on accounts lacking 
full KYC documentation and those potentially used as money mules. 
  

 
 
30 
 
Customer Due Diligence and Fraud Risk Management 
3.6.3 In the meeting with the representatives of RBI, the Committee was informed that  RBI 
has laid down a comprehensive regulatory framework to ensure strict adherence to Customer 
Due Diligence (CDD) and Fraud Risk Management, aimed at safeguarding the integrity of 
the financial system. The RBI’s Master Direction on Know Your Customer, revi sed on 12 
June 2025, mandates that regulated entities (REs) conduct rigorous identity verification at 
onboarding, maintain continuous monitoring of customer accounts, and periodically refresh 
KYC data to swiftly detect unusual activity. Its Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management, 
effective from 15th July 2024,  obliges supervised entities (SEs) to remain vigilant against 
suspicious transactions especially those tied to non-KYC compliant or suspected money mule 
accounts and to strengthen internal policies, controls, and recruitment procedures to deter 
employee involvement in fraud. An advisory issued on 19 th November 2024 further instructs 
banks to bolster staff accountability, reinforce systems, and enhance digital onboarding 
processes such as Video-based Customer Identification (V-CIP).  
3.6.4 On the supervisory  front, RBI employs multiple layers of oversight to ensure 
compliance and risk mitigation. Prudential supervision by Senior Supervisory Managers 
(SSMs) covers operational risks including KYC, Anti-Money Laundering (AML), Combating 
the Financing of Terroris m (CFT) and cybersecurity. RBI conducts full -scope KYC/AML 
inspections that encompass customer due diligence, transaction monitoring, identification of 
money mule activity and preventive controls. Thematic assessments and supervisory 
evaluations of major banks help identify gaps in controls related to money mule detection and 
fraud prevention. Where gaps or non -compliance are detected, RBI issues supervisory letters 
demanding timely corrective actions, with involvement from the banks’ top management and 
audit committees. In cases of violations, the RBI enforces stringent actions, including 
monetary penalties, to uphold regulatory standards and protect the financial ecosystem. 
API Integration with I4C for Faster Cybercrime Response 
3.6.5 RBI apprised the Comm ittee about the integration of Application Programming 
Interfaces (APIs) between banks and the Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C) portal 
marks a significant step toward speeding up the response to complaints registered under the 
National Cybercrim e Reporting Portal (NCRP). This initiative, facilitated by RBI, aims to 
streamline communication and data exchange between financial institutions and cybercrime 
authorities to tackle cyber -related fraud and crimes more efficiently. I4C requested RBI to 
advise banks to onboard the NCRP -Centralized Fraud and Citizen Financial Fraud Reporting 
and Management System (CFCFRMS) platform and proceed with API integration. In 
response, RBI has issued advisories mandating banks and financial institutions to join the 
platform and encouraging them to implement API integration as and when approached by 
I4C. This ensures that all involved parties work seamlessly in reporting and investigating 
cybercrime incidents tied to financial fraud. 
3.6.6 RBI informed the Committee that as on July 2025, 19 banks and financial institutions 
have fully completed the API integration process, enabling automated, real -time sharing of 
complaint-related information with I4C. In addition, over 350 banks have been on boarded to 
the CFCFRMS platform, reflecting broad adoption across the financial sector. However, the 
full integration process is still underway for some institutions, with delays primarily 
attributed to dependencies on third-party vendors or technical challenges.  
  

 
 
31 
 
Supervisory Actions and Coordination 
3.6.7 Beyond public advisories, RBI issues confidential instructions to banks and financial 
institutions to combat evolving fraud patterns. These include sharing information on fraud 
“hotspots” requiring enha nced monitoring, identifying money mule accounts linked to 
investment or job frauds and tightening internal controls and staff accountability. Banks must 
respond swiftly to law enforcement  agencies, secure customer data and align anti -fraud 
efforts with anti-money laundering protocols. Compliance deadlines and progress, especially 
regarding technology upgrades like IP -based monitoring, are tracked closely. Banks also 
receive specific instructions on telemarketing compliance, deployment of dedicated staff fo r 
24x7 cybercrime reporting and cooperation with law enforcement, as well as participation in 
national cybercrime mitigation platforms and suspect registries. 
Strengthening Security in Card Usage and Payments 
3.6.8 RBI’s 2016 cybersecurity framework mandat es that banks maintain strong, ongoing 
cyber safeguards; this requirement now extends to cooperative banks as well. Master 
Directions issued in 2021 require regulated digital payment entities to implement robust 
governance and minimum-security standards across all payment platforms, including unified 
authentication for ATMs, mobile and online banking and card transactions. Given the 
growing reliance on outsourcing, the 2023 guidelines outline risk management strategies for 
third-party and cloud -based IT ser vices. Since 2024, non -bank payment system operators 
must also conform to standards for cyber resilience and information security, aiming for a 
robust, secure digital payments ecosystem.  
3.6.9 Further RBI has highlighted the Committee that it has introduced several measures to 
secure card transactions, digital payments and the broader banking system against cyber fraud 
and operational risks. Card tokenisation now protects users by replacing sens itive card data 
with unique tokens, reducing data theft risks. Now, cardholders can manage transaction limits 
or even switch cards on/off and new cards are enabled only for domestic, contact -based 
transactions by default. Only authorised Payment Aggregator s (PAs) are allowed to operate 
and banks must close accounts associated with unauthorised PAs, referring regularly to RBI’s 
updated official list. ATM security has also been enhanced with mandatory video 
surveillance via CCTV and a new convenient and secure way to withdraw cash without using 
physical cards has been introduced where users can withdraw cash using the UPI system. 
Banks are also directed to monitor withdrawals in high -risk locations and review overseas 
card usage. Additionally, the introduction  of a payee name look -up feature in NEFT and 
RTGS systems has helped in verifying account details before fund transfers, thereby reducing 
fraud risk. 
Digital Payment Intelligence Platform (DPIP) 
3.6.10  RBI informed the Committee that the Digital Payment I ntelligence Platform (DPIP) 
is an initiative led by RBI to combat the rising frauds in digital payments by leveraging 
advanced technologies. The RBI constituted a committee to explore the framework for 
establishing DPIP. The platform is designed as a neutr al, industry -wide digital public 
infrastructure (DPI) that enables real -time sharing, analysis and intelligence of payment 
transaction data across banks and non -bank payment system participants. DPIP will use 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learni ng (ML) models developed from historical 
transaction data contributed by banks and payment networks. The platform will provide real -
time risk scores for ongoing transactions. Participating banks can use it to identify suspicious 

 
 
32 
 
transactions and take preve ntive actions effectively. By collecting and sharing data instantly 
across multiple institutions, hence DPIP facilitates centralised threat detection and fraud 
management.  
3.6.11  The Reserve Bank Innovation Hub (RBIH), a wholly owned subsidiary of RBI, i s 
tasked with building a DPIP prototype in collaboration with several banks. The institutional 
framework is being developed with participation from public and private sector banks, 
recognizing fraud as a widespread challenge across the sector. Contextually , the urgency to 
operationalize DPIP arises from a significant surge in digital payment frauds. According to 
RBI's latest Annual report, fraud value related to bank transactions nearly tripled from 
₹12,230 crore in FY24 to ₹36,014 crore in FY25, with a lar ge number of cases occurring in 
digital payment modes such as cards and internet banking.  
Supervision and Coordination 
3.6.12  RBI undertakes thorough supervisory activities, including risk inspections spanning 
KYC, AML/CFT and cybersecurity. Any system gaps identified prompt time-bound remedial 
action, with top management involvement and enforcement action may include penalties. The 
Central Bank maintains continuous engagement with regulated entities to address issues like 
digital frauds and mule accounts, supported by special supervisory cells and frequent training. 
RBI’s coordination extends to law enforcement, regulators and Ministry of Home Affairs, 
facilitating anti -fraud strategies, knowledge sharing through joint workshops and efficient 
cyber fraud response. Initiatives also include collaboration with the telecom and IT sectors to 
tackle phishing scams and consideration of a ‘bank.in’ domain for official bank websites in 
collaboration with MeitY. Efforts are underway to standardize cybercrime complai nt 
handling and accelerate coordinated action via Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) 
connectivity with national fraud and cybercrime management platforms. 
Fostering Innovation and Technological Response 
3.6.13  As technology continues to advance, fr audsters are also becoming more 
sophisticated, constantly finding new ways to exploit vulnerabilities in the financial system. 
RBI informed the Committee that recognizing this ongoing challenge, RBI is committed to 
help banks and financial institutions to stay a step ahead by promoting the adoption of 
advanced technological tools and frameworks. RBI is actively encouraging the use of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) to strengthen fraud detection and 
prevention mechanisms. One notable i nitiative is MuleHunter.ai, a machine learning tool 
developed by the Reserve Bank Innovation Hub (RBIH) for near real -time identification of 
mule accounts. By leveraging advanced pattern -recognition techniques, MuleHunter.ai 
achieves higher accuracy and sp eed than traditional detection systems and is already 
operational at 4 banks (Canara Bank, Punjab National Bank, Bank of Baroda and Bank of 
India) and is being deployed in two others (AU Small Finance Bank and Federal Bank). As of 
now, MuleHunter.ai has flagged over 75,000 potential mule accounts with accuracy of ~90% 
across the four banks, where it has been implemented. 
3.6.14  To encourage further innovation, RBI has introduced a Regulatory Sandbox 
framework that allows banks and fintech companies to pilo t new products and technologies 
under regulatory oversight, particularly those aimed at preventing fraud. In addition, RBI’s 
“HaRBInger Hackathon” annual program brings together fintech professionals from around 
the world to create innovative solutions add ressing immediate challenges such as real -time 
fraud detection and the identification of mule bank accounts. 

 
 
33 
 
3.6.15  RBI is also investing in digital infrastructure to improve sector -wide supervision and 
incident management. The tool known as “DAKSH” , an a dvanced web -based supervisory 
monitoring system, facilitates the automation and streamlining of key processes like cyber 
incident reporting and analysis.  It further ensures that lessons learned from individual 
incidents are translated into actionable intel ligence for the broader financial sector. Looking 
ahead, new platforms like the Digital Payment Intelligence Platform (DPIP) will deploy 
multiple AI models to assess risk levels of transactions, enabling banks to take timely and 
appropriate action to mitig ate potential fraud. The upcoming Central Payment Fraud 
Information Registry (CPFIR) will also serve as a consolidated source for tracking and 
analyzing fraud incidents across the financial sector. 
3.6.16  The RBI has issued guidance encouraging regulated entities (REs) to adopt Artificial 
intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for robust transaction monitoring and to 
enhance customer identification processes, including making Video -based Customer 
Identification Process (V -CIP). To ensure ethical and e ffective use of these technologies, an 
Expert Committee has been established to develop frameworks for the responsible 
deployment of AI in the banking and financial sector. RBI’s principle -based regulatory 
approach also calls for regulated entities to dyna mically assess emerging risks from new 
technologies and implement suitable remediation measures.  
Digital Payment Fraud Complaints and Resolution  
3.6.17  RBI informed the Committee that the victims of digital payment fraud can lodge their 
complaints with RBI Ombudsman under the Reserve Bank -Integrated Ombudsman Scheme 
(RB-IOS). Complaints can be filed either physically or digitally ( via email or online portal) 
and in any language, making the process accessible and user -friendly. Over the last three 
financial years, complaints related to unauthorised transactions have been handled diligently 
by RBI Ombudsmen. The average Turnaround Time (TAT) for disposal of complaints related 
to ‘Unauthorised transactions’ dealt by RBI Ombudsmen in last 3 years is given below: - 
Table 3.5 
 
 FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 FY 2024-25 
TAT of Disposed 
Complaints 
36.3 Days 51.9 Days 68.3 Days 
 
3.6.18  The number of resolved complaints (i.e. resolved through Mutual Settlement/ 
Agreement or by passing of Award) related to ‘Unauthorised transactions’ dealt by RBI 
Ombudsmen in the last 3 years are given below: - 
Table 3.6 
 
 FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 FY 2024-25 
Settled Complaints 2,566 2,202 1,823 
 
3.6.19  The complaints received under the Reserve Bank Integrated Ombudsman Scheme are 
disposed in a fair and expeditious manner by the RBI Ombudsmen. The numbers of 
complaints received and disposed under the scheme have increased over the years. 
Complaints are disposed in favour of the complainant, where it is observed that there is a case 

 
 
34 
 
of service deficiency on the part of the regulated entities of Reserve Bank. The summary of 
the complaints received and disposed of during the last three financial years is prov ided 
below: - 
Table 3.7 
 
 FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 FY 2024-25 
Received 2,34,690 2,93,924 2,96,321 
Disposed 2,40,453 2,84,355 2,90,567 
 
Addressing OTP Vulnerabilities and Initiatives 
3.6.20  One-time passwords (OTPs) face several security challenges that impact their 
effectiveness in authenticating digital transactions. Customers are vulnerable to sharing OTPs 
due to social engineering tactics or coercion. Additionally, if a customer’s device is 
compromised through hacking, the OTP can be intercepted and misused. Another significant 
threat is SMS -based OTP interception via SIM swapping, where fraudsters fraudulently 
obtain a genuine customer’s SIM card to gain access to OTPs. RBI informed the Committee 
that in response to these challenges, the RBI has launched multiple public awareness 
initiatives, such as “RBI Kehta Hai” a nd “RBI Says.” These initiatives consistently educate 
customers to never share OTPs, even if requested by individuals claiming to be bank 
officials. Awareness messages are widely disseminated across social media platforms, print 
media and broadcast channels in various languages to maximize reach. 
3.6.21  While the RBI has not mandated a specific authentication factor, the digital payments 
ecosystem predominantly relies on SMS -based OTPs as Additional Factor of Authentication 
(AFA). It was apprised to the Co mmittee that although this method works satisfactorily, 
technological advancements have introduced alternative authentication mechanisms. 
Recognizing this, the RBI issued a draft framework in July 2024 for alternative factors of 
authentication and after re viewing stakeholder feedback, a final circular is expected to be 
released soon. The RBI had discussions with companies like Google to enhance digital 
payment authentication security. Google has developed two of the RBI’s requirement to 
prevent compromise of OTPs through remote access applications and auto -SMS forwarding. 
Further, guidelines have been established to improve transaction transparency and security, 
requiring that alerts and OTP messages received by customers for online transactions display 
the merchant’s name wherever applicable, rather than the payment aggregator’s name, to help 
customers verify transaction authenticity. 
Emerging Quantum Computing Threat 
3.6.22  RBI pointed out to the Committee that quantum computing is poised to significantly 
impact the financial ecosystem by potentially breaking current encryption methods that 
protect sensitive data. Although quantum cryptography offers stronger security, it also 
presents challenges, especially for existing legacy systems that may require wide spread 
upgrades. At present, the threats from quantum computing are in its early stages due to 
uncertainties about how vulnerable current cryptographic controls truly are against future 
quantum computers. In response to concerns raised by the Department of  Economic Affairs 
(DEA) about "quantum proofing the financial sector," RBI agrees that a coordinated, unified 
approach is essential. This collaborative effort, potentially led by the National Security 
Coordination Secretariat (NSCS), would involve Governme nt agencies, regulators, financial 

 
 
35 
 
institutions, academia and private sector players to ensure the smooth and standardised 
transition to Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC).  
3.6.23  Alongside this unified effort, RBI recognises the need for a sector -specific approach 
given the unique challenges faced by Regulated Entities (REs) in the banking and financial 
sector. To address this, RBI has established an Inter -Departmental Group focused on 
formulating proactive measures toward PQC adoption that align with natio nal initiatives. 
Further, REs have been advised to develop a Cryptographic Bill of Material (CBoM), an 
inventory of their existing cryptographic assets to better prepare for a shift to quantum -safe 
technologies. RBI continues to monitor advancements in inf ormation technology and 
cybersecurity closely, fine -tuning regulations and supervisory processes to effectively 
manage emerging cyber threats, including those related to quantum computing. 
Unauthorised Credits to Bank Accounts  
3.6.24  A question was raise d in the meeting of the Committee about the risk that malicious 
actors, such as terrorist organisations, might deposit money into a person’s or business’s bank 
account without their direct involvement or consent. The main worry expressed is that, in the 
current system, anyone can transfer money to any account, possibly creating legal or 
reputational liabilities for the account holder, especially if the source is illicit. In response, it 
is clarified that if money is credited to an account without the accoun t holder’s consent, the 
account holder is not automatically criminally liable for merely receiving that money. Section 
72 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, explains that if something is paid or delivered by 
mistake or coercion, the recipient must repay or return it to the rightful owner. The response 
further notes that when anyone opens a bank account, there is an implied authorisation for the 
bank to accept and credit funds on their behalf and it would be impractical and contrary to 
standard banking operat ions to require explicit permission for every inward transaction. 
However, this matter may require holistic examination from the Law Enforcement angle. 
Limiting Liability in Unauthorised Electronic Banking Transactions 
3.6.25  RBI has apprised the Committe e that it has put in place specific guidelines to protect 
customers from losses due to un authorised electronic banking transactions. These guidelines 
apply to all scheduled commercial banks as well as co -operative banks and are designed to 
limit the financ ial liability of customers when unauthorised transactions occur. The key 
features of this framework are as follows: 
 Zero Liability: 
Customers bear no loss in two scenarios: (a) if the fault is with the bank; or (b) if the 
unauthorised transaction occurs due to issues elsewhere in the system and the customer 
reports the unauthorised transaction within three working days from receiving the 
communication. This means prompt reporting by the customer ensures full protection. 
 Limited Liability: 
If the loss results from the customer’s own negligence, the customer is responsible for 
all losses up to the time the incident is reported to the bank. If the loss is not due to the 
customer’s or the bank’s fault but is caused by a third -party system i ssue and the customer 
reports the transaction within four to seven working days of receiving communication, the 

 
 
36 
 
maximum liability of the customer ranges from ₹5,000 to ₹25,000, depending on the type of 
account/ instrument. 
 Liability beyond Seven Days: 
If the customer delays in notifying the bank and reports the unauthorised transaction 
after seven working days, the extent of their liability is determined according to the bank’s 
Board approved policy. 
 Burden of Proof: 
The burden of proving customer liability  in case of unauthorised electronic banking 
transactions shall lie on the bank. 
 Timely Resolution and Compensation: 
Banks also have been advised to ensure that a complaint is resolved and liability of 
the customer, if any, established within such time, as may be specified in the bank’s Board 
approved policy, but not exceeding 90 days and the customer is compensated as given above. 
Where banks are unable to resolve the complaint or determine the customer liability, if any, 
within 90 days, the compensation as prescribed is paid to the customer. 
Public Awareness Campaigns  
3.6.26  As per the information provided by the RBI to the Committee, during the financial 
year 2024 -25, a total of 4,13,95,262  participants attended financial literacy programs 
organised by the Financial Inclusion and Development Department (FIDD) of the RBI 
through its Regional Offices (ROs), Centres for Financial Literacy (CFLs) and Financial 
Literacy Centres (FLCs). Continuous efforts are being made to maximize the coverage and 
impact of these initiatives. Special focus has also been laid on the youth, with RBI’s regional 
offices conducting 563 financial literacy programs for school and college students across the 
country. The Offices of the Reserve Bank of India Ombudsmen (ORBIOs) contribute actively 
by conducting townhall and awareness programs each year, including dedicated sessions in 
educational institutions, generally attended by 100 to 500 participants. These programs serv e 
a wide demographic, including students, senior citizens and women.  
3.6.27  In the fiscal years 2023-24 and 2024-25, the Ombudsmen offices conducted a total of 
203 and 243 awareness programs and 46 and 47 townhall events, respectively. The number of 
such programs in educational institutions increased from 76 to 108 over the two years, 
reflecting intensified outreach. Ombudsmen offices further enhance public understanding by 
participating in local fairs and festivals, using hoardings and distributing bookl ets to spread 
information on digital frauds. From 2017 to May 2025, various RBI Regional Offices have 
conducted 2,032 Direct Contact Awareness Programs under the Electronic Banking and 
Awareness Training (e -BAAT) initiative, educating people about electron ic payment 
systems, their advantages and cyber safety concerns. On average, each program was attended 
by around 100 people. To scale these efforts further, RBI is revamping the Direct Contact 
Awareness Programs by engaging third parties to reach more peopl e and increase the 
frequency of events. In addition to these direct programs, awareness campaigns are 
periodically launched through newspapers, television, radio and other media platforms. 

 
 
37 
 
3.6.28  Every year in March, RBI observes Digital Payment Awareness  Week (DPAW), 
during which a variety of activities and competitions are held to promote safe digital 
payments. Other stake holders like banks, Payment System Operators, etc., are also 
encouraged to participate in DPAW with their own initiatives. It is esti mated that the 
initiatives during DPAW 2025 have had about 30 crore impressions. To unify these 
widespread awareness activities, the mission ‘Har Payment Digital’ was launched in 2023 
with the objective of making every citizen aware of safe digital payment practices.  
3.6.29  Public awareness campaigns (PACs) have also been conducted on specific threats, 
such as money mule frauds, delivered across television, print, digital media and SMS 
channels in 2024. RBI has further cautioned public through press relea ses against frauds 
under the pretext of KYC updation. RBI also used to conduct quiz contests, which are aimed 
at creating greater awareness about the Reserve Bank and the financial ecosystem among the 
students. RBI has been encouraging the youth to cultivate responsible financial behaviour and 
develop the habit of safe and secure usage of digital financial products through its public 
awareness campaigns. The quantum of prize for the quiz contest varies from contest to 
contest. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.6.30  The Committee appreciates the RBI’s comprehensive framework for Customer 
Due Diligence and Fraud Risk Management, which reflects a strong commitment in 
securing the financial system through rigorous KYC practices, proactive monitoring 
and robust supervisor y oversight. The Committee is of the view that increasing 
collaboration and real -time information sharing between financial institutions and law 
enforcement agencies can accelerate response times and improve the effectiveness of 
preventive measures.  
3.6.31   The Committee recommends that banks should regularly train their employees 
and organise awareness programs for customers about the latest methods that 
fraudsters use. The Committee is of the view that by doing so, both staff and customers 
will be bette r prepared to recognise and respond to new types of scams and thereby 
complementing technological solutions with human vigilance. 
3.6.32   The Committee notes the deadline fixed by RBI to all banks to complete the 
migration process to the exclusive Interne t Domain ‘.bank.in’ is 31 st October, 2025 with 
the Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT) 
designated as the registrar for this process. The Committee believes that till date no 
major banks have migrated to the domain. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
RBI should supervise the entire migration process, ensuring that all banks adhere to the 
schedule and complete the migration process within the prescribed deadline. The 
Committee further recommends that the RBI should cond uct public awareness 
campaigns to educate consumers on identifying genuine ‘.bank.in’ domains, thereby 
reinforcing public trust. The Committee also suggests that to have an audit mechanism 
for verifying the domain usage and security standards, as it would further strengthen 
the preventive impact of this initiative.  
3.6.33    The Committee appreciates the good progress made in connecting banks with 
the Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C) portal through Application 
Programming Interface (API) integra tion. This integration is important for improving 

 
 
38 
 
how cybercrime complaints and financial fraud cases are handled. So far, 19 banks 
have fully completed the API integration and over 350 banks have joined the Citizen 
Financial Cyber Fraud Reporting and Management System (CFCFRMS) platform. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the RBI to extend this API integration to all 
remaining banks, including smaller and cooperative banks, to ensure full coverage and 
a strong nationwide cybersecurity response. The Commi ttee also recommends  that a 
clear deadline should be set for completing this integration. Further, the Committee 
suggests that the RBI may provide support to banks facing technical or vendor -related 
difficulties by offering dedicated technical help or sett ing up a centralized helpdesk to 
resolve issues quickly. The Committee believes that RBI, together with I4C, needs to 
have a regular review process to closely monitor the progress of this integration effort. 
The Committee recommends initiating early collab oration among stakeholders to 
develop and implement quantum -resistant cryptographic solutions, ensuring a smooth 
shift from legacy systems to future-proof technologies.  
3.6.34  The Committee acknowledges the RBI’s proactive and innovative approach 
through the Digital Payment Intelligence Platform (DPIP). It is truly impressive, 
showcasing a strong commitment to safeguarding the digital payments ecosystem. 
However, the Committee r ecommends setting  a timeline for the rollout of the DPIP, 
ensuring its speedy implementation to address the rising digital payment frauds 
effectively.  
3.6.35  The Committee also appreciates the implementation of MuleHunter.ai, as a pilot 
phase, in the fou r banks Canara Bank, Punjab National Bank, Bank of Baroda and 
Bank of India to validate the tool's effectiveness and accuracy in detecting mule 
accounts. Considering the promising results of MuleHunter.ai, the Committee 
recommends that MuleHunter.ai be gra dually expanded to other banks, both public 
and private sector banks, to cover a broader segment of the digital payments ecosystem. 
The Committee further recommends that the upcoming Central Payment Fraud 
Information Registry (CPFIR) be fully leveraged as a centralized, comprehensive fraud 
data repository to facilitate sector -wide analysis, coordination and mitigation of 
emerging fraud threats. 
3.6.36  The Committee notes that the Reserve Bank -Integrated Ombudsman Scheme 
(RB-IOS) provides a mechanism for vi ctims of digital payment fraud to lodge 
complaints, reflecting RBI’s commitment to consumer protection. However, the 
increasing turnaround time (TAT) for resolving unauthorised transaction complaints 
from 36.3 days in FY 2022-23 to 68.3 days in FY 2024-25 indicates a growing backlog or 
complexity in case resolution. The Committee, therefore, recommends the RBI to 
consider enhancing the Ombudsman’s operational capacity by adopting advanced 
digital case management tools, streamlining complaint resolution work flows and 
possibly increasing staffing to reduce delay in resolving the complaints.  
3.6.37  The Committee appreciates the proactive stand taken by RBI in addressing 
quantum computing threats through coordinated efforts and the formation of an Inter -
Departmental Group in this regard is commendable. The Committee suggests that the 
Regulated Entities (REs) need to accelerate the development of their Cryptographic Bill 
of Material (CBoM) to ensure a smoother transition to quantum-safe technologies. 

 
 
39 
 
3.6.38  The Committee notes the concern about illicit deposits into account holders’ 
banks without their knowledge and it is good that existing laws protect innocent account 
holders from criminal liability. However, considering the unauthorised transactions 
including facilitating money laundering or fraud, the Committee recommends that the 
approval of recipient should be necessary for receiving money in their account , actively 
involving customers in their own protection.  The Committee feels that this measure can 
also ensure that money do not get transferred to mule account. 
3.6.39  The Committee advises the integration of digital ID checks like Aadhaar -based 
e-KYC to ensure every person initiating a deposit is authentic, thereby limiting 
anonymity that criminals exploi t. The Committee observed that, despite the 
implementation of KYC measures, mule accounts continue to be opened at banks, 
indicating lapses or negligence on the part of bank personnel. The Committee 
recommends that strict action be taken against those foun d responsible to ensure 
accountability and deter future violations.  The Committee suggests exploring the 
implementation of behavioural biometrics that analyse customer pattern, like typing 
speed or mouse movement of users to spot unusual activity and alert  the bank or 
temporarily block suspicious deposits. 
3.6.40  The Committee appreciates the RBI’s well -structured liability limits to protect 
customers by fairly assigning zero or limited liability based on timely reporting and 
accountability, thereby fostering trust in digital banking. The Committee feels that 
liability limits be made more customer -centric and effective by personalizin g them 
according to individual security behaviour. The Committee suggests RBI to explore the 
possibility of rewarding users who adopt strong digital hygiene and report fraud 
promptly with lower liability.  
3.6.41  The Committee recommends the introduction of affordable micro -insurance 
policies designed to protect customers against losses exceeding standard liability limits, 
thus providing a reliable financial safety. The Committee believes that banks should use 
AI tools to proactively reduce customer liabil ity upon detecting suspicious activity, even 
before formal complaints are made. The Committee recommends exploring the zero 
liability periods and providing personalized assistance for vulnerable groups such as the 
elderly or differently -abled to enhance in clusiveness. The Committee also suggests 
enabling trusted family members/friends to assist in reporting unauthorised 
transactions to support customers who may be unable to act quickly themselves. The 
Committee recommends establishment of a forgiveness program for first-time victims of 
fraud, who maintain good security practices afterward, in order to restore confidence 
and encourage continued digital adoption. 
3.6.42  The Committee appreciates the extensive and sustained efforts of RBI in 
enhancing financia l literacy and digital payment awareness across diverse 
demographics, reflecting a strong commitment to financial inclusion and consumer 
protection. The Committee recommends that the awareness programs should be 
conducted both in Government and private sch ools so that the budding generation 
becomes aware of cybercrimes and is less likely to fall prey to it. The Committee also 
recommends that the awareness programs should reach at the grassroots level through 
active involvement of Panchayat representatives, local community leaders and 
representatives of people of the concerned constituencies. The Committee feels that to 

 
 
40 
 
foster inclusive participation integrate financial literacy sessions into village level 
gatherings, cooperatives, self-help groups and local festivals.  
3.7  Department of Financial Services (DFS) 
3.7.1 The Department of Financial Services (DFS) plays a central and proactive role in 
safeguarding India’s financial ecosystem by coordinating policy, regulating banking 
practices, financial services, insurance and collaborating with cyber -law enforcement 
networks. DFS has convened multiple high-level workshops with stakeholders including RBI, 
banks, NPCI, MeitY, DoT and fintech firms to address emerging online fraud threats and 
cyber risks. D uring such sessions, it was reported that approximately 70 lakhs mobile 
connections linked to suspected financial fraud were deactivated and ₹900 crore in funds 
were prevented from being siphoned.  
Streamlining Incident Response Mechanisms 
3.7.2 DFS has hi ghlighted the Committee that it played a key role in implementing the 
Citizen Financial Cyber Fraud Reporting and Management System (CFCFRMS) in 
coordination with I4C. This platform, launched in 2021, integrates the 1930 toll -free helpline 
with a cyber-fraud mitigation centre. It has helped recover over ₹5,489 crore from more than 
17.8 lakh complaints. DFS regularly facilitates cross -sharing of mule account data and fraud 
indicators with RBI, law enforcement agencies and I4C. In a recent initiative (Operati on 
Chakra-V), the Central Bureau of Investigation ( CBI) arrested individuals and identified 
nearly 8.5 lakh mule accounts used in frauds, based on leads supported by DFS coordination.  
Strengthening Cyber Governance Framework 
3.7.3 DFS works with RBI and f intech firms to periodically review cyber security audits 
and best practices. Regulatory collaboration ensures banks to implement robust real -time 
fraud detection systems, financial fraud risk indicators (FRIs) and compliance with 1930 
helpline protocols. These initiatives significantly reinforce India’s cyber resilience in the 
financial space though sustained public outreach, improved cross -jurisdictional legal 
frameworks and proactive compliance remain central to closing remaining gaps. In a major 
policy move, DFS mandated digitization and simplification of KYC norms across fintech 
segments. This measure is expected to reduce fake onboarding, identity misuse and facilitate 
quicker fraud detection. 
Table 3.8 
 
Domestic Payment Frauds (Y-O-Y) 
Financial Year   Volume 
(Lakh) 
Value 
(Crore) 
FY 2023- 2024 28.22 4403 
FY 2024-2025 27.56 4824 
Source: RBI’s Payment System Indicators, March 2025 
 
  

 
 
41 
 
Table 3.9 
 
Domestic Payment Frauds (M-O-M) 
Month    Volume Value One in every X payment 
transaction fraudulent (count) 
FTS (Fraud value/ 
Payment Value * 10000) Lakh Crore 
24-Apr 2.38 414 70681.81 0.191 bps 
May-25 2.81 545 62637.44 0.240 bps 
Jun-24 2.36 480 73786.5 0.206 bps 
Jul-24 2.54 462 71157.3 0.194 bps 
Aug-24 2.34 401 79284.04 0.170 bps 
Sep-24 2.19 401 84751.16 0.158 bps 
Oct-24 2.35 411 87719.87 0.159 bps 
Nov-24 2.03 345 93298.98 0.155 bps 
Dec-24 2.59 425 78851.58 0.155 bps 
Jan-25 2.3 361 90183.15 0.140 bps 
Feb-25 1.83 288 107458.55 0.121 bps 
Mar-25 1.84 291 121303.33 0.094 bps 
FY 2024-25  27.56 4824     
Source: RBI’s Payment System Indicators, March 2025 
 Fraud value amounts to only 0.09 paisa in every Rs.10,000 transaction (March 2025) as 
measured by FTS 
 FTS has reduced from 0.191 bps in April 2024 to 0.094 bps in March 2025 - a sign of 
improvement 
 Whereas only 1 fraud reported out of 70,681 transactions in April 2024, only 1 fraud 
reported out of 1,21,303 transactions in March 2025- a sign of improvement again 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.7.4 The Committee observes that financial intermediaries operating in different 
segments such as banks, stock brokers, insurance companies and mutual fund platforms 
have developed distinct user interfaces and operational frameworks, leading to 
inconsistencies in user experience. The Committee furt her observes that this 
fragmentation creates barriers for users to migrate from one platform to another, 
resulting potential security vulnerabilities as users struggle to adapt to varying 
authentication methods, transaction processes and interface designs.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the DFS in coordination with relevant regulators including 
RBI, SEBI, IRDAI and PFRDA, should implement standardized guidelines for user 
interface design and customer experience across all financial platforms. The  Committee 
further recommends that the DFS should also mandate the adoption of standardized 
APIs and data portability features that enable users to seamlessly transfer their 
financial profiles including Demat accounts transaction history, and preferences a cross 
platforms, thereby reducing switching costs.  
3.7.5 The Committee notes that despite advanced AI, transaction monitoring and data 
sharing, mule accounts persist in banks. The Committee feels that current technologies 

 
 
42 
 
have not fully stopped fraudsters. The Committee observes that fraudsters often recruit 
vulnerable people via social media, scams and local networks. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends creating a formal network involving local communities, 
Panchayats, local groups, NGOs, etc., to watch and report suspicious mule recruitment. 
The Committee further recommends tha t training these groups and offering small 
rewards to them will motivate timely reporting of suspicious activities. The Committee 
feels that combining this human intelligence with existing technology is necessary to 
build a stronger defence against mule accounts. 
3.8  Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) 
Institutional Mandate and Framework 
3.8.1 The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) informed the Committee that it 
regulates capital markets and maintains digital resilience through strateg ic policy 
frameworks. In August 2024, SEBI issued the Cybersecurity and Cyber Resilience 
Framework (CSCRF) for all regulated entities, mandating governance practices, cyber threat 
monitoring and continuous risk assessment. The initial compliance deadline w as set for 
January 2025 and was extended to August 2025 to accommodate regulatory readiness across 
entities. SEBI introduced a Cyber Capability Index (CCI) to evaluate regulated entities’ cyber 
maturity and preparedness. It also enabled Small and Medium In termediaries (SMIs) to 
access Security Operation Centers (SOCs) either internally or via market SOCs to meet 
compliance obligations. Further, SEBI -led workshops such as “Niveshak Shivir” in Pune 
(June 2025) supported investor education and digital awareness campaigns. 
Verified UPI Mechanism for Investor Protection and Investor Awareness  
3.8.2 SEBI apprised the Committee that in June 2025, it launched a “Validated UPI 
handles” and “SEBI Check” for secured payments by investors to enhance investor protection 
and combat Fraud  where fraudsters pose as brokers. This mechanism helps investors verif y 
authenticity before transferring funds, significantly reducing fraud risk. SEBI’s collaboration 
with Investor Education & Protection Fund Authority (IEPFA), National Council of Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER) and the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)  has res ulted in 
investor workshops focusing on fintech risks and digital literacy. These initiatives help 
empower retail investors with knowledge to identify and avoid digital fraud. 
Enforcement Tools and Market Surveillance 
3.8.3 SEBI’s enhanced cybersecurity monitoring includes: 
 Regular audits and governance checks for high-risk entities. 
 Use of real -time surveillance and algorithm detection to flag anomalous trading 
behaviour. 
 Introduction of “kill switches” to halt suspicious algorithmic trades especially 
relevant as retail algo-trading gains traction. 
 
SEBI is also deploying business continuity and disaster recovery plans and mandates 
penetration testing and phishing simulations for trading platforms. 
  

 
 
43 
 
National Stock Exchange (NSE) 
3.8.4 NSE adheres to SEBI’s Cybersecurity and Cyber Resilience Framework (CSCRF) 
issued in August 2024 and its subsequent clarifications and compliance extensions through 
March 2025. NSE mandates quarterly cyber -incident reporting via its Member Portal for all 
trading members; failure to comply leads to disciplinary action as per circular dated 1 st July, 
2025. NSE informed the Committee that amid intensified geopolitical tensions, NSE 
temporarily blocked access to its websites for overseas users, citing high -risk cyber activity 
from specific IP ranges while ensuring international trading remained unaffected. The 
Exchange operates under enhanced vigilance mode with 24x7 monitoring by its Security 
Operations Center (SOC) and Network Operations Center (NOC), per internal advisories. 
Security Operations Center (SOC) & Audits 
3.8.5 Mandated by SEBI’s Cybersecurity and Cyber Resilience Framework (CSCRF) , NSE 
maintains a Market SOC (M -SOC) to onboard and support smaller regulated entities like 
brokers and depository participants in maintaining cybersecurity standards. NSE enforces 
penetration testing (red teaming), real -time threat monitoring, disaster recovery planning and 
annual cyber drills in line with regulatory expectations. 
Capacity Building & Stakeholder Engagement 
3.8.6 NSE collaborates with agencies including the CERT -In, the Investor Education and 
Protection Fund Authority (IEPFA), the National Council of Applied Economic Research 
(NCAER), and SEBI on investor awareness programs. Workshops like the “Niv eshak Shivir” 
held in Pune in mid -2025 focused on digital literacy and cyber risk education for capital 
market participants. 
Technology Row and Institutional Strategy 
3.8.7 NSE’s majority-owned IT arm, NSEIT Ltd (recently sold to Investcorp), was integral 
to its cloud infrastructure, cybersecurity architecture and digital services platform. This 
strategic restructuring demonstrates NSE’s commitment to robust and scalable cyber 
readiness. NSE also upgraded cybersecurity frameworks in collaboration with third -party 
entities like Aujas (now part of NSEIT/NuSummit) for identity access management, Managed 
Detection and Response (MDR) and threat advisory services. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.8.8 The Committee notes that cybersecurity incidents in the financial market sector 
can cause large -scale data breaches, operational disruptions, and significant financial 
losses. The Committee also notes that these threats are growing in sophistication and 
increasingly target trading systems, depository operations, and sens itive investor data. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends SEBI to establish a robust, multi -layered 
cybersecurity framework; mandate regular independent audits; implement real -time 
incident-disclosure protocols; and develop collaborative platforms for proa ctive risk 
monitoring. 
3.8.9 The Committee has observed the growing phenomenon of unsolicited and 
unregistered financial influencers on social media platforms who promise exorbitant or 
unrealistic returns to the public, often leading to misinformation, fin ancial losses and 

 
 
44 
 
potential scams. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Significant Social 
Media Intermediary (SSMIs) be directed to allow only SEBI registered financial 
influencers to advice and to do marketing on social media platforms. The Comm ittee 
further recommends SEBI for exploring the possibility of "verified tick" (a verification 
mark indicating that an account or entity has been authenticated and confirmed as 
legitimate by a platform or service) for the SEBI registered investment advisor s on 
social media platforms. The Committee also recommends that such registration should 
be subject to prescribed disclosure norms and conduct guidelines, including the clear 
display of registration numbers, disclaimer and any potential conflicts of intere st on 
social media profiles. The Committee recommends that SEBI, in collaboration with 
MeitY, establish a robust mechanism for identifying unregistered financial influencers 
and swiftly issuing legally binding takedown orders to social media intermediaries  for 
specific content found to violate SEBI regulations. The Committee also recommends 
that SEBI should make suitable mandatory legal provisions for violation of disclosure 
norms and take strict actions against those who disseminate misleading information. 
3.8.10  The Committee is of the view  that SEBI should collaborate with social media 
platforms to develop mechanisms for identifying and curbing unregistered financial 
influencers, including leveraging artificial intelligence tools for content monitoring a nd 
enabling public reporting of suspect financial promotions. The Committee further 
recommends that SEBI should also take strict enforcement actions against those who 
disseminate misleading information.  The Committee is also of the view that SEBI 
should conduct regular awareness campaigns to educate investors on the risks of 
following unverified financial advice. 
3.9  National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) 
Institutional Mandate 
3.9.1 The National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), operating under the Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI)  and the Indian Banks' Association (IBA) , manages India’s core retail -
payment systems including UPI, RuPay, Immediate Payment Service (IMPS), Aadhaar -
enabled Payment System (AePS) and Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS) serves as the 
backbone of digital transactions. NPCI maintains high cybersecurity standards by aligning 
with globally recognised protocols: PCI DSS v4.0, ISO 27001 (Information Security), ISO 
22301 (Business Continuity) and ISO 27701 (Data Privacy). It also follows a Zero -Trust 
Architecture, with continuous security monitoring via its Security Operations Centre and 
integrated threat intelligence systems. 
Advanced Fraud Risk Management (FRM) 
3.9.2 NPCI shared with the Committee that its flagship Fraud Risk Management (FRM) 
solution employs Artificial intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML ) to analyse UPI and 
RuPay transactions in real time, classify anomalous patterns and issue alerts to member banks 
for preventive action. The system also helps detect mule accounts and coordinate timely 
responses across the ecosystem. In June 2025, NPCI signed a MoU with Institute for 
Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT) to jointly develop cyber 
resilience training and launch an NPCI -certified payment security certification, along with 
sharing threat intelligence through systems like Indian Bank Center for Analysis of Risks and 
Threats 3.0 (IBCART 3.0). 

 
 
45 
 
Risk Controls & Consumer Protection Measures 
3.9.3 In a reply to the Committee, NPCI has stated that it employs multiple robust measures 
to secure UPI transactions and prevent fraud. These include device -binding protocols linking 
customers’ mobile numbers to devices, daily transaction limits, two -factor authentication and 
AI-driven anomaly detection that helps banks customise rules against suspicious transactions. 
From 30th June, 2025, a new rule mandates users must verify the actual identity of the UPI 
beneficiary before completing any payment, greatly reducing the risk of misdirected funds 
and fraud. NPCI also provides a real -time fraud monitoring system free of cost to ov er 500 
banks and operates a 24x7 Fraud Management Cell, actively conducting mystery shopping 
exercises to identify and block fraud attempts. 
3.9.4 To build user trust and promote safer payment experiences, UPI apps display 
beneficiary names during transactions and provide clear notifications about debiting amounts, 
preventing social engineering scams. NPCI works closely with banks by sharing data on 
suspicious accounts linked to mule activities. Complementing technical safeguards, NPCI 
conducts extensive training workshops for banks and fintechs and runs multi -language public 
awareness campaigns across TV, radio, digital platforms and print media to educate users 
about phishing, QR-code risks and safe digital practices. Further, NPCI collaborates actively 
with law enforcement and FIU -India, providing critical data and support for cybercrime 
investigations. 
Real-Time Fraud detection and Consumer Protection 
3.9.5 NPCI apprised the Committee that it ensures interoperability between payer and 
payee banks, while t ransaction authentication is handled by the payer’s bank and 
authorisation by the customer  himself. To protect customers from cyber frauds on BHIM, 
UPI and RuPay platforms, NPCI provides banks with a free, Artificial intelligence (AI) and 
Machine Learning (ML) powered real-time fraud monitoring system that scores transactions 
and helps banks set custom rules to block suspicious activity. Once a fraudulent transaction is 
reported on the NPCI portal, further transactions on the affected account are blocked 
immediately. NPCI also has a formal chargeback mechanism through which customer banks 
can initiate refunds based on scheme rules and guidelines. For complaints filed directly via 
the National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal, NPCI collaborates with the Indian Cy ber Crime 
Coordination Center (I4C) by providing a real -time API that enables beneficiary banks to 
track fraudulent funds and take protective actions such as placing liens or freezing accounts. 
This proactive coordination between NPCI, banks, RBI and law e nforcement agencies has 
helped save approximately ₹280 crores between January 2023 and June 2025, demonstrating 
effective consumer protection in cyber fraud cases. 
Security Framework for Strengthening Digital Payment 
3.9.6 On a query related to security standards measures, NPCI informed the Committee that 
it routinely issues detailed security circulars covering essential aspects such as cybersecurity 
hygiene, incident reporting protocols, mobile security best practices and ransomware 
advisories. These circu lars ensure strict compliance across all stakeholders including 
Application Service Providers (ASPs), Technology Service Providers (TSPs), Third Party 
Application Providers (TPAPs) and Payment Service Providers (PSPs), with PSPs being 
regulated entities directly overseen by the regulator.  

 
 
46 
 
3.9.7 NPCI mandates annual security audits carried out by CERT -In empanelled auditors, 
requiring participating entities to submit comprehensive compliance certificates and clean 
audit reports. This process is designed to proactively identify and address security  
vulnerabilities within their systems. Further, NPCI conducts specialized annual functionality 
audits targeting critical TPAPs and system security audits focused on key ASPs that deliver 
payment services to Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and cooperative banks . If gaps or 
weaknesses are detected through these assessments, NPCI requires the concerned entities to 
promptly develop and submit detailed remediation plans and corrective actions.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.9.8 The Committee appreciates NPCI’s comprehensive and proactive efforts to 
secure India’s digital payment ecosystem, like consistent issuance of security guidelines, 
strict enforcement of compliance among stakeholders and rigorous annual audits to 
identify promptly and address vulnerabilities. The Committee notes that NPCI provides 
a real -time fraud monitoring system free of cost to over 500 banks. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends NPCI that this valuable service be expanded and made available 
to a greater number of banks, including smalle r regional and cooperative banks, to 
enhance overall security coverage across the entire banking ecosystem. The Committee 
is of the view that widening access will strengthen early detection and prevention of 
fraudulent transactions nationwide, thereby impr oving consumer protection and 
reinforcing trust in digital payment platforms. 
3.10  Law Enforcement Agencies  
3.10.1  In the rapidly digitizing landscape of India, cybercrime has emerged as both a 
formidable internal security challenge and a significant threat to the nation’s economic fabric. 
With the proliferation of digital transactions, growing dependence on information technology 
and increasing connectivity among citizens and businesses, cybercrimes such as online 
financial fraud, phishing attacks, ra nsomware incidents, data breaches and even cyber -
terrorism have grown in frequency and sophistication. The multidimensional nature of these 
threats demands a layered, coordinated and highly specialized response from India’s security 
and law enforcement agencies. 
3.10.2  At the forefront of this response are specialised law enforcement agencies, most 
notably the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and the National Investigation Agency 
(NIA). The CBI plays a critical role in investigating complex and inters tate cybercrimes 
particularly those involving organized criminal networks, significant financial losses or 
national security implications. The NIA, on the other hand, focuses on cybercrimes that 
intersect with terrorism and threats to national security, su ch as cases of cyber -terrorism and 
attacks on critical infrastructure. Complementing these central agencies are the numerous 
State and Union Territory (UT) police forces that serve as the first line of defence in 
addressing public complaints. From cyber fr aud and identity theft to digital harassment and 
online defamation, these local units handle a wide spectrum of cases.  
3.10.3  Central to the effectiveness of these investigations and enforcement actions is the 
Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) . Unlike traditional law enforcement agencies, 
I4C does not investigate or prosecute cases directly. Rather, it functions as the national nodal 
agency responsible for orchestrating a holistic and unified response to cybercrime across the 
country. The ecosystem is further reinforced by agencies such as the National Crime Records 
Bureau (NCRB), which compiles and analyses crime data, tracks patterns and statistics 

 
 
47 
 
related to cyber incidents and assists with digital forensic support. The Intelligence Bureau 
(IB), additionally, contribute by monitoring cyber threats with implications for internal 
security and advising on policy and national preparedness. 
3.10.4  Each of these institutions, while working within their distinct areas from criminal 
investigation, cy ber-terror counteraction, frontline law enforcement, to central policy 
guidance and coordination collaborate to form a resilient and adaptive cybercrime prevention 
and enforcement framework. The synergy between central investigative agencies, State -level 
enforcement units and specialised coordinating bodies like I4C ensures that India can respond 
to the evolving nature of cybercrime with agility, expertise and nationwide reach. 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
3.10.5  The Central Bureau of Investigatio n (CBI), established under the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment Act, 1946, is India’s premier law enforcement agency tasked with 
investigating complex, high -value, and transnational crimes. In the realm of cybercrime, the 
CBI plays a critical role in pro bing offences that have inter -state or international 
ramifications, including cyber -enabled financial frauds, crimes against critical information 
infrastructure, and online exploitation networks. Over the last two decades, the agency has 
systematically dev eloped structural, operational, technical, and forensic capabilities for 
cybercrime investigation. 
3.10.6  To address the growing complexity of cyber threats, the CBI has created a dedicated 
Cyber Crime Investigation Division (CCID), which includes specialized units for crimes such 
as online child sexual exploitative and abuse material (CSEAM) , cyber slavery and 
international fraud operations. This includes the deployment of the Network for Evidence 
Tracing, Research, and Analysis (NETRA) lab that supports activities such as real -time 
packet inspection, forensic imaging, memory analysis, and reverse engineering of malware. 
NETRA provides critical capabilities for network forensics, encrypted data handling, and 
correlation of digital traces across geographies. 
3.10.7  In its presentation to the Committee, the CBI informed that its approach to 
cybercrime is based on a broad strategic framework built around three pillars: financial, 
technical and human. Under the financial pillar, attention is given to breaking the structure 
and utility of mule bank accounts, illegal payment gateways and cyber money laundering 
systems. Technical aspects include the use of phishing toolkits, breach data repositories and 
tools enabling anonymous routing and data exfiltration. Under  the human pillar, the CBI 
targets facilitators such as scam syndicates operating from overseas compounds, human 
traffickers and online exploiters. This framework enables the agency to take a multi -pronged 
operational approach. 
3.10.8  The CBI has led and coordinated several nationwide enforcement efforts, the most 
prominent being Operation Chakra I to V, which focused on dismantling frauds involving 
scam call centres, investment schemes, cryptocurrency money laundering, mule accounts, and 
financial app -driven extortion. These operations were conducted in coordination with 
international law enforcement agencies such as INTERPOL, Europol, the FBI and national 
police forces in Japan, Germany, and Australia. Another major operation, Operation Megh 
Chakra target ed circulation and possession of child sexual exploitative and abuse material 
(CSEAM) across online platforms and cloud storage environments. As per the information 
placed before the Committee, these interventions have led to the seizure of digital assets,  

 
 
48 
 
arrest of key accused and discovery of financial and operational infrastructure behind 
organized cybercrime networks. 
3.10.9  The CBI has also developed strong international cooperation mechanisms. Through 
the INTERPOL Global Communication System (I -24/7), the agency shares and receives near 
real-time information on suspects and criminal activity hosted across borders. It has built 
internal capability for processing Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs), INTERPOL 
Red Notices, and fast -tracking intellige nce via the BHARATPOL Portal, a digital gateway 
that connects law enforcement agencies at the central and state levels for issuing and 
responding to INTERPOL references. Several assistance requests related to crimes such as 
crypto fraud, tech impersonation scams, and CSEAM distribution have been handled through 
the portal. 
3.10.10 In terms of jurisdictional challenges, the CBI continues to encounter operational 
constraints owing to the requirement of State consent under Sections 5 and 6 of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (DSPE Act). As per its submission to the Committee, 
eight States have withdrawn general consent, hampering the quality of investigation and 
detrimental to timely and prompt investigation.  This inhibits timely detection and i s 
particularly problematic for coordinated national responses and digital offences with cross -
border implications. The multiplicity of laws and the absence of harmonized procedures 
across states complicate access to search, seizure, and trial jurisdiction.  
3.10.11   To overcome, overload and decentralize procedural capacity, the agency stressed 
the need of establishment of regional digital forensic labs, to reduce reliance on centralized 
infrastructure and enhance turnaround times for evidence extraction a nd analysis. It has also 
undertaken regular upgrades of its internal cyber forensic protocols. This includes use of 
write blockers, calculation and preservation of hash values, maintenance of chain of custody 
logs, and ensuring judicial compatibility of di gital evidence standards. The CBI conducts 
frequent audits of its Malkhanas (evidence stores) and updates its SOPs in compliance with 
emerging decisions and procedural law changes, including under the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023. 
3.10.12   The forensic capabilities developed by the CBI include disk and memory forensics, 
mobile device examinations, deep packet inspection, blockchain tracing and the use of open -
source intelligence (OSINT) tools for profiling suspects on social media and dark net forums.  
The agency also uses machine learning for data clustering, transaction pattern analysis, and 
scraping large volumes of email, cloud, and device metadata. These tools are operationalized 
under controlled environments by trained cyber forensic specialists a t the headquarters and 
are also demonstrated to law enforcement trainees as part of its outreach programs. 
3.10.13   In addition to enforcement, the CBI highlighted the importance of preventive 
communication and awareness, stressing the need for digital hy giene campaigns and public 
reporting mechanisms. The agency supports the introduction of cyber literacy modules in 
school and university education, as well as intensive engagement with the fintech ecosystem 
for fraud prevention. It recommended national rec ognition schemes for exemplary digital 
safety practices by public and private institutions. 
3.10.14   CBI has positioned itself as India’s apex national investigative agency for large -
scale cybercrime leveraging legal authority, forensic strength, internat ional networks, and 
specialized manpower. However, it continues to face external constraints in operational 
jurisdiction and evidence logistics due to procedural dependencies on States. Addressing 

 
 
49 
 
these challenges is vital for enabling CBI to function as t he cornerstone of India’s unified, 
resilient and responsive cybercrime control ecosystem. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.10.15  The Committee in CBI’s reply noted that certain States have withdrawn 
general consent required under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (DSPE 
Act). It creates major hurdle in the seamless investigation and asking specific consent 
again on a case-to-case basis is time consuming, creates stress on resources and 
manpower, can hamper the quality of investigation and is detrimental to timely and 
prompt investigation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA must 
engage in active consultation with those State Governments that have not given consent 
in order to resolve this issue. Further the Committee is of the view that the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment Act, 1946 may be amended in order to empower the CBI to 
investigate the cybercrime cases in the country, without the consent of the State. 
National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
3.10.16  Created under the NIA Act, 2008, the NIA investigates offences that impact national 
security, including terrorism -related cybercrime and online radicali sation. Its jurisdiction 
includes Section 66F of the IT Act (cyber terrorism).  The National Investigation Agency’s 
(NIA) Anti -Cyber Terrorism Division (ACTD) plays a pivotal role in addressing cyber 
threats with national security implications. The ACTD oversees specialized units focused on 
dark web monitoring to uncover illicit networks and extremist communication channels, 
alongside threat intelligence gathering to identify and assess emerging digital risks. Its digital 
forensics and attribution capabilities enable the precise tracing of hostile cyber activities, 
contributing significantly to the identification of perpetrators and s afeguarding critical 
infrastructure from cyber-terrorist attacks. 
Combating Cyber Terrorism and Online Radicalisation 
3.10.17   In a reply to the Committee, NIA stated that it serves as the central authority in 
India for investigating terrorism -related cases, which explicitly includes cyber terrorism and 
online radicali sation. Historically, radicalisation occurred through physical gatherings, 
meetings and ideological sessions; however, it has increasingly shifted to digital platforms. 
The use of Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), encrypted communication channels and 
anonymous social media accounts allows perpetrators to conceal their identities, exploit 
jurisdictional challenges and disseminate extremist content with broader reach and lower risk 
of detection. 
3.10.18   Since the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA) does not explicitly 
address radicalisation, NIA prosecutes such cases under Section 13 (punishment for unlawful 
activities) and Section 18 (punishment for conspiracy and preparatory a cts). In situations 
where, online platforms are utilised for terrorist training or recruitment, Sections 18A 
(organizing terrorist training camps) and 18B (recruitment for terrorist acts) are invoked, 
depending on the nature and extent of the digital activ ities involved. Moreover, the 
amendment to the NIA Act in 2019 formally incorporated cyber terrorism within the 
Agency’s jurisdiction. This empowers the NIA to investigate offences involving the use of 
computer resources or unauthorised access to sensitive  information, data, or computer 
databases that could threaten the sovereignty, security, or interests of India. To address this, 

 
 
50 
 
the NIA has established a dedicated Anti Cyber Terrorism Division (ACTD), specializing in 
probing cyber terrorism cases. 
3.10.19  As India’s premier investigative agency, NIA places significant emphasis on the 
thorough collection and analysis of digital evidence in all cases, especially those 
demonstrating the increasingly complex nexus between terrorism and cyberspace.  
Role in Inter-Agency Coordination 
3.10.20   NIA is entrusted by Central Government with investigation of cases involving cyber 
terrorism and online radicalisation registered by State police in cases, especially when they 
have national or cross -border implications. The Central Government can also order NIA to 
investigate a case suo-moto based on the information available with the Government.   
3.10.21 NIA maintains close coordination with central intelligence agencies such as the 
Intelligence Bureau (IB) and the Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW), as well as with State 
police forces. It contributes to regular intelligence -sharing forums, including Multi Agency 
Centre (MAC) and Special Focus Group (SFG) meetings. Additionally, the NIA convenes the 
annual Anti-Terror Squad (ATS) Conference, which focuses on emerging threats, including 
the use of new-age technologies in terrorism. During investigations, the NIA also undertakes 
joint operations and interrogations, facilitating a more comprehensive and multi -dimensional 
approach to case resolution. 
Encrypted Messaging Applications 
3.10.22  NIA informed the Committee that it maintains a comprehensive database of 
encrypted messaging applications that are developed and exploited by anti -national and 
terrorist elements. To monitor such covert activities, the NIA employs advanced tools 
developed by the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO). In addition, the 
agency actively tracks the usage patterns of these encrypted applications through DRDO's 
technological platforms. Whenever a new application or digital platform emerges that could 
facilitate terrorist activities, the NIA conducts a thorough assessment, which includes 
analysing the IP addresses used to host the application. The agency performs detailed 
metadata analysis on the usage of these apps to extract critical information such as 
communication frequency, geolocation and timestamps. 
3.10.23  Upon identifying a suspicious entity based on these parameters, NIA leverages IP 
Detail Record (IPDR) analysis to de crypt and understand the usage patterns of such 
encrypted applications. Further, the agency utilises the NETRA platform developed by 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) to capture and analyse data 
packets from users accessing the destination IPs of these applications. 
3.10.24  One of the major technical challenges faced by the NIA is identifying users who 
access encrypted apps through Virtual Private Networks (VPNs). VPNs route internet traffic 
through multiple intermediate servers, without  leaving any direct trace of user activity and 
complicating efforts to detect access to encrypted apps or dark web sites. In terms of legal 
challenges, the most important one pertains to failure of foreign based encrypted application 
platforms to provide d ata/IP addresses of the end users, due to our lack of jurisdiction over 
the servers hosted in such foreign countries. 

 
 
51 
 
Ensuring Integrity and Protection of Digital Evidence 
3.10.25 NIA highlighted the Committee that the agency ensures the protection and for ensic 
integrity of digital evidence during transnational cyber investigations through a robust 
combination of technical, procedural, legal and diplomatic measures. At the outset of 
investigations, Data Preservation Requests are dispatched via the National Central Bureau 
(NCB) the  CBI’s Nodal Point. The NIA meticulously maintains chain of custody 
documentation in accordance with the newly introduced certification provisions for electronic 
evidence under Section 63(4) of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 (BSA). This 
includes recording cryptographic hash values, such as SHA -256, generated at the time of 
evidence collection by any law enforcement agency, including foreign agencies acting upon 
NIA’s requests, thereby ensuring the evidence’s integrity during transfer and analysis. 
3.10.26 To secure cross -border transmission, encrypted files are exchanged on physical 
media such as CDs. Electronic storage devices containing digital evidence, accompanied by 
certifications under the Indian Evidence Act/BSA, are typ ically couriered physically under 
seal, particularly when treaty protocols demand such measures. These transmissions are 
coordinated through the Ministry of Home Affairs’ Central Authority under the Letters 
Rogatory (LRs)/Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties f ramework or via Interpol’s National 
Central Bureau for countries without treaty arrangements. 
3.10.27  For international evidence sharing, NIA utilises Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties 
(MLATs) with 42 countries, alongside multilateral conventions such as t he Harare 
Convention and the UN Convention on Transnational Organised Crime (UNTOC). These 
agreements facilitate the exchange of digital records including emails, IP logs, metadata and 
more governed by due process, dual criminality principles, judicial scr utiny and the 
respective domestic laws of the requested country for outgoing requests. 
3.10.28  In countries without MLATs, the NIA proceeds through Letter Rogatory issued by 
courts on the basis of Assurance of Reciprocity. Additionally, Memoranda of Under standing 
(MoUs) with various nations enable preliminary preservation of digital evidence, notification 
pertaining to the existence of data and provisional data sharing while formal MLAT 
responses are prepared.  
Legal and Procedural Gaps 
3.10.29 NIA informed the Committee that India's cybercrime enforcement landscape 
continues to face critical structural and diplomatic barriers. A major concern stems from data 
localisation gaps many prominent social media and messaging platforms store user data in 
foreign jurisdictions, significantly impeding timely access to digital evidence for domestic 
investigations. This delay not only weakens prosecution but also diminishes operational 
agility in fast -evolving cases. Additionally, the sluggish pace of mutual lega l assistance 
mechanisms has prompted urgent calls for fast -track treaty arrangements modeled on 
frameworks like the CLOUD Act. These reforms are seen as essential to securing prompt and 
lawful access to foreign -hosted data, enabling Indian authorities to e ffectively counter 
digitally enabled criminal and terror activities. 
  

 
 
52 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.10.30 The Committee notes the legal and procedural gaps identified by the NIA, 
particularly concerning delays in early stage data preserv ation. The Committe e 
recommends MHA for the establishment of standardised protocols and robust 
monitoring mechanisms to ensure the preservation requests and also to issue necessary 
directives mandating State police to initiate data preservation requests within the first 
24 hours of a cybercrime report to mitigate the risk of losing volatile evidence, such as 
IP logs and server files, when NIA assumes investigation from the State police . The 
Committee further recommends that the SSMIs be required to ensure timely provision 
of required data to NIA, regardless of the physical location of the data centers. 
3.11   Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) 
Comprehensive Cybercrime Management 
3.11.1  I4C was launched by the MHA in 2 020, I4C acts as the central coordination, 
reporting, capacity -building and advisory body for cybercrime response in India. It is the 
national nodal agency for cybercrime coordination, protection and policy support. Its 
mandate is expressly geared towards creating a secure cyber ecosystem by actively 
facilitating prevention, detection and response to cybercrime threats across the country. As a 
multi-functional body, I4C operates through following seven verticals: (1) the National 
Cybercrime Reporting Portal  and Helpline 1930 facilitate citizen -centric complaint 
registration and immediate response; (2) the National Cyber Crime Research and Innovation 
Centre fosters indigenous technology development for cyber forensics and threat mitigation; 
(3) the Cybercrime  Ecosystem Management Unit vertical aims to develop an ecosystem 
conducive for effective neutralization of threats from cyber criminals by bringing together 
academia, industry and Government to combat cybercrime through multi -pronged and multi-
stakeholder efforts; (4) National Cybercrime Forensic Laboratory as a facility for forensic 
analysis and investigation of Cybercrime by use of the latest digital technology to support 
investigations; (5) Platform for Joint Cybercrime Investigation Team enables cross -
jurisdictional data sharing and collaborative investigations; (6) National Cybercrime Training 
Centre (NCTC) capacity building for law enforcement agencies, public prosecutors and 
judges in the field of cybercrime; and (7) National Cybercrime Threat Analyti cs Unit 
functions as a platform for analyzing cybercrime data and generating threat intelligence. 
National Cybercrime Coordination and Reporting 
3.11.2  The I4C serves as a pivotal nexus for aligning national efforts across law 
enforcement agencies, Government institutions, financial regulators, industry and civil 
society to combat cybercrime cohesively. Through its strategic coordination function, I4C 
facilitates the timely exchange of intelligence, technical resources and operational best 
practices, thereby reinforcing India’s overall cyber resilience. In its role as an enabler of 
multi-sectoral engagement, the I4C fosters a dynamic collaboration ecosystem connecting 
academia, industry leaders, enforcement bodies and citizens to drive innovation, ant icipate 
emerging digital threats and strengthen collective cyber defence mechanisms. 
3.11.3  The I4C administers a robust citizen -facing infrastructure to streamline cybercrime 
reporting and accelerate response mechanisms. The National Cybercrime Reporting  Portal 
(cybercrime.gov.in) serves as India’s official digital interface for lodging complaints across a 
spectrum of cyber offences, including financial fraud, online abuse and crimes targeting 

 
 
53 
 
vulnerable groups. Through its rapid complaint routing system,  the portal ensures that 
submissions are promptly directed to the relevant State or Union Territory law enforcement 
units, enabling efficient triage, follow -up and resolution. Complementing this is Helpline 
1930, a dedicated emergency channel for real-time intervention in financial cyber fraud cases 
facilitating immediate transaction blocking and minimizing victim losses through coordinated 
action with banks and enforcement agencies. 
Cyber Fraud Mitigation and Threat Analytics 
3.11.4  The I4C hosts the Cybe r Fraud Mitigation Centre (CFMC), a dedicated unit that 
facilitates rapid, multi -agency intervention against online financial crimes. CFMC brings 
together stakeholders from banking institutions, payment intermediaries, telecom operators 
and law enforcement  bodies to enable real -time coordination, which includes freezing 
suspicious transactions, tracing digital footprints and disrupting fraudulent accounts. In 
addition, I4C operates a nationwide threat dissemination mechanism, issuing regular 
technical alerts, advisories and situational digests on emerging cyber threats such as scams, 
fake applications and critical vulnerabilities. These communications are directed to relevant 
agencies, regulators and industry partners to reinforce India’s cyber fraud early w arning and 
response ecosystem. 
3.11.5  The I4C harnesses data -driven methodologies to elevate strategic foresight and 
operational precision in cybercrime response. Through its National Cybercrime Threat 
Analytics Unit, I4C applies advanced analytical tools  to detect emerging crime trends, 
geographic hotspots and behavioural patterns, thereby enabling targeted protection strategies 
and intelligence -led enforcement actions. Complementing this capability is its Suspect 
Repository, a continually updated public -accessible database that empowers both law 
enforcement and citizens to verify suspicious digital identifiers such as phone numbers, email 
IDs and URLs against documented cybercriminal profiles. This dual -pronged approach 
enhances situational awareness, fac ilitates rapid risk assessment and reinforces public safety 
in the digital ecosystem. 
Capacity Building and Cybersecurity Outreach 
3.11.6  The I4C undertakes targeted skill development and technical reinforcement to bolster 
India’s cybercrime response ecos ystem. Its National Cybercrime Training Centre (NCTC) 
vertical delivers customized programs for law enforcement personnel, prosecutors and 
judicial officers, equipping them to confront sophisticated cyber threats, master digital 
forensic techniques and add ress evolving criminal methodologies. In tandem, the National 
Cybercrime Forensic Laboratory provides comprehensive digital evidence analysis and 
investigative assistance to both State and Central agencies, thereby strengthening legal 
prosecution efforts and advancing deterrence mechanisms across jurisdictions. 
3.11.7  The I4C drives inclusive and proactive engagement to foster a secure digital culture. 
Through its Outreach Campaigns, including flagship efforts like the “Cyber Dost” initiative, 
I4C dissemin ates safe -cyber practices nationwide via social media messaging, educational 
workshops and targeted programs, with special emphasis on protecting vulnerable 
populations. Additionally, the Citizen Volunteers platform encourages community -led 
vigilance by enabling individuals to report illegal or harmful online content, thereby 
augmenting participatory cybersecurity and reinforcing collective responsibility across 
India’s digital ecosystem. 

 
 
54 
 
3.11.8  I4C plays a pivotal role in shaping India’s cybersecurity governance landscape. 
Through its Guideline s and SOPs, I4C formulates technical frameworks, standard operating 
procedures and strategic policy advisories targeted at Government bodies, industry 
stakeholders and academic institutions, ensuring a harmonized and forward -looking approach 
to mitigating present and emerging cyber threats. Additionally, it gives expert 
recommendations to develop best -practice protocols enabling India’s regulatory architecture 
to remain agile and responsive to technological shifts and evolving threat vectors. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.11.9  The Committee suggests exploring the possibilities of conversion of complaints 
reported on the National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP) into e -FIRs thereby 
resolving legal issues arising during the refunding of the lien amount to th e victims on 
account of non-registration of the FIRs. 
3.11.10  The Committee is of the view that standardisation of cybercrime units at the 
State level. The Committee, therefore, recommends establishing State Cybercrime 
Coordination Centres (S4C) in all States/UTs, on lines similar to Indian Cyber Crime 
Coordination Centre (I4C), to ensure seamles s coordination between I4C and S tate-
level units for effective intelligence sharing. 
3.12 National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) 
3.12.1  The National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) is the 
designated national nodal agency for the protection of Critical Information Infrastructure 
(CII) in India. It functions under the National Technical Research Organi sation (NTRO) and 
is notified under Section 70A of the Information Technology Act, 2000. NCIIPC plays a 
central role in safeguarding systems that, if attacked or disabled, could severely impact 
national security, economic stability, public health, or order . CII is defined, as per Section 
70(1) of the IT Act, 2000 as computer resources whose incapacitation may have a debilitating 
impact on national interests. NCIIPC’s primary mandate includes identifying Protected 
Systems (PSs), conducting sectoral cybersecu rity audits, issuing threat advisories, supporting 
incident response and developing sector -specific cyber maturity. It currently oversees 427 
Protected Systems across 114 organis ations spread across seven critical sectors: Banking, 
financial services and i nsurance (BFSI), Power, Telecom, Transport, Health, Government, 
and Strategic/Public Enterprises. An additio nal 50 systems across 19 organis ations have 
already undergone assessments and await official notification. 
3.12.2  To support these institutions, NC IIPC coordinates lifecycle security ranging from 
architecture review and policy guidance to crisis management planning. The Centre assists in 
formulating Information Security Management Systems (ISMS), Service Level Agreements 
(SLAs), audit scopes, and pos t-incident review mechanisms for designated entities. Its 
advisory support also covers vendor policy, monitoring dashboard configurations, and 
periodic vulnerability analytics. 
3.12.3  One of NCIIPC’s most impactful interventions is the Automated Threat 
Dissemination Platform (ATDP), a real -time intelligence feed system for malicious IPs, 
domains, Indicators of Compromise (IoCs), and malware signatures. As of July 2025, 181 
critical infrastructure entities actively integrate these feeds into their cybersecu rity 
environments. In the first six months of 2025, NCIIPC identified and reported 1,172 phishing 
domains targeting CIIs, sharing these findings with MeitY and other enforcement agencies. 

 
 
55 
 
These actions demonstrate NCIIPC’s transition toward proactive and p redictive threat 
detection. Risk assessments carried out by NCIIPC include field visits, Security Operations 
Centre (SOC) evaluations, incident readiness reviews, and cybersecurity capacity scoring. 
Maturity benchmarking is conducted using a five -dimensional risk matrix that includes 
network security, application security, governance, security operations, and risk management. 
These findings inform both internal remediation and executive -level decision-making within 
CII organisations. 
3.12.4  In April 2025, NCIIPC organized its third national -level cybersecurity drill, the 
Critical Information Infrastructure Security Exercise (CII SECEX). Held in hybrid mode 
across four cities, it b rought together over 170 organis ations and more than 1,050 personnel 
for techn ical drills, executive scenario planning, and high -level decision maker briefings. 
Strategically structured across tiers technical teams, executives, and board -level leadership 
the exercise tested response protocols, inter -agency coordination, and foundati onal resilience 
in simulated breach conditions. 
3.12.5  In terms of policy leadership, NCIIPC released the National Cybersecurity Reference 
Framework (NCRF) in November 2024 a consolidated playbook of best practices, sectoral 
benchmarks, and risk control m atrices for CII protection. In parallel, work continues on a 
Cyber Security Capability Maturity Model (CSCMM) in partnership with IIT Kanpur to 
objectively measure cybersecurity maturity across CII verticals and enable long -term 
planning, tailored to Indian sectoral conditions. 
3.12.6  NCIIPC enforces accountability through the creation of Information Security 
Steering Committees (ISSCs) for each Protected System -owning organi sation. These 
committees chaired by the CEO or equivalent and meeting quarterly ar e responsible for post-
incident reflection, change management approvals, audit tracking, and risk resolution. 
NCIIPC is a standing member on these ISSCs and submits non -compliance escalations to 
relevant ministry Secretaries, Chief Secretaries, and the Nat ional Cyber Security Coordinator 
(NCSC) for appropriate action. 
3.12.7  Passive network -wide scans are also routinely conducted by NCIIPC to evaluate 
Internet-facing attack surfaces of CIIs. This includes the identification of insecure ports, 
leaked creden tials, subdomain enumeration, and re -exposed previously breached data. 
Vulnerabilities are reported confidentially to affected stakeholders and closely followed up to 
ensure timely closure. To support operational resilience, NCIIPC coordinates with CERT -In 
on malware reverse engineering, forensic correlation of digital attacks, and advanced 
persistent threat (APT) tracking. This joint model ensures both strategic oversight and 
immediate technical response during high-priority or complex cyber events. 
3.12.8  NCIIPC forms a critical layer of India’s national cyber resilience architecture. 
Through a structured model of pre -emptive threat detection, layered risk assessment, sectoral 
maturity benchmarking, and executive coordination, the Centre ensures that nati onal critical 
infrastructure is not only protected from evolving threats but is also enabled with the 
institutional knowledge and technologies needed to mitigate future risks. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.12.9  To strengthen national cybersecurity resilience, the Committee recommends 
that NCIIPC should consider Sector -specific Computer Security Incident Response 
Teams(CSIRTs), such as CSIRT in Finance sector (CSIRT -Fin) and CSIRT in Power 

 
 
56 
 
sector (CSIRT -Power) to be expanded to more critical information infrastructure 
sectors such as healthcare, road transport, railways, aviation  and telecommunications, 
where they can address sector -specific threats like ransomware in hospitals, 
cyberattacks on transport infrastruc ture, and network intrusions in telecom systems to 
improve cyber resilience within respective critical sectors. The Committee is of the view 
that a national coordination mechanism should be established to unify sectoral CSIRTs 
through a central hub that facilitates real-time threat intelligence sharing, joint incident 
response protocols and secure communication channels.  
3.13 Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and International Cooperation 
3.13.1  The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) plays a strategic role in India’s global 
cybercrime response efforts, with a core focus on multilateral engagement, bilateral 
collaboration and policy harmonization. Through its dedicated Cyber Diplomacy Division, 
MEA leads India’s participation in international forums such  as the United Nations and 
regional cyber dialogues with partners including the US, Japan and the European Union. This 
division also spearheads the negotiation and operationalisation of bilateral Memoranda of 
Understanding (MoUs) that support joint efforts  in combating cyber threats, enabling 
information exchange, enhancing investigative collaboration and facilitating technology 
transfer. Recent MoUs reflect expanded cooperation in strategic policy dialogue and cyber 
law enforcement with countries like the US, Australia, Singapore, France and the UK, 
underscoring MEA’s commitment to strengthening India’s cyber resilience through 
diplomacy and global partnerships. 
3.13.2  Through the MEA, India is part of cross -border cyber incident response frameworks, 
including intelligence sharing, early warnings and joint investigations. MEA serves as India’s 
nodal point for requests made under bilateral treaties for assistance on cybercrime, especially 
when digital evidence or suspects are located abroad. India participat es in Information 
Security Dialogues under MEA stewardship, facilitating sharing of best practices and incident 
data between nations. MEA leads Indian delegations on cyber issues at the UN, including 
working on the development of international cybercrime t reaties and frameworks and plays a 
pivotal role in global cyber lawmaking processes, advocating norms of responsible state 
behaviour in cyberspace, principles of non -interference and protection of critical information 
infrastructure at UN Group of Governme ntal Experts (GGE) and Open -ended Working 
Group (OEWG). 
3.13.3  MEA provides advisory support to other ministries and enforcement agencies on 
mutual legal assistance treaties (MLATs) and legal frameworks for evidence exchange. The 
MEA’s guidance aligns Ind ian regulations with global norms and enables the lawful cross -
border transfer of evidence by channeling best practices and legal standards from 
international partnerships to Indian policymakers, law -enforcement agencies, and the 
judiciary. MEA, in collabo ration with domestic and foreign partners, organizes capacity 
building programs, international workshops and staff exchanges that train Indian officials in 
the latest cybercrime detection, forensics and response practices. 
3.13.4  MEA coordinates cross -border alerts and rapid response in cyber incidents, 
particularly those threatening India’s critical information infrastructure or economy. It 
represents India at multinational platforms like the G20 and BRICS, advocating global cyber 
security measures and frameworks that align with national interests. The MEA’s overarching 
role in cybercrime protection is to internationalize India’s fight against cyber threats, enhance 
cross-border cooperation, help shape robust legal and diplomatic frameworks and build 

 
 
57 
 
India’s global influence in the digital domain. It acts as the bridge between domestic agencies 
(like I4C and CERT -In) and international partners, ensuring that India remains resilient, 
proactive and influential in the evolving global cyber arena. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.13.5  Recognising the critical need for rapid international cooperation, the Committee 
suggests instituting a dedicated 24x7 fusion desk or contact point staffed with 
multilingual, legally trained personnel, as envisioned under Article 42 of the UN 
Cybercrime Convention (2024). The Committee is of the view that such a unit would 
facilitate swift communication and coordination with foreign agencies on preservation 
and cooperation requests, thereby mitigating the currently prolonged execution  
timelines of MLATs and Letters Rogatory. 
3.13.6  The Committee observes the challenge posed by  the lack of a statutory mandate 
for compelling data disclosure from foreign service providers (cloud/email/VoIP), where 
most critical data is stored outside Ind ia. The Committee is of the view that relying on 
voluntary cooperation and slow Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) processes 
delays access to vital digital evidence, affecting cybercrime investigations. To address 
this, the Committee recommends pursuing  legal and diplomatic measures to enable 
enforceable and timely data disclosure. 
3.14  Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
Pivotal Role of C-DAC in Cybersecurity Advancement 
3.14.1  C-DAC, with support from the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) has played a vital role in strengthening India’s cybersecurity ecosystem through 
extensive research and development in critical areas such as mobile security, cyber forensics, 
threat analysis, security operations, blockchain,  cryptography and deepfake detection. These 
efforts have resulted in the creation of indigenous products and solutions that are being 
effectively used by citizens, law enforcement agencies, defence organisations, enterprises and 
critical infrastructure sec tors to safeguard against cyber threats and enhance investigative 
capabilities. 
3.14.2  Recognising the shortage of skilled cybersecurity professionals in the country, C -
DAC has also launched various programs focused on skill development, capacity building  
and awareness generation. Specialised training in cyber forensics has been provided for law 
enforcement and judiciary personnel to build a responsive and resilient cybercrime handling 
framework. In alignment with the Government’s vision of a "Secure Digit al India", C -DAC 
remains committed to continual innovation and global best practices.  
Development of Key Indigenous Cybersecurity Tools 
3.14.3  Some of the key cybersecurity tools developed by C -DAC include the Deepfake 
Detection Tool, which is currently in the testing phase with 89% accuracy on global 
benchmarks and shared with law enforcement agencies for evaluation. M-Kavach 2 is an end-
user mobile security application available to all android users via the Google Play Store and 
provides protection against hidden apps, misconfigurations and risky software. Vishleshak is 
another tool used by security analysts for in -depth threat analysis of mobile applications, 
specifically targeting access behaviours such as camera, location and microphone usage. 

 
 
58 
 
Parikshan aids android developers by identifying and reporting vulnerabilities through 
automated static and dynamic code analysis, while Praamaanik, built on the National 
Blockchain Framework, helps verify app authenticity and developer ownership. Integration 
with M -Kavach 2 allows users to easily cross -check and avoid downloading fake 
applications. 
3.14.4  C-DAC's other strategic contributions include CDACSIEM, a security monitoring 
solution that aggregates and analyzes logs across networks to provide holistic vi sibility to 
Security Operations Centre (SOC) analysts. It was notably deployed during the G20 summit. 
Similarly, Rakshak DNS serves as a secure enterprise DNS resolver that identifies and blocks 
malicious web domains. In the IoT domain, C -DAC, in collabora tion with Standardization 
Testing and Quality Certification (STQC) has developed the IoT Security Evaluation Hand 
book to ensure devices used within Government or enterprise settings meet baseline security 
standards. 
Cyber Security Audit and Forensic Analysis 
3.14.5  To address the growing need for cybersecurity assessments, C -DAC plays a major 
role in conducting rigorous cyber audits and forensic analysis across India’s digital 
ecosystem. These audits help identify operational vulnerabilities, enforce regu latory 
compliance and support proactive risk mitigation especially in sectors l ike finance, health 
care, defenc e, telecom and public utilities. Both technical (vulnerability assessments, 
penetration testing) and procedural (policy adherence, access control  reviews) audits are 
conducted in alignment with standards such as CERT -In guidelines, ISO 27001 and various 
domain-specific regulations mandated by bodies like RBI, IRDAI and NPCI. These audits are 
particularly critical for small and medium enterprises an d Government departments that may 
lack internal cybersecurity capacity. 
3.14.6  As part of its forensic support role, C -DAC has developed the CyberCheck Suite, a 
powerful, web-based forensic tool that enables law enforcement officers to efficiently recover 
and analyse data from digital devices. Along with this toolkit, C -DAC extends broader 
support during incident response, including memory forensics, malware reverse engineering 
and assisting in audits following breaches, especially in cases involving ranso mware or 
insider threats. By providing both technological tools and capacity -building initiatives, C -
DAC continues to contribute significantly toward building a resilient and secure digital 
infrastructure across India. 
Information Security Education and Awareness 
3.14.7  The Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) program, implemented 
by C-DAC under MeitY, is a key initiative to combat cybercrime in India through education, 
awareness and capacity building. It conducts nationwide digital safety c ampaigns, supports 
higher cybersecurity education via top institutes and trains IT professionals, auditors and law 
enforcement. ISEA also provides specialized courses for police and judiciary on cyber laws, 
digital forensics and online fraud investigations . By bridging academic learning with real -
world cybersecurity practices, ISEA helps build a skilled, future -ready workforce critical to 
safeguarding India’s digital infrastructure against evolving cyber threats. 
  

 
 
59 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.15  Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In)  
3.15.1  The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) operates under the 
Ministry of Electronics and In formation Technology (MeitY). It is the national nodal agency 
responsible for addressing cybersecurity threats, coordinating incident responses, issuing 
advisories and building cyber resilience across Government, critical infrastructure and private 
sectors. CERT-In was designated as the national incident response body under Section 70B of 
the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008. Its statutory mandate includes: 
• Collection, analysis and dissemination of cybersecurity threat information. 
• Forecasting and issuing early warnings. 
• Emergency response coordination during cyber incidents. 
• Promoting security awareness and technical assistance. 
3.15.2  CERT-In provides 24x7 incident detection and response support, helping 
organisations mitigate attacks such as phishing, ransomware, DDoS and data breaches. It 
coordinates containment and recovery efforts following major cyber incidents, while ensuring 
communication between affected organi sations, sectoral regulators and law enforcement. It 
regularly publishes bull etins, security advisories and vulnerability notes regarding newly 
discovered threats. Helps institutions identify and patch weaknesses by providing technical 
mitigation steps including zero-day vulnerabilities, malware families, or phishing campaigns. 
In FY 2024–25, CERT-In conducted 9,700+ cybersecurity audits across ministries, PSUs and 
critical infrastructure facilities to evaluate compliance with security controls. 
3.15.3  CERT-In has partnered with BITS Pilani (2025) to launch certification programs o n 
cybersecurity governance and technical operations for public sector professionals. Regional 
and sector -specific cyber awareness campaigns are conducted by CERT -In, alongside 
MeitY’s Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) initiative. CERT -In leads 
India’s participation in global cyber exercises like “Synergy,” collaborates with foreign 
CERTs and facilitates international intelligence exchanges through secured frameworks. 
Cyber Swachhta Kendra (CSK) was launched in 2017 and operated by CERT -In in 
partnership with C -DAC, the CSK provides free cleanup tools for citizens to detect and 
remove botnets and malware. These tools include M -Kavach for mobile security and 
AppSamvid for application whitelisting. 
3.15.4  CERT-In has formulated a Cyber Crisis  Management Plan (CCMP) that guides all 
central agencies, regulators and critical institutions in preparing and responding cyber -attacks 
3.14.8  The Committee appreciates the insightful and forward-thinking of C-DAC to 
harness Artificial intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) technologies for 
predictive cyber threat intelligence, which is crucial for safeguarding critical national 
infrastructure in today’s rapidly evolving cybercrime. The Committee recommends C -
DAC to explore the development of an AI/ML-powered that predicts cyber threats to 
critical sectors by integrating data from existing tools such as Deepfake Detection, 
Vishleshak, CDACSIEM and Rakshak DNS, along with external global threat 
intelligence. The Committee suggests creation of a national training platform for 
cybersecurity that uses virtual reality (VR), thereby offering realistic practice sessions 
and certification program to build a skilled workforce across the law enforcement 
agencies, judiciary and enterprise. 

 
 
60 
 
and cyber-terrorism. CCMP provides strategic framework to coordinate recovery from cyber -
crisis and enhance resilience.  Simulations, workshops and compliance assessments are 
conducted under the CCMP mandate. CERT -In also regularly conducts workshops for 
Government bodies and key organi sations to sensitize them about the cyber security threat 
landscape and enabling them to prepare & implement the CCMP. So far, 205 such CCMP 
workshops have been conducted. 
3.15.5  CERT-In’s Sectoral coordination involves collaborative efforts with sector -specific 
CSIRTs such as CSIRT -FIN and CSIRT -Power, facilitating rapid cross -sectoral respo nse 
mechanisms. It also includes joint publication of Digital Threat Reports, exemplified by 
initiatives like CERT -In’s BFSI Sector Advisory Report 2024. The enforcement and 
regulatory role of Cert -In includes issuing legally binding directions under Secti on 70B on 
matters such as incident reporting timelines (within six hours for specific incidents), 
synchronisation of system clocks using NTP and compliance requirements related to KYC, 
log retention and cloud services as per the April 2022 directive. It al so involves active 
coordination with IT intermediaries, data centers, VPN providers and other digital service 
platforms. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.15.6  The Committee acknowledges CERT -In’s crucial role in safeguarding India’s 
cybersecurity by effectively managing threat detection, incident response and 
coordination across multiple sectors. To strengthen its capabilities further, the 
Committee recommends the adoption of an AI -driven Cyber Threat Intelligence 
Platform that enables quicker and mor e intelligent identification and handling of cyber 
threats. Further, the Committee encourages CERT-In to build strong partnerships with 
start-ups and academic institutions to foster innovation and develop a skilled 
cybersecurity workforce. The Committee al so recommends conducting regular, flexible 
cybersecurity drills in collaboration with sectoral teams to ensure CERT -In remains 
agile and prepared to tackle emerging cyber challenges promptly. 
3.16  Ministry of Education 
Department of School Education & Literacy (DoSEL)  
3.16.1  The Department of School Education & Literacy (DoSEL), under the Ministry of 
Education, plays a vital role in building a resilient education system and promoting digital 
safety among schoolchildren, teachers and stakeholders across I ndia. DoSEL has 
mainstreamed digital safety, cyber hygiene and responsible use of technology in school 
curricula following the recommendations of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020. 
These initiatives raise awareness among students and teachers about safe internet practices, 
cyberbullying, phishing and online threats. The department conducts regular in -service and 
online training for teachers on digital safety and cybersecurity, equipping them to identify 
and address issues like cyberbullying, online fraud and digital addiction. 
3.16.2  It was informed to the Committee that campaigns and classroom modules by DoSEL 
promote safe digital behaviour, with a special focus on marginalized groups and gender -
sensitive content, often in partnership with autonomou s bodies and State Governments. 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, a flagship scheme supports the introduction of digital literacy 
programs, safe network protocols and infrastructural safeguards in Government schools. This 
includes filtered access to online resource s and the encouragement of parent involvement in 

 
 
61 
 
digital safety. DoSEL has issued advisories on preventing cyber incidents in educational 
institutions, including protocols for parental engagement and reporting of cybercrimes 
affecting minors. There are sch ool and district -level grievance redressal mechanisms to 
handle reports of cyber offences against children, ensuring timely intervention and support. 
3.16.3  DoSEL contributes significantly to India’s cyber safety ecosystem by promoting 
awareness and responsible digital behaviour among students and communities. Through 
Workshops & Collaborations, DoSEL actively partners with entities such as NCERT, 
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) and State police to conduct 
educational sessions focusing on cyber safety, online privacy and the risks associated with 
social media usage. To ensure broad accessibility, DoSEL also leads efforts in Promoting 
Responsible Internet Use by developing digital safety resources in multiple Indian languages 
and formats tailored for diverse audiences, including rural and underserved populations. 
These initiatives foster inclusive participation and empower citizens with  the knowledge 
needed to navigate the digital world safely. 
Department of Higher Education (DoHE)  
3.16.4  The Department of Higher Education (DHE) is responsible for driving technological 
advancement, digital literacy and cyber safety awareness at the ter tiary level of education 
throughout India’s universities and colleges. The Digital Learning Platforms administered by 
the Department of Higher Education such as SWAYAM, the National Digital Library and 
Virtual Labs promote inclusive and accessible educatio n. These platforms incorporate 
operational guidelines and, in some cases, training modules that encourage responsible use of 
digital resources. In line with ICT -Enabled Education, DoHE policies emphasize cyber 
ethics, data privacy and cybersecurity as inte gral components of “21st Century Skills,” 
embedding cyber protection content across both technical and general curricula. To further 
promote hands -on engagement, the department facilitates Academic Collaborations, 
including workshops and hackathons (e.g., Smart India Hackathon) that address cybersecurity 
challenges and spur digital innovation among students and faculty. 
3.16.5  DoHE apprised the Committee that it plays a guiding role in embedding 
cybersecurity and digital protection across India's higher ed ucation landscape. Through UGC 
Guidelines, the University Grants Commission under DoHE issues advisories to universities 
and colleges on cybersecurity measures, safeguarding research data and preventing 
cybercrime within campus environments. Additionally, the National Mission on Education 
through ICT (NMEICT) supports the rollout of secure digital platforms, disseminates cyber 
awareness resources and ensures both students and faculty can access relevant cyber safety 
learning tools. DoHE also prioritizes Res earch and Faculty Training, offering specialized 
modules in cyber forensics, digital ethics and online intellectual property to faculty members 
and research scholars across academic institutions, thereby enhancing institutional capacity 
and knowledge resilience. 
3.16.6  The DoHE collaborates with I4C, MeitY, and law-enforcement agencies to spearhead 
nationwide awareness initiatives, empowering student bodies as cyber -safety ambassadors to 
cultivate a secure and digitally resilient academic ecosystem on campuses and in surrounding 
communities. 
  

 
 
62 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.16.7  The Committee recommends that to effectively build a resilient digital 
generation, cybercrime prevention and cyber hygiene education should be integrated 
into the school curric ulum starting from early grades to senior secondary level.  The 
Committee further recommends that this curriculum inclusion be mandated for all 
schools irrespective whether it governed by Central board or State board to ensure no 
child is left behind.  The C ommittee also recommends for introduction of mandatory 
cyber education subject in non -technical courses across colleges and universities, 
integrating modules on cyber awareness, digital safety, responsible online conduct and 
basics of data privacy. 
3.17  Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
Safeguarding India’s Corporate Digital Infrastructure 
3.17.1  The Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) operates the MCA21 portal, a key digital 
platform that enables regulatory compliance and corporate governance for companies and 
LLPs (Limited Liability Partnership) registered in India. It facilitates statutory filings under 
the Companies Act and LLP Act, 2008 forming a foundational part of India’s corporate 
regulatory ecosystem. As digital governance deepens, the cyber threat landscape has grown 
more complex, making the security and resilience of MCA21 critical not only to protect 
sensitive stakeholder data but also to uphold the integrity of regulatory processes and support 
national cybersecurity objectives. 
3.17.2  To address these evolving challenges, MCA has implemented a robust, multi -layered 
cybersecurity strategy in alignment with guidelines issued by the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY). This includes conducting comprehensive security audits 
covering all applications and infrastructure and performing regular Vulnerability Assessment 
and Penetration Testing (VAPT) through CERT -IN empanelled vendors. Threat intelligence 
is actively utilised through the blocking of malicious indicators such as IP ad dresses, URLs 
and IOCs, based on advisories from CERT -IN and the National Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC), with real -time threat reporting mechanisms in 
place. 
3.17.3  Additionally, MCA follows a structured monthly cycle for patch management and 
maintains secure configuration baselines to ensure systems are up to date and resilient. The 
guidelines from MeitY on information security and cybersecurity are fully adopted across the 
platform. Cybersecurity practices and advisories applicable to Government employees are 
also incorporated into MCA21 operations to promote cyber hygiene and reduce human -
related risks. Collectively, these measures demonstrate MCA’s commitment to maintaining a 
secure digital infrastructure that underpins the compliance and governance of India’s 
corporate sector. 
Preventive Measures in MCA21v3 
3.17.4  MCA21v3 employs a multi-layered, advanced cybersecurity architecture aligned with 
MeitY, CERT -IN, NCIIPC and industry standards to address the growing threat landscape 
surrounding digital regulatory platforms. At the perimeter and application layer, MCA21v3 
leverages a CDN -based Web Application Firewall (WAF) from Akamai to defend against 
sophisticated attacks such as zero -day exploits, DDoS, SQL injection and XSS (Cross -Site 

 
 
63 
 
Scripting). This is supported by an anti -DDoS system that monitors and mitigates malicious 
inbound traffic in real time and a Network Intrusion Prevention System (NIPS) that 
continuously scans for and blocks, harmful network activities. 
3.17.5  Within the endpoint, server and infrastructure layers, the platform incorporates an in -
house WAF, combining with external firewalls to secure the borders between internal and 
external networks, while internal firewalls based on Zero Trust model segmen t resources to 
contain potential breaches. Antivirus protections are regularly updated to detect malware and 
abnormal behaviours across all servers and endpoints. Secure VPN tunnels are mandatory for 
server-to-server and endpoint communication encrypting t raffic and safeguarding against 
interception such as Man -in-the-Middle attacks. To secure email and user access, MCA21v3 
restricts user internet access via a web proxy and permits only pre -approved domains. Email 
security is further enhanced with gateway -levels and boxing to isolate and examine 
suspicious attachments and links, effectively blocking phishing and malware delivery to end 
users.  
3.17.6  Strategically, the architecture employs micro -segmentation techniques to reduce the 
attack surface, isolating critical assets and limiting lateral movement in case of compromise. 
The network is also organized into well -defined zones (DMZs, MZs), each governed by 
stringent firewall policies to rigorously separate trusted and untrusted resources. This 
architectural approach ensures that the MCA21v3 platform remains resilient, preserving data 
confidentiality and integrity, ensuring service availability and supporting compliance with 
India’s national and sectoral cybersecurity requirements. 
Security Monitoring and Compliance Framework 
3.17.7  MCA21 has established a comprehensive real -time security monitoring and response 
system to safeguard its digital ecosystem. At its core is a Security Information and Event 
Management (SIEM) tool that collects, correlates and anal yzes security event data across the 
platform, enabling efficient detection and response to cyber threats. This is supported by a 
24x7 Security Operations Centre (SOC) that ensures constant surveillance and immediate 
resolution of any anomalies. To enhance resilience further, MCA21 employs a structured 
Vulnerability Management program, continuously identifying and mitigating security risks. 
Tools like Tenable VA support infrastructure vulnerability scanning, while SAST and DAST 
help address application -level weaknesses during both development and deployment stages. 
A rigorous patch management process ensures timely updates across all software layers, 
minimizing exposure to known vulnerabilities through a well -defined patching cycle. 
Systems are maintained at n-1 version levels, ensuring they are secure and current. 
3.17.8  In addition to these internal measures, third -party penetration tests are conducted 
regularly by CERT -IN empanelled agencies. These simulations reveal hidden security flaws 
in MCA21 web appl ications, ensuring independent validation and strengthening the 
platform’s overall defence. The entire cybersecurity architecture is anchored in strict 
compliance with national and international standards. Internet access is highly restricted and 
zero-trust principles govern internal system interactions, ensuring access is always verified. 
MCA21 integrates ISO 27001 best practices for structured risk management and regularly 
undergoes internal and STQC -conducted security audits. Compliance with guidelines f rom 
CERT-IN and NCIIPC further reinforces its cyber defenc e posture, making MCA21 a secure 
and resilient platform for corporate governance in India.  
  

 
 
64 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.17.9  The Committee appreciates the comprehensive and robust cybersecurity 
measures already implemented in MCA21 portal to protect India’s corporate 
regulatory ecosystem. However, recognizing the increasing sophistication of cyber 
threats, especially those exploiting shell companies and fraudulent corporate entities, 
the Committee recommends the Ministry of Corporate Affairs the adoption of an AI -
powered, blockchain -based verification and continuous monitoring system integrated 
into MCA21. The Committee is of the view that this framework should enable seamless 
and automated collab oration with law enforcement and regulatory agencies for rapid 
investigation and action of any fraudulent activities. 
***** 
  

 
 
65 
 
Part IV: Prevention Strategies 
4.1 Legal framework available to prevent cybercrimes 
4.1.1  The legal mechanism available to prevent cybercrimes in India is a comprehensive 
and evolving framework combining legislation, rules, institutional setups and technological 
initiatives to address the growing cyber threat landscape effectively. Cyber Crimes in India 
are primarily addressed through various legislations as mentioned below: 
● Information Technology Act, 2000 
● Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 
● Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
● Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 
● Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 
● The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition Act), 1986 
● The Young Persons (Harmful Publication) Act, 1956 
● Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 
4.1.2  MeitY looks after the “Matters relating to Cyber Laws, administration of the 
Information Techn ology Act, 2000 (IT Act) and other IT related laws” according to 
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 (AoBR). The enactment of IT Act, 
2000 designed initially to facilitate e -commerce and electronic governance aligned with the 
Model Law  on Electronic Commerce adopted by the United Nations Commission on 
International Trade Law. Over time, it has become the core statute addressing cyber offences 
such as hacking, unauthorised data access, identity theft, cyber terrorism and publication of 
obscene material online. Several rules under the IT Act bolster this, like the Information 
Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking Access of Information by Public) Rules, 
2009, the Information Technology (Reasonable security practices and procedur es and 
sensitive personal data or information) Rules, 2011 and the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021. 
4.1.3  The following table shows the list of offences mentioned in the IT Act, 2000 
Table 4.1 
 
IT Act 
Provision Offence Cognizable/ 
Non-Cognizable 
Bailable/ 
Non-Bailable Punishment 
Sec 65 Tampering with computer source 
documents 
Cognizable  
 Bailable Up to 3 years imprisonment  and /or 
fine up to ₹2,00,000  
Sec. 66 
r/w 43 
Unauthorized access to computer 
systems 
Cognizable  
 
Bailable  
 
Up to 3 years imprisonment  and /or 
fine up to ₹5,00,000 
 
Sec 66B Dishonestly receiving stolen 
computer resources Cognizable Bailable Up to 3 years imprisonment  and /or 
fine up to ₹1,00,000  
Sec 66C Identity theft Cognizable  
 
Bailable  
 
Up to 3 years imprisonment  and /or 
fine up to ₹1,00,000  

 
 
66 
 
Sec 66D Cheating by personation using 
computer resource 
Cognizable  
 
Bailable  
 
Up to 3 years imprisonment  and /or 
fine up to ₹1,00,000  
Sec 66E 
Violation of privacy (capturing or 
publishing images without 
consent) 
Cognizable Bailable Up to 3 years imprisonment  and /or 
fine up to ₹2,00,000  
Sec 66F Cyber Terrorism  Cognizable Non-Bailable Extended up to Life Imprisonment 
Sec 67 Publishing obscene material 
electronically Cognizable Non-Bailable 
First conviction: Up to 3 years 
imprisonment  and /or fine up to 
₹5,00,000; 
Subsequent: Up to 5 years and fine 
up to ₹10,00,000 
Sec 67A Publishing or transmitting 
material containing sexually 
explicit acts in electronic form. 
Cognizable Non-Bailable Imprisonment up to 5 years and fine 
up to ₹10 lakhs (for first 
conviction). Second or subsequent 
conviction: imprisonment up to 7 
years and fine up to ₹10 lakhs. 
Sec 67B Publishing or transmitting 
material depicting children in 
sexually explicit acts, etc. 
Cognizable Non-Bailable Imprisonment up to 5 years and fine 
up to ₹10 lakhs (for first 
conviction). Second or subsequent 
conviction: imprisonment up to 7 
years and fine up to ₹10 lakhs. 
Sec 67C Preservation and retention of 
information by intermediaries as 
prescribed by the government. 
Non-Cognizable Bailable Fine up to 25,00,000. 
Sec 69 
Failure to comply with directions 
to intercept or decrypt 
information 
Cognizable  
 
Non-Bailable  
 
Up to 7 years imprisonment and 
fine  
 
Sec 69A Blocking public access to 
information for national security 
Cognizable  
 
Non-Bailable  
 
Up to 7 years imprisonment and 
fine  
Sec 69B 
Authorizes monitoring and 
collection of traffic data by an 
intermediary for cybersecurity. 
Non-Cognizable Bailable Imprisonment up to one year or 
shall be liable to fine which may 
extend to one crore rupees, or with 
both. 
Sec 70 Securing access to a protected 
system Cognizable Non-Bailable 
Up to 10 years imprisonment and 
fine  
 
Sec 70B Failing to provide information 
called-for by CERT-In Non-Cognizable Bailable Up to 1 year imprisonment and fine 
up to 1 Crore 
Sec 71 
Misrepresentation or suppression 
of material facts for obtaining a 
license or digital signature 
certificate 
Non-Cognizable  
 
Bailable  
 
Up to 2 years imprisonment, or fine 
up to ₹1,00,000, or both 
Sec 72 Breach of confidentiality and 
privacy Non-Cognizable Bailable Fine up to ₹5,00,000  
Sec 72A Disclosure of information in 
breach of lawful contract Non-Cognizable Bailable Fine up to ₹25,00,000  
Sec 73 Publishing digital certificates for 
fraudulent purposes Non-Cognizable Bailable Up to 2 years imprisonment  and /or 
fine up to ₹1,00,000  
Sec 74 Knowingly creating fake digital 
signatures or certificates Non-Cognizable Bailable Up to 2 years imprisonment  and /or 
fine up to ₹1,00,000  
Sec 84B Abetment of cybercrime - - Punishment same as the principal 
offence  
Sec 84C Attempt to commit cybercrime - - Punishment up to half of the 
principal offence  

 
 
67 
 
 
4.1.4  Commonly used legal provisions for preventing cybercrimes 
i. Section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act establishes the liability framework for IT 
intermediaries such as social media platforms and internet service providers regarding 
the third-party content they host. These intermediaries enjoy “safe harbour” protection 
from li ability for such content only if they exercise due diligence and comply with 
government or court orders to take down unlawful material. According to Section 
79(3)(b), when an intermediary receives actual knowledge such as a court order or 
official notification that certain content on their platform is being used to commit an 
unlawful act, they must promptly remove or disable access to it, or else they risk 
losing their immunity and face legal consequences. 
The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines  and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021, particularly Rule 3(1)(d), further clarify these responsibilities, 
requiring intermediaries to act swiftly, within 36 hours, upon receiving a valid order 
related to unlawful content which can include material th reatening national security, 
public order, decency, defamation, or incitement to offences. 
As of November 30, 2024, 16 States namely - Bihar, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, We st Bengal, Tripura, Manipur, Goa, have notified the nodal 
officer/authorize agency under section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act, 2000 for the takedown 
of unlawful content. Further, the Ministry of Home Affairs has designated the Indian 
Cyber Crime Coordination Cen tre (I4C) as the nodal agency to perform the functions 
mandated under this provision.  
To streamline the process and ensure faster, coordinated action, I4C developed the 
SAHYOG portal, a centralized platform where authorised agencies, ministries and IT 
intermediaries, including prominent platforms like Josh, Quora, Telegram, Amazon, 
Apple, Google and Sharechat, collaborate to report and remove or disable unlawful 
online content. Since its inception, the portal has facilitated the takedown of over 
83,149 unlawful content. 
This coordinated effort has led to targeted actions such as blocking 3,255 fraudulent 
Skype IDs that impersonated government bodies and were involved in extortion -
related financial fraud; removing 2,745 Instagram accounts spreading fraudulent stock 
market advertisements and scams; shutting down 82 Telegram groups trading mule 
bank accounts used for illegal loan apps and fake stock trading; and taking down 120 
fraudulent investment and loan apps as well as related digital entities impersonatin g 
legitimate financial advisors. Further, more than 76,599 WhatsApp accounts 
associated with organized cybercrime syndicates from Southeast Asia have been 
blocked for activities including digital extortion and illegal stock trading scams.  
ii. Section 69A of the IT Act empowers the Central Government or its authorised officers 
to block public access to any information available on a computer resource when 
deemed necessary in the interests of sovereignty and integ rity of India, defenc e of 
India, security of the state, friendly relations with foreign states, public order or to 
prevent incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence related to these 

 
 
68 
 
grounds. The blocking process is governed by the Information Technology (Procedure 
and Safeguards for Blocking for Access of Information by Public) Rules, 2009, which 
set out a structured procedure ensuring safeguards and due process. Under this 
procedure, a Nodal Officer first initiates the blocking request if content is considered 
harmful to national interests. This request is examined by a Designated Officer and 
then referred to an Inter -Departmental Committee comprising members from various 
Ministries. The Committee reviews the request and may allow the intermediary or the 
originator to present their case, exce pt in emergency situations where immediate 
blocking can occur. Upon the Committee’s recommendation, the Secretary of the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) approves the order, 
which the Designated Officer then issues to the intermediary for compliance.  
In urgent cases, interim blocking orders can be issued with prior approval, subject to 
review within 48 hours. Intermediaries who fail to comply with the blocking orders 
under Section 69A face stringent consequences, including impriso nment of up to 
seven years and fines. Since 2020 to November 2024, approximately 3,265 URLs, 
online accounts, websites and 625 malicious apps have been blocked under Section 
69A to protect India's digital ecosystem. 
iii. Section 69B of the IT Act, grants the Ce ntral Government the power to authorise any 
Government agency to monitor and collect traffic data or information generated, 
transmitted, received, or stored in any computer resource, with the purpose of 
enhancing cybersecurity and preventing cyber intrusio ns or the spread of harmful 
computer contaminants. This traffic data includes details such as the origin, 
destination, route, time and other relevant information related to communication. 
Intermediaries or persons responsible for computer resources are obl igated to provide 
technical assistance and facilitate online access to such data when requested by the 
authorised Government agency. Failure to comply with these directions can result in 
penalties, including imprisonment for up to three years and fines. Th e operation of 
Section 69B is complemented by the Information Technology (Procedure and 
Safeguards for Monitoring and Collecting Traffic Data or Information) Rules, 2009, 
which prescribe procedures and safeguards for the monitoring and collection of traffi c 
data or information for cybersecurity purposes. 
 
iv. Section 69 of the IT Act, 2000 grants the Central and State Governments the authority 
to intercept, monitor, or decrypt information transmitted, received, or stored in any 
computer resource. This provision is invoked when it is necessary in the interest of the 
sovereignty or integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to the 
commission of any cognizable offe nce relating to above or for investigation of any 
offence. Intermediaries, including ISPs, social media platforms and telecom service 
providers, are required to extend technical assistance and comply with lawful 
directions issued under this section. Failure to comply with such directions may result 
in penalties, including imprisonment of up to seven years and fines. To prevent misuse 
of powers under Section 69, the Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards 
for Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009 establish a 
detailed framework. These rules ensure that interception orders are issued only by 
competent authorities with prior approval from a Secretary -level officer and are 
subject to review by a high-level committee. 
 

 
 
69 
 
v. Section 70B of the IT Act establishes the Indian Computer Emergency Response 
Team (CERT -In) as the national agency responsible for cybersecurity incident 
response, with a focus on prevention and proactive measures. CERT -In’s 
responsibilities include collecting, analysing and disseminating information on cyber 
incidents, issuing forecasts and alerts and coordinating responses to cybersecurity 
threats. The agency also plays a crucial role in issuing guidelines, advisories, 
vulnerability notes and white papers aimed  at preventing cyber incidents and 
promoting best practices in information security. By offering recommendations on 
procedures for cybersecurity, response actions and reporting mechanisms, CERT -In 
seeks to prevent cyber threats before they escalate. The In dian Computer Emergency 
Response Team (CERT -In) Rules, 2013 (copy attached) establish the operational 
procedures for CERT -In’s mandate under Section 70B, focusing on prevention, 
coordination and response to cyber threats while ensuring compliance and 
accountability across sectors. 
 
vi. The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021, prescribe due diligence to be observed by intermediaries, 
including Social Media Intermediaries (SMIs) and Significant Social Media 
Intermediaries (SSMIs). 
(a) Rule 3(1)(d) of the IT Rules 2021 mandates that intermediaries, such as social 
media platforms and other digital services, must ensure compliance with the 
laws of India and refrain from publishing or transmitting content that 
promotes, encourages, or incites illegal activities, including a ny offensive 
material related to national security, public order, or religious harmony.  
(b) Rule 3(1)(g)  mandates preservation of information and records by the 
intermediaries for 180 days for investigative purposes or for a longer period if 
so, required by the court or an authorised government agency.  
(c) Rule 3(1)(h) requires the intermediary to retain user registration information 
for 180 days after any cancellation or withdrawal of registration. 
(d) Rule 3(1)(j) speaks directly to the requirements of law enforcem ent agencies 
and mandates that an intermediary shall ‘as soon as possible’ but not later 
than 72 hours of receipt of a written order, provide information/assistance to a 
lawfully authorised government agency for investigative, protective or cyber 
security activities, for verification of identity or for prevention, detection, 
investigation or prosecution of offences.  
(e) Rule 3(2)(a)(ii)  provides that the Grievance Officer of an intermediary is 
obligated to receive and acknowledge any order/notice/direction iss ued by an 
appropriate government/competent authority or competent court.  
(f) Rule 4(1)(a), (b) and (c)  requires an SSMI must appoint a Chief Compliance 
Officer, a nodal contact person  and a Resident Grievance Officer. 
(g) Rule 7 provides that where an intermedia ry fails to observe the IT Rules, 
2021, the exemption available under Section 79(1) of the IT Act, 2000 shall 
not be available to such intermediary and consequently the intermediary shall 
be liable for punishment under any law for the time being in force 

 
 
70 
 
vii. Section 12AA of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA)  
provides conditions for re -verification and disallowing of specified transactions in 
certain cases which involves cash withdrawals and deposits and transactions where 
there is a risk of mon ey laundering and terror financing.   For such transactions banks 
are expected to; 
(a) Verify the identity of the transacting parties,  
(b)Take additional prescribed steps to examine ownership, source of funds and 
financial position. 
(c) Record the purpose  behind the transactions and the intended nature of 
relationship.  
Failing which, the specified transaction should be disallowed.  
Additionally, in cases where transaction or series of specified transactions undertaken 
by a client is considered suspicious or likely to involve proceeds of crime, the 
reporting entity shall also increase the future monitoring of the business relationship 
with the client. This provision is key to identification of money mules and preventing 
money laundering from going through. 
viii. RBI Master Directions on KYC 2016 Updated 2024. 
RBI’s Master directions prescribe the procedure of customer onboarding by spelling 
out requirements for Customer Due Diligence (CDD), Officially Verifiable 
Documents (OVDs) required, risk -based classification  of accounts, verification of 
existence of customers among others. However, due to the laxity on the part of Banks 
and FIs and lack of enforcement of these directions, fraudsters have been abusing the 
Banking ecosystem.   
RBI Guidelines on Regulation of Payment Aggregators and Payment Gateways It 
prescribes CDD requirements on part of the banks for onboarding of Payment 
Aggregators (PAs). 
RBI Advisory dated 10th August 2022. It states that banks are advised to put in place 
a comprehensive mechanism duly app roved by the Board/Audit Committee of the 
Board to identify and monitor the suspected money mule accounts. 
RBI Advisory dated 19th November 2024 It advises banks to further strengthen their 
policies, procedures, systems and controls for effectively thwarti ng cyber -enabled 
frauds being perpetrated through banking channels and to guard against the use of 
money mule accounts for such fraudulent transactions. This advisory further improves 
upon the comprehensive mechanism put in place by banks pursuant to the Advisory 
dated August 10, 2022  and lays down detailed instructions for ‘Identification of 
Suspected Money Mules and Action thereof’. 
ix. The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) :  The BNS modernizes and toughens 
India’s criminal law provisions for cybercrime by categorizing organized cybercrime 
as a distinct and severely punishable offence, expanding punishment for fraud and 
misinformation via electronic means and incorporating offences related to digital 
expressions affecting sovereignty, public order, religious harmony  and morality. 
Some of the sections applicable to cyber offences are mentioned below:- 

 
 
71 
 
 Section 77  covers the act of watching, capturing, or sharing images of a 
woman engaged in a private act without her consent, which constitutes 
"voyeurism." If these images are published or transmitted by electronic means, 
such conduct also falls within the purview of cybercrime. 
 Section 78 addresses the offence of stalking, encompassing both physical and 
online stalking.  
 Section 111 stands out as a key provision targeting continuing unlawful 
activities, including cyber crimes, committed ei ther individually or as part of 
an organized crime syndicate. The punishment is minimum of 5 years (non -
bailable) which may extend to imprisonment for life and fine not less than ₹ 5 
lakh and fine not less than ₹10 lakh in case death of any is caused.  
 Section 152 provides punishment for any act that excites or attempts to excite, 
secession or armed rebellion or subversive activities, or encourages feelings of 
separatist activities or endangers sovereignty or unity and integrity of India 
purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by 
visible representation, or by electronic communication or by use of financial 
mean, or otherwise.  
 Section 196  Promotes or attempts enmity between different groups on 
grounds of religion, race, p lace of birth, residence, language, etc. and doing 
acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony by words, either spoken or written, 
or by signs or by visible representations or through electronic communication 
or otherwise. 
 Section 197 Publishing any imputat ions, assertions prejudicial to national 
integration by words either spoken or written or by signs or by visible 
representations or through electronic communication or otherwise. 
 Section 199 Deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious 
feelings of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken or written or 
by signs or by visible representations or through electronic means or 
otherwise, 
 Section 294 Regulating obscene and inflammatory content published or 
transmitted via electronic means, with increased penalties for repeat offences 
or offences committed in sensitive religious places. 
 Section 303 primarily related to the offence of theft. Its scope can be extended 
to theft not only to physical movable property, but also t o theft of mobile 
phones, electronic data and computer hardware or software. This means theft 
of such items can also falls within the purview of cybercrime. 
 Section 353 addresses statements and rumours circulated electronically to 
incite public mischief. 
 Section 356 addresses the offence of defamation, including the transmission of 
defamatory content through electronic means thereby falling within the scope 
of cybercrime. 

 
 
72 
 
These sections reflect an integrated approach to addressing cybercrime that includes 
not only digital fraud and un authorised access but also cyber -enabled offenc es 
affecting public order, national integration and decency. This renewed statutory 
regime complements the Information Technology Act, 2000, by focusing on the 
organized and continuing nature of cyber offences, thus enhancing India’s capacity to 
prosecute complex cybercrime networks effectively. 
Gaps in the Legal Framework for Preventing Cybercrime 
4.1.5 Cybercriminals are agile and constantly adapt their techniques and methodology 
leveraging the new technologies for committing cybercrimes and swiftly deploying measures 
to counter law enforcement efforts. To effectively address these challenges, the legal 
framework needs to constantly evolve. There are four major type of infrastructu res used by 
the cybercriminals; Telecommunication, Information Technology, Banking and FinTech  and 
Human. Gaps in regulation and enforcement of the existing regulations lead to their 
exploitation.  
a) Virtual Private Networks (VPNs): VPNs are frequently exploited by cybercriminals to 
evade detection. While CERT -In has issued a circular mandating data preservation, 
there are many VPNs service which are non -compliant. In the meeting of the 
Committee, several queries were raised by the Member with respect to the 
vulnerability in the usage of VPNs. 
b) There is a need for robust mechanism for holding the IT Intermediaries for non -
compliance of various legal provisions laid down in IT Act & its rules. Often, there 
have been instances when IT Intermediaries have failed t o comply with the legitimate 
request made by the Law Enforcement Agencies for data request and removal of 
online unlawful content. In light of the above, existing provisions under Section 79 of 
the IT Act, 2000 pertaining to safe harbour clause, need to be  revisited to ensure 
accountability of IT intermediaries whose platforms are being misused.  
c) The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021, under Rule 3(2) provides the Intermediary to prominently publish 
on its website, mobile based application or both the name of the grievance officer and 
its contact details as well as the mechanisms by which a user and victim may make 
complaint against violations of vario us provisions of IT Intermediary Rules, 2021. 
Further, Rule 4  provides for appointment of Chief Compliance Officer and Nodal 
Contact Person for 24x7 coordination with Law Enforcement Agencies and Resident 
Grievance Officer in respect of Significant Social Media Intermediaries (SSMIs). 
Thus, there are no designated nodal officers for raising requests in respect of 
Intermediaries who are not SSMIs, which complicates communication and adversely 
affect data request raised by LEAs. Many IT intermediaries are for eign-based and 
there is no registration mechanism for IT intermediaries within the country. In many 
cases, grievance officers are based abroad and do not respond to emails. Hence, there 
is a need for a registration mechanism for IT Intermediaries operating  within the 
country. 
d) Even where SSMIs have appointed nodal officers the number is grossly inadequate. 
For e.g. Facebook, WhatsApp, Telegram etc. have only one nodal officer for the entire 
country to coordinate with the LEAs. There is a need to appoint regi onal nodal 
officers.  

 
 
73 
 
e) Both the IT Act and the BNSS address extraterritorial offences, providing India with 
legal tools to deal with crimes committed outside its borders. Both laws empower law 
enforcement agencies to take action against cybercrimes and othe r offences, 
regardless of where the crime occurs, as long as the impact or the perpetrator involves 
India. Despite this legal framework, practical challenges emerge due to issues like 
jurisdictional conflicts, lack of international cooperation and the comp lexity of 
enforcement across borders. 
4.1.6  Some of the important offences under the IT Act, 2000 viz., unauthorised access to 
computer system, tampering with computer source documents, hacking with computer 
system, dishonestly receiving stolen computer resources, identity theft, cheating by 
personation using computer resource, violation of privacy (capturing or publishing images 
without consent) etc., are bailable offences and the punishment prescribed are not stringent 
enough to deter the cybercriminals  from committing such crimes. As a result, cybercriminals 
can easily get bail and further continue to commit such offences. Many of these offences are 
in the nature of transnational and organised crimes wherein multiple criminal networks are 
operating together to execute such crimes. The main source for committing cybercrimes is 
data breaches. Further, unauthorised access to computer systems and demand for huge 
ransomware and other cyber -attacks have exponentially increased and have become highly 
sophisticated as a result of new and emerging technologies, requiring rethinking of the penal 
provisions for such crimes. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.1.7  The Committee appreciates that the Government has put in place strong legal 
frameworks to effectively address and prevent cybercrime. However, the Committee 
observes persistent and evolving challenges driven by technological advances and agile 
cybercriminal tactics. The Committee recommends that while enforcing the CERT -In 
mandates with respect to VPN logging to a id in prevention of cybercrime, a balanced 
approach must be adopted to protect citizens’ right to privacy. The Committee suggests 
that mandatory data retention and reporting obligations for VPNs be accompanied by 
strict safeguards, including limiting data access solely to authorised investigations 
subject to judicial oversight, along with conducting periodic compliance audits to 
maintain transparency. The Committee encourages the use of privacy -preserving 
technologies, to enable lawful access verification w hile minimizing exposure of sensitive 
data. Further, the Committee also recommends conducting public awareness 
programmes on responsible VPN use and cybersecurity hygiene. The Committee notes 
that some IT Intermediaries have failed to comply with the legit imate request made by 
the Law Enforcement Agencies for data request and removal of online unlawful 
content. Hence, the Committee recommends that the existing provisions of Section 79 of 
the IT Act, 2000 pertaining to safe harbour needs to be revisited to e nsure 
accountability of IT intermediaries whose platforms are being misused. 
4.1.8  The Committee observes that the current rules require grievance and nodal 
officers only for Significant Social Media Intermediaries (SSMIs), leaving other IT 
intermediaries without designated contacts, which hampers effective communication 
and timely data access for law enforcement agencies. Further, many intermediaries are 
foreign-based without any mandatory registration or local presence, causing delays and 
non-responsiveness. The Committee, therefore , recommends establishing a mandatory 
national registration system for all IT intermediaries operating in India, regardless of 

 
 
74 
 
size or origin, requiring them to appoint local grievance officers and nodal contact 
persons with cl ear timelines for responses. Further, for SSMIs, (Facebook, WhatsApp, 
Telegram etc), the Committee suggests increasing the number of nodal officers by 
appointing regional representatives to facilitate faster and region specific coordination 
with law enforcement agencies.  
4.1.9  The Committee appreciates that the IT Act and BNSS empower law 
enforcement agencies to take action against cybercrimes and other offences, regardless 
of where the crime occurs, as long as the impact or the perpetrator involves India. 
However, the Committee observes that significant practical challenges in cross -border 
enforcement due to jurisdictional conflicts and limited international cooperation, which 
hinder effective action against cybercriminals operating globally. The Com mittee 
recommends exploring the possibility for the establishment of a dedicated International 
Cybercrime Liaison Unit with specialized legal and technical experts to resolve the 
problem. 
4.1.10  The Committee notes that many provisions in the IT Act, 2000  are bailable and 
attract low penalties. The accused can get bail easily and the punishments or fines for 
these crimes are relatively low. The Committee, therefore, recommends reviewing and 
amending the IT Act to impose harsher penalties on offenders. 
4.1.11  It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that there is no provision in 
the IT Act, 2000 that holds IT intermediaries liable for compensating victims for 
financial losses, psychological harm, or reputational damage caused due to their 
inaction even after being alerted by G overnment agencies about unlawful or malicious 
content. The Committee, therefore, recommends amending the IT Act, 2000 to 
introduce provisions in the IT Act, making IT intermediaries to compensate victims for 
such acts. 
4.1.12  The Committee notes that Section 78 of the IT Act, 2000 mandates that any 
offence under the Act be investigated by a police officer not below the rank of Inspector. 
The Committee recommen ds that for more effective hand ling of cybercrime cases, 
investigations should be assigned only to police officers senior to the rank of Inspector. 
The Committee also recommends that those officers must be well-versed in all aspects of 
cybercrime, including digital forensics, cyber laws, investigative techniques, cyber 
hygiene and incident response as this will help to resolve cybercrimes efficiently and 
quickly. 
4.1.13   In its meeting the Committee noted that, in view of the rapidly evolving nature 
of cyber threats and the increasing complexity of technology -enabled crimes, it is 
essential that India’s cybercrime legal framework undergoes regular updates to remain 
effective and future -ready. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, in collaboration with the Ministry of Electronics & Information Tech nology, 
Ministry of Law & Justice and relevant regulators, institutionalize a structured, 
multidisciplinary review mechanism to assess cybercrime laws periodically. Adopting 
such a systematic and periodic legislative review will foster a proactive, resilie nt and 
future-ready legislative ecosystem allowing India to remain adaptive to emerging 
threats and to safeguard national security, digital innovation, and citizen rights in the 
face of a fast changing cyber world. 

 
 
75 
 
4.1.14   The Committee notes that ambigui ty in the suspension of suspicious 
transactions has caused inconsistent responses from financial institutions, weakening 
efforts against cybercrime and money laundering. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that financial institutions may add provisions to  incorporate immediate 
suspension of suspicious transactions upon alerts from monitoring systems or law 
enforcement agencies. The Committee specifies that those provisions should clarify that 
such preventive actions comply with all regulatory obligations a nd include provisions 
for disciplinary measures against officials negligent or complicit in facilitating illicit 
activities.  
4.1.15   The Committee recommends that a certified foundational course in 
cybersecurity be made a prerequisite for entry -level police recruitment. The Committee 
observes that such recruited personnel would be in a position to better handle modern 
digital threats from the outset of their policing careers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government may consider integratin g this requirement into the 
recruitment and training framework. 
4.1.16   The Committee recommends that the capacity of Law Enforcement Agencies 
(LEAs) be enhanced through regular specialized training for police officers, prosecutors 
and judicial officials in areas such as cyber forensics, investigative techniques, cyber 
hygiene and cyber laws. The Committee is of the view that States and Union Territories 
should be supported in establishing dedicated cybercrime training and research centers 
to ensure a consistent and high standard of skill development among LEA personnel 
nationwide. The Committe e further recommends investing in advanced forensic 
infrastructure, including state -of-the-art labs that cover Memory Forensics, Network 
Forensics, Image Enhancement, Malware Analysis, Cryptocurrency Forensics and 
Mobile Forensics, making these facilities accessible to LEAs across the country.  
4.1.17   The Committee observes that at present, regulation of online gaming in our 
country is overseen by various Ministries and various State Governments resulting in a 
fragmented and at times, inconsistent approac h to enforcement and consumer 
protection. Recognizing these challenges, the Committee recommends the Central 
Government for the establishment of a dedicated ecosystem for Online Gaming in the 
country through a comprehensive consultative process. The Commit tee is of the view 
that this system should not only oversee the sector to address concerns related to real 
money/betting apps but also foster the development of a vibrant 
multimedia/animation/gaming ecosystem within the country. 
4.1.18  The Committee notes  that cybercrime laws in India are currently scattered 
across multiple statutes, creating enforcement and judicial challenges. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that there is an urgent need for comprehensive, unified 
cybercrime legislation. This new legislation should clearly define cyber offences, address 
emerging technologies and provide strong, adaptable penal provisions. The Committee 
further recommends the establishment of a specialized, dedicated Integrated 
Cybercrime Task Force, exclusively focuse d on investigating cybercrime. The 
Committee suggests that this Task Force should operate nationally with the mandate 
and capacity to tackle complex, multifaceted and transnational cyber offences. 
  

 
 
76 
 
4.2  Tools and Technologies for Cyber Protection 
4.2.1  India’s cyber protection landscape leverages advanced tools and institutional 
technologies d eveloped and deployed by organis ations such as C -DAC (Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing), Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) and the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C).  
• AppSamvid: It is an application whitelisting software for Microsoft Windows based 
operating systems. Whitelisting allows only pre-approved files to execute on operating 
system. This is in contrast  to the traditional signature based antivirus software 
approach of blacklisting the virus files. Whitelisting has the advantage over 
blacklisting as it does not require frequent virus definition updates. AppSamvid can 
protect operating system against computer malware (such as Viruses and Trojans). 
• M-Kavach 2: C -DAC has developed M -Kavach 2, a comprehensive mobile device 
security solution that addresses emerging threats related to android -based mobile 
devices. The major emphasis is on advising the users agai nst security 
misconfigurations, detection of hidden/ banned apps and scanning the device for 
potential malicious apps installed on the user's mobile device. 
• USB Pratirodh: It controls the usage of removable storage media like pen drives, 
external hard drives, cell phones and other supported USB mass storage devices. Only 
authenticated users can access the removable storage media. 
• CyberCheckLite: C-DAC has developed a portable forensic computer seizure tool. It 
has built-in Previewing, Hashing and Imaging of  computer systems in both offline and 
online conditions. CyberCheckLite comes with a bootable forensic Windows 
Operating System, which write -blocks the suspect system's storage media. In online 
mode, it's capable of imaging RAM as well as hard disk. Withou t a separate write -
blocker, computers can be seized using CyberCheckLite USB drive. 
• DARPAN Network Management System, Browser JSGuard, Disk/Mobile/Network 
Forensics tools, SIMXtractor: Suite of forensic and investigative technology 
extensively deployed in police and enforcement labs across India. 
• Training and Lab Support: CDAC has helped establish over 25 Cyber Forensics Labs 
and trained more than 3,000 officers on digital forensics. C-DAC also provides various 
training programs and lab support to foster high-quality manpower for the R&D and IT 
industry. These programs are delivered through their Advanced Computing Training 
School (ACTS) with 11 locations and a network of 15 Authorised Training Centers 
(ATCs). 
• Telecom Cyber Security Rules (2024 –25): DoT has mandated a multilayered 
compliance and technology regime for telecom service providers. 
• Security Certification: All telecom equipment must undergo mandatory security testing 
as per Indian Telecom Security Assurance Requirements (ITSARs). 
• The Mobile Number Validation (MNV) Platform is a centralized system proposed by 
the Department of Telecommunications to verify the authenticity of mobile numbers 
used in digital transactions. It aims to prevent impersonation, SIM -related fraud and 

 
 
77 
 
unauthorised access by ena bling real -time backend validation of mobile identifiers 
across telecom and non-telecom platforms. 
• India’s national IMEI database, managed through the CEIR  (Central Equipment 
Identity Register) platform, tracks lost, stolen and tampered mobile devices. Under 
telecom cybersecurity rules, second -hand resellers will be legally required to validate 
device IMEI status before sale to prevent fraud and ensure compliance. 
• Security Operations Centres (SOC): Telecom operators required to establish SOCs for 
ongoing monitoring, detection and response. 
• Financial Fraud Risk Indicator (FRI): It is a risk -based metric that classifies a mobile 
number to have been associated with Medium, High, or Very High risk of financial 
fraud. It empowers stakeholders -especially banks, NBFCs and UPI service providers - 
to prioritize enforcement and take additional customer protection measures in case a 
mobile number has high risk. 
• Cybersecurity Operation Centres (C -SOC): Banks must operationalize SOCs for 24×7 
network monitoring and incident detection. 
• Risk-Based Authentication & Secure Payment Gateways: Implementation of strong 
customer authentication, whitelisting internet -facing systems and deep packet 
inspection. 
• Incident Reporting and Crisis Management: Frameworks for prompt cyber ri sk 
reporting, incident disclosure, post -breach analysis and internal redressal are 
compulsory. 
• Standards and Audits: Regular compliance audits and third -party penetration testing 
are mandated by RBI circulars. Major digital payments institutions also emplo y real-
time fraud detection (Fraud Risk Indicators, MuleHunter™). 
• National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP): All -India digital portal for reporting 
and triaging cyber incidents. 
• Cyber Fraud Mitigation Centre (CFMC): Platform for immediate freezing of sus pected 
fraudulent transactions, operating as a real -time bridge between banks, payment 
intermediaries and law enforcement agencies. 
• Samanvay Platform: A Joint Cybercrime Investigation system for data sharing, crime 
mapping, analytics and multi-agency coordination. 
• Cyber Suspect Registry: A dynamic repository based on NCRP and financial sector 
partners, enabling pattern detection and proactive interdiction. 
• Broadcast and Alert Systems: Rapid dissemination of advisories, technical alerts and 
trend reports to all State/UT agencies. 
4.3  Cyber Hygiene and Institutional Safeguards 
4.3.1  Cyber hygiene and institutional safeguards form the backbone of India’s strategy to 
counter the rising tide of cybercrime. The Government’s multi -layered approach spans policy 

 
 
78 
 
guidelines, awareness campaigns, technical interventions and operational systems deployed 
across ministries and regulatory agencies.  
Awareness Campaigns and Education Initiatives 
4.3.2  The Ministry of Home Affairs, through the Indian Cyber Crime Coordina tion Centre 
(I4C), leads nationwide cyber awareness campaigns such as ‘Cyber Dost’ and ‘STOP -
THINK-ACT’. These initiatives disseminate cyber hygiene advisories via social media, 
television, radio (AIR, Doordarshan) and grassroots outreach, promoting safe digital practices 
across diverse communities. The Ministry of Electronics & IT (MeitY) runs the Cyber 
Swachhta Kendra (Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre), providing free tools to the 
public and organisations for malware removal, system clean -up  and safe online practices. It 
supports downloadable solutions such as M -Kavach and AppSamvid and publishes booklets 
and hand books on digital safety for women and vulnerable groups. CERT -In publishes 
regular “Guidelines on Information Security Practices,” checklists and security awareness 
materials for government employees and the public. These guidelines serve as foundational 
tools for government entities and auditors to assess cyber hygiene, ensure compliance and 
safeguard against emerging digital threats. 
School and Higher Education Outreach 
4.3.3  The Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL) integrates cyber safety 
modules into school curricula and teacher training programs, supported by initiatives like 
DIKSHA and Cyber Safety Weeks coordinat ed with state and district authorities. The 
Department of Higher Education (DHE) and University Grants Commission (UGC) promote 
ICT-enabled learning and digital hygiene advisories in colleges and universities, in 
collaboration with technical agencies such as C-DAC and NIC. 
Institutional Safeguards 
Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) 
4.3.4  The Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) serves as the nodal agency for 
disseminating cyber hygiene best practices, incl uding manuals, ‘Do’s and Don’ts  guides and 
incident response protocols for government departments and agencies. It coordinates user 
education through platforms like the National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal (NCRP) and the 
Financial Fraud Management System, which enable instant alerts and rapid response to 
reported fraud. The Cyber Crime Volunteers Programme engages informed citizens in online 
surveillance and timely reporting of unlawful content. 
CERT-In and Cyber Swachhta Kendra 
4.3.5  CERT-In, as the national incident response organisati on under MeitY, provides 
advisories, daily bulletins, vulnerability analyses and rapid alerts to the stakeholders 
including government, industry and citizens. The Cyber Swachhta Kendra helps organisations 
maintain endpoint and network hygiene via regular toolkits and malware scan utilities. 
CERT-In’s guidelines are regularly updated to incorporate newly emerging threats such as 
ransomware, phishing and social engineering. They are a statutory requirement for all central 
government ministries/departments. 
  

 
 
79 
 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
4.3.6  DoT enforces Telecom Cyber Security Rules (2024) mandating telecom operators to 
establish Security Operations Centres (TSOC), implement network vulnerability testing and 
adopt incident response workfl ows. DoT initiatives like Sanchar Saathi empower citizens to 
validate SIM ownership, block lost/stolen phones and mitigate telecom -related fraud. The 
Digital Intelligence Platform (DIP) coordinates stakeholder action to prevent large -scale 
telecom misuse and fraud. 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Financial Institutions 
4.3.7  RBI’s cyber security framework for banks/NBFCs mandates Security Operation 
Centres, incident reporting, fraud risk analytics (MuleHunter™) and layered authentication 
for critical financial assets and payment systems. RBI and NPCI enforce rapid fraud detection 
and response, share advisories on secure banking practices and collaborate with I4C for 
citizen-facing fraud prevention through helpline 1930. 
Sectoral Safeguards and Regulatory Mandates 
4.3.8  All ministries, critical infrastructure operators and financial regulators are required to 
regularly train their workforce in safe IT practices, run phishing simulation drills and adhere 
to CERT -In, DoT and RBI advisories. The Data Protection  framework (DPDP Act 2023) 
prescribes mandatory breach notifications, data minimi sation and secure system deployment 
across the public and private sectors. 
4.4  Infrastructure Readiness in Education and Public Sector 
4.4.1  Infrastructure readiness is a co rnerstone for India’s cybercrime protection strategy, 
especially across the education and public sectors where digital adoption has surged. The 
government, through various ministries and agencies, is investing in remediation, digital 
resilience and systematic safeguards to address gaps identified in recent audits. 
School Education Infrastructure 
4.4.2  ICT Integration and Digital Infrastructure: The Ministry of Education under the 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan has introduced large -scale ICT labs, smart classrooms  and access 
devices (tablets, notebooks) in government schools, supported by internet connectivity and 
digital learning content. Special emphasis is given to teacher training for cyber safety, secure 
learning management systems and parent-student engagement for safe digital practices. 
4.4.3  Cyber Hygiene and Awareness: The Department of School Education & Literacy 
mandates digital safety modules in curricula, regular “Cyber Safety Weeks,” and teacher 
workshops on safe internet usage, delivered in partnership with agencies like NCERT, CBSE 
and MeitY’s Information Security Education & Awareness (ISEA) project. 
4.4.4  Schools are progressively being connected to digital redressal mechanisms for 
reporting cyber incidents, supported by evolving guidelin es on grievance escalation, parental 
engagement and early detection of cyber risks. Advisory frameworks from the Ministry of 
Education and MeitY promote structured protocols, community awareness campaigns and 
capacity-building efforts to strengthen institu tional response across the school education 
system. 

 
 
80 
 
Higher Education Infrastructure 
4.4.5  Campus Networks and Safeguards: Universities and colleges have adopted dedicated 
firewalls, secure Wi -Fi, two -factor authentication and endpoint protection for IT 
infrastructure. Major institutions participate in faculty skill -building workshops with 
organisations like CDAC and NIC. 
4.4.6  Cybersecurity Curriculum and Labs: The Department of Higher Education has 
promoted cyber forensics laboratories, faculty upskilling and sponsored ICT-enabled research 
on cyber -physical systems. Initiatives include UGC advisories on safe online academic 
practices, cyber etiquette and incident response planning in higher education. 
4.4.7  Professional Training: In 2025, MeitY and CER T-In tied up with BITS Pilani for a 
formal cybersecurity certification program aimed at government officials, public sector units  
and higher education professionals, addressing both technology and management aspects of 
cyber preparedness. 
Critical Infrastructure and Government Systems 
4.4.8  Security Audits and Monitoring: CERT -In and the National Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) conducted over 9,700 security audits in FY 2024 –
25 for critical sectors such as power, transport  and BFSI (Banking, Financial Services  and 
Insurance). Sectoral Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs) like CSIRT -Fin 
(finance) and CSIRT-Power (energy) facilitate incident response, while sector -specific crisis 
management frameworks guide organisations through recovery and resilience planning. 
4.4.9  Cyber Crisis Management: All public sector bodies must implement the Cyber Crisis 
Management Plan (CCMP), with 205+ workshops held nationwide to ensure the public sector 
is trained in real -time thr eat response and recovery. Institutional templates, guidelines and 
readiness checklists were published for this purpose. 
4.4.10  Infrastructure Moderni sation: State and central ministries have been directed to 
deploy endpoint security, SIEM (Security Infor mation and Event Management), firewalls  
and automated threat monitoring into public IT infrastructure. DoT’s Sanchar Saathi digital 
platform, for example, allows for proactive SIM/IMEI validation and fraud detection in 
telecom infrastructure. 
Indigenous Tools and Capacity Building 
4.4.11  India’s digital infrastructure in education and public institutions benefits significantly 
from indigenous development efforts. The Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
(CDAC) contributes by provisioning secured platforms and back -end lab integration (e.g., 
forensics labs, university campuses and digital classrooms), in support of national 
cybersecurity objectives. Details of CDAC’s specific cyber tools and forensic technologies 
such as AppSamvid, USB Pratirodh  a nd M -Kavach are already in operational use across 
educational and public sector systems. Additional capacity building and collaboration with 
CDAC are being leveraged through its partnerships with academic institutions and 
government departments to enhance readiness and reduce dependency on foreign security 
platforms. 
  

 
 
81 
 
Challenges and Ongoing Initiatives 
4.4.12  There is a continued shortfall in skilled cyber professionals emphasizing the need for 
more structured investments in infrastructure and training. M any institutions still lag in 
compliance, especially at the state level, due to lack of regular audits or up -to-date 
technological safeguards. The government is expanding indigenous tooling and enforcing 
audit regimes to bridge these gaps. The government’s  future strategy includes quantum 
encryption migration, cloud -based cyber protections, cross -sector digital twins for training 
and expanding secure digital services to rural areas. 
4.5  Global Dimensions of Cybercrime and Preventive Measures 
4.5.1  Cybercrime, in the context of today’s digital world, is transnational, transcending 
traditional geographical boundaries and giving myriad complexities to law enforcement and 
regulatory efforts. With the proliferation of digital connectivity, criminal actor s exploit 
differences in jurisdictions, legal frameworks and enforcement capabilities to engage in illicit 
activities such as hacking, financial fraud, data breaches and misinformation campaigns. The 
multifaceted nature of cybercrime’s international reach can be explored through the following 
various aspects. 
(i) Cross-Border Operations and Regulatory Gaps 
One of the defining features of cybercrime is its cross -border character, which allows 
perpetrators to exploit the patchwork of differing regulatory and enfo rcement 
environments between countries. Cybercriminals commonly coordinate attacks using 
digital resources scattered across several jurisdictions for instance, deploying malware 
from servers situated in one country while targeting victims in another and ro uting 
illicit profits through a third nation. This practice effectively frustrates law 
enforcement, as no single country’s authorities possess comprehensive oversight or 
jurisdiction. The result is an environment in which criminals can evade detection and 
prosecution by capitalizing on legal loopholes and delays inherent in international 
cooperation. 
(ii) Convergence of Criminal Activities 
The convergence of various forms of illicit activities significantly increases the threat 
posed by transnational cybercrime.  Organized crime groups, particularly in regions 
such as Southeast Asia, have begun to blend and integrate diverse criminal enterprises 
such as cyber -enabled fraud, underground banking and sophisticated money 
laundering techniques into unified, highly adap tive operations. Recent reports by the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) show that these criminal 
syndicates routinely leverage underground financial channels and unregulated virtual 
asset service providers to launder the proceeds of cyber fraud. 
(iii) Jurisdictional Challenges and Legal Complexities 
Variations in legal definitions, extradition treaties and enforcement capabilities across 
nations create significant hurdles in tracking and prosecuting cybercriminals. This has 
led to safe havens where offenders can avoid prosecution due to the lack of legal 
harmonisation.  

 
 
82 
 
(iv)  Emergence of New Threats and Criminal Service Models 
Emerging trends such as the adoption of cryptocurrencies for money laundering, the 
proliferation of dark web marketplaces a nd the rise of crime -as-a-service (CaaS) 
offerings have further broadened the international scope of cybercrime. Regions like 
Southeast Asia have become prominent hubs for testing and supporting new forms of 
illicit digital services ranging from ready-to-use phishing kits and ransomware tools to 
deepfake generators and Money Laundering -as-a-Service platforms. These 
developments have enabled cybercrime to scale efficiently and offered transnational 
criminal groups a list of options of services to buy or rent, thus accelerating the spread 
and impact of global cyber threats. 
Cybercrime landscape in Southeast Asia 
4.5.2  The transnational cybercrime landscape in Southeast Asia has evolved into a 
significant and sophisticated threat, with scam compounds emerging as major hubs for 
organized crime that transcends borders. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime (UNODC), cyber -enabled fraud has continued to intensify, resulting in estimated 
financial losses between US $18 billion and $37 billion fro m scams targeting victims in East 
and southeast Asia in 2023, much of which can be attributed to organized syndicates 
operating within Southeast Asia. Key criminal hubs in Cambodia, Lao PDR and Myanmar, 
have become entrenched bases for a range of illicit a ctivities, from illegal online gambling 
and human trafficking to large -scale cyber fraud. These operations have expanded at an 
alarming rate, as evidenced by satellite imagery and extensive financial inflows to scam 
wallets between 2021 and 2024. These com pounds, often fortified with high walls, barbed 
wire, armed guards and strict surveillance, function as nearly autonomous zones, posing 
significant challenges to law enforcement and regulatory authorities.  
4.5.3  The convergence of cyber fraud with underg round banking and cryptocurrency has 
established a resilient infrastructure that enables transnational criminal groups to operate with 
impunity. To address this escalating threat, it is imperative to intensify efforts that target the 
underlying infrastruct ure supporting these networks. Enhanced cross -border cooperation, 
strengthened regulatory frameworks and bolstered enforcement mechanisms are essential to 
mitigating the impact of these highly organized criminal operations. 
4.5.4  Organised gangs recruit u nemployed youth worldwide, including from India, by 
offering fake overseas jobs. Once they land in places like Cambodia, Vietnam, etc., they are 
asked to work in scam centers. Recruits pay high fees for visas and get trapped and are forced 
to scam people w hile facing abuse and passport confiscation. Scammers use WhatsApp to 
contact and “mule accounts” to hide stolen money, laundering it via crypto currency, gold 
and cash withdrawals. The Indian Government has rescued over 2,000 victims from these 
scam operations in Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Thailand. 
4.5.5  Scam compounds in Southeast Asia use various methods to defraud people in India. 
These include fake investment and trading schemes promising high returns, task -based scams 
which involve activities such as “like and subscribe”, part -time jobs, fake reviews etc., that 
waste victims’ time or money and digital arrest scams where fraudsters pretend to be law 
enforcement to extort money through threats. They also run dating or romance scams to build 
emotional connection to gain victims’ trust and steal money. The  stolen funds are laundered 
via complicated networks involving mule accounts, ATM withdrawals, gold purchases, 
cryptocurrencies and prepaid wallets. 

 
 
83 
 
International Agencies involved in Prevention of Cybercrime 
4.5.6  Cybercrime is a transnational threat tha t requires a coordinated global response. Key 
international agencies like INTERPOL, Europol and the United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC) play vital roles by enhancing collaboration, intelligence sharing and 
capacity building. They work together  to strengthen legal frameworks, assist member states 
in combating cyber threats and safeguard the global digital environment. Their combined 
efforts highlight the importance of a unified, comprehensive approach to effectively address 
the evolving challenges of cybercrime. 
International Criminal Police Organisation (INTERPOL) 
4.5.7  INTERPOL, the inter -governmental organi sation with 196 member countries is 
facilitating global police cooperation by enabling data sharing on crimes and criminals, as 
well as pr oviding technical and operational support. Each member country hosts an 
INTERPOL National Central Bureau (NCB), run by national police officials and serving as 
the contact point for the General Secretariat and other NCBs. The INTERPOL Cybercrime 
Directorate focuses on reducing the global impact of cybercrime and enhancing community 
safety. The following are some of the key initiatives of INTERPOL to combat evolving 
cybercrime:- 
Operation Serengeti (Sep -Oct 2023), a joint effort with AFRIPOL across 19 Africa n 
countries, led to over 1,000 arrests, dismantling of more than 134,000 malicious 
infrastructures  and identified 35,000 victims tied to nearly $193 million in financial 
losses. 
Operation Synergia (Sep-Nov 2023) coordinated 60 law enforcement agencies from over 
50 countries and private partners to target phishing, malware  and ransomware attacks, 
resulting in over 30 arrests, identification of 70 suspects  and takedown of around 70% 
of more than 1,300 malicious servers. 
Operation Storm Makers II (Oct 2023)  across 27 countries in Asia and beyond targeted 
human trafficking and migrant smuggling, arresting 281 individuals and rescuing 149 
victims destined for cyber scam centers. 
The Global Rapid Intervention of Payments (I -GRIP) initiative, launched with the 
Financial Action Task Force in 2022, helps police worldwide track, freeze and seize 
criminal assets. Since its inception, over $200 million linked to cyber -enabled fraud has 
been intercepted. 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) 
4.5.8  The mission of UNODC is to contribute to global peace and security, human rights 
and development by making the world safer from drugs, crime, corruption and terrorism, 
through working for and with Member States to promote justice and the rule of law and build 
resilient societies. The mandate of UNODC encompasses thematic areas related to preventing 
and countering transnational organized crime, corruption, terrorism and the world drug 
problem as well as enhancing and strengthening criminal justice systems. Cybercrim e and 
Anti Money Laundering Section (CMLS) under Organized Crime and Illicit Trafficking 
Branch (OCB) in UNODC focus on the issue of cybercrime. The following are some of the 
efforts of UNODC to fight cybercrime:  

 
 
84 
 
 (i) 39 victims and 35 alleged suspects of online child sexual exploitation identified as a 
direct result of UNODC’s intervention.  
 (ii) 02 guides developed on digital evidence and cryptocurrencies for law enforcement 
officers and criminal justice authorities.  
 (iii)  Reports published on cybercrime:-  
(a) Casinos, cyber fraud and trafficking in persons for forced criminality in 
Southeast Asia – September 2023.  
(b) Casinos, Money Laundering, Underground Banking & Transnational 
Organized Crime in SE Asia – January 2024.  
(c)Transnational Organized C rime in the Pacific: Expansion, Challenges and 
Impact – October 2024.  
Draft United Nations Convention against Cybercrime 
4.5.9  On 9 th August 2024, the UN General Assembly's Ad Hoc Committee finalized the 
draft United Nations Conven tion against Cybercrime. This land mark treaty seeks to 
strengthen international cooperation by standardizing definitions, procedural powers and 
data-sharing mechanisms to support cross-border investigations and capacity building against 
cybercrime. It aims to promote a  unified global response to cyber threats while protecting 
fundamental rights and freedoms. The convention was adopted by the UN General Assembly 
and will be opened for signature in Hanoi in 2025. India has actively contributed to shaping 
this convention, reflecting its commitment to influencing international cyber norms that 
respect national sovereignty and align with domestic legal priorities.  
European Cybercrime Centre (EC3), Europol 
4.5.10  The European Cybercrime Centre (EC3), established in January 2 013 by Europol, 
serves to strengthen the law enforcement response to cybercrime within the European Union. 
Its primary mission is to protect European citizens, businesses and governments from online 
crime by coordinating cross-border investigations and providing technical expertise. EC3 also 
hosts the Joint Cybercrime Action Taskforce (J -CAT) which was launched in September 
2014. Its mission is to drive intelligence -led, coordinated action against key cybercrime 
threats through cross -border investigations a nd operations by its partners. The taskforce was 
involved in 33 high-profile operations in 2022. 
The following are some of the efforts of EC3 to fight cybercrime: 
(a) The European Money Mule Action (EMMA) is an annual international law 
enforcement initiative coordinated by Europol, aimed at identifying and 
apprehending individuals involved in money mule schemes, which facilitate 
money laundering activities. In its ninth  edition, EMMA 9, LEAs from 26 
countries, in collaboration with Europol, Eurojust, INTERPOL and several private 
industry partners, have identified 474 recruiters/herders, 10,759 money mules, 
4,659 investigations initiated, 1,013 arrests, €32 million (₹284. 19 Cr) prevented 
losses.  

 
 
85 
 
(b) Coordination of a joint operation, including private -sector partners to target a 
botnet, ‘Ramnit’ that had infected millions of computers around the world. 
(c) Coordination with Eurojust in an operation targeting large -scale malware attacks 
that originated in Ukraine, an operation that led to tens of arrests. 
National Cyber Crime Unit (NCCU) 
4.5.11  The National Cyber Crime Unit (NCCU) is part of the National Crime Agency 
(NCA) and leads the United Kingdom’s fight against cybercrime. NCCU’s role is to protect 
the UK public from serious and organised crime. NCCU leads, coordinates and supports the 
national law enforcement response to Cybercrime. NCCU supports organisations that fall 
victim to Cybercrime and take action against those res ponsible. The Triage, Incident 
Coordination & Tasking (TICAT) team of NCCU is available 24x7 and can help businesses 
identify, remove and remediate the initial access/compromise. Where possible, NCCU 
pursues criminal justice outcomes for cybercriminals, bu t its work also includes the use of 
alternative disruptions – sanctions, takedowns and the infiltration of criminal enterprises. 
4.6  Practices adopted by countries to prevent Cybercrime 
Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) – USA 
4.6.1  The Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) was set up by the FBI in May 2000 under 
its Cyber Division to receive complaints on a wide range of internet -enabled crimes, 
including intellectual property violations, hacking, economic espionage, online extortion, 
money laundering and identity theft. Its mission is to offer the public and its partners with a 
reliable way to report suspected cybercrimes and to foster strong partnerships with law 
enforcement and industry to help those who report. Information received is analysed and 
disseminated for investigative and intelligence purposes for law enforcement and public 
awareness. The individual IC3 complaints are combined with other data, which allows the 
FBI to connect complaints, investigate reported crimes, track trends and threats  and in some 
cases, even freeze stolen funds. 
4.6.2  In the year 2023, the IC3 received 880,418 complaints, with reported financial losses 
exceeding $12.5 billion. Over the past five years, the IC3 has averaged around 758,000 
complaints each year, These co mplaints address a wide array of Internet scams affecting 
individuals across the globe. The IC3’s Recovery Asset Team (RAT) was established in 
February 2018 to streamline communication with financial institutions and assist FBI field 
offices with the freez ing of funds for those who made transfers to domestic accounts under 
fraudulent pretences. The RAT functions as a liaison between law enforcement and financial 
institutions supporting statistical and investigative analysis. Since its establishment (till 
2023), the RAT has achieved a 71% success rate, addressing 3,008 incidents, freezing 
$538.39 million (₹4544.9 Cr) of $758.05 million (₹6398.8 Cr) in reported losses  and 
significantly reducing the impact of financial fraud. 
4.6.3  The Federal Bureau of Inves tigation (FBI), in its strategic endeavor to combat 
ransomware, has adopted a decentralized approach by empowering its regional field offices 
to target specific cybercriminal groups. This initiative demonstrates an advanced operational 
framework that leverages specialized expertise to dismantle organized cybercrime effectively. 
For instance, the Cleveland Field Office has disrupted the “Radar/Dispossessor” ransomware 
group, while the Tampa Field Office successfully neutralized the Hive group and provided 

 
 
86 
 
decryption keys to victims, while Newark Office made significant progress against the 
LockBit ransomware variant. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), in its strategic 
endeavor to combat ransomware, has adopted a decentralized approach by empowering it s 
regional field offices to target specific cybercriminal groups. This initiative demonstrates an 
advanced operational framework that leverages specialized expertise to dismantle organized 
cybercrime effectively. 
Anti-Scam Command (ASCom) – Singapore 
4.6.4  The Anti -Scam Command (ASCom) was operationalized on 22 March 2022 to 
achieve greater synergy between various scam -fighting units within the Singapore Police 
Force (SPF), by integrating scam investigation, incident response, intervention, enforcement  
and sense-making capabilities under a single umbrella. The command comprises the Anti -
Scam Centre, three Anti -Scam Investigation Branches and oversees the Scam Strike Teams 
situated within each of the seven Police Land Divisions. The following are some of the 
efforts of ASCom to Fight Scams and Cybercrimes:  
i. Co-location of staff from 06 banks and Government Technology Agency (GovTech) 
within the ASCom. Carousell and Shopee (e-commerce) staff also collocated.  
ii. Since Jan 2023 to Jun 2024, the ASCom froze more tha n 29,900 bank accounts based 
on reports referred to the Anti -Scam Centre (ASC) and recovered more than $154 
million (₹967.21 Cr).  
iii. In the first half of 2024, the ASCom, together with the Scam Strike Teams in the seven 
Police Land Divisions, conducted 13 island -wide anti -scam enforcement operations, 
leading to the investigation of more than 4,000 money mules and scammers. Police 
have a lso stepped up our enforcement with more than 300 money mules charged in 
Court.  
iv. ASCom also focused on upstream interventions to identify and alert victims by 
leveraging Robotic Process Automation (RPA) technology to identify job, investment 
and other scam victims and alerting them. Through the A.S.T.R.O. Project (Automation 
of Scam -fighting Tactics & Reaching Out), the ASCom works with banks in 
automating information-sharing, information-processing and mass distribution of SMS 
alerts to scam victims to pre vent further financial losses. In the first half of 2024, more 
than 46,400 SMSs were sent to alert more than 33,600 victims averting over $204 
million (₹1281.24 Cr) of potential losses.  
v. In the first half of 2024, the close collaboration between SPF and ov erseas law 
enforcement agencies resulted in the successful takedown of 09 transnational scam 
syndicates comprising three fake friend call syndicates, four suspected money 
laundering cells, one phishing scam syndicate and one investment scam syndicate. 
More than 100 persons based overseas who were responsible for more than 320 
transnational scam cases, were arrested.  
vi. ScamShield Suite: It is a joint effort by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Singapore 
Police Force, Open Government Products and the National Crime Prevention Council to 
inform citizens on scams. The ScamShield mobile app leverages advanced artificial 
intelligence technology to effectively filter scam messages and block calls from 
numbers linked to fraudulent activities. Complementing this, a 24 x7 helpline at 1799 
has been established to provide immediate assistance and verification for suspicious 
communications. 

 
 
87 
 
Joint Policing Cybercrime Coordination Centre (JPC3) - Australia 
4.6.5  In March 2022, the Australian Federal Police (AFP) led Joint Po licing Cybercrime 
Coordination Centre (JPC3) was launched to enable state and territory law enforcement, 
Commonwealth agencies and the private sector to coordinate Australian policing responses to 
ensure maximum impact on high -harm, high -volume cybercrime,  by utilising the powers, 
experience, investigative and intelligence capabilities of all Australian policing jurisdictions. 
4.6.6  The role of JPC3 is to enhance intelligence -sharing and target development across 
police and industry; coordinate joint task forces to counter priority cybercrime threats; 
coordinate capability improvements through cross -skilling, joint training and collaborative 
tool development; and communicate prevention, awareness raising and media activities. The 
following are some of the efforts of JPC3 to fight cybercrime:  
i. JPC3 uses AFP’s cross-jurisdictional partnerships with key international stakeholders’ 
presence in 33 countries. Through various operations JPC3 was able to disrupt the 
cybercrime networks and centres in and outside Aus tralia, such as in October 2024 in 
Philippines, where more than 250 suspects were arrested from various scam centres. 
ii. In August 2024, the JPC3 commenced Operation FIRESTORM, as a proactive 
initiative and a holistic approach to combating Cyber Enabled Fraud (CEF), bolstering 
the ongoing efforts of Australian law enforcement, the National Anti -Scam Centre 
(NASC) and key industry stakeholders. These JPC3 operations also focused on 
disruption of mule account networks used in cybercrime  
Internet Content Provider (ICP) Number – China 
4.6.7  The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) of the People’s 
Republic of China issues three different types of ICP numbers, which are managed at the 
provincial level:  
i. ICP license  for commercial websites, which cover any website offering goods or 
services to customers.  
ii. ICP filing for non -commercial websites which are purely informational and are not 
involved in direct sales.  
4.6.8  Mobile APP ICP filing for all mobile apps. Starting from September 1, 2023 , all new 
apps must undergo the ICP Filing process before they can be published on app stores in 
China, while the existing apps should complete the filing before March 31, 2024. This rule 
applies to Apple App stores, as well as all android app stores and m ini-program app (quick 
app) stores in China.  
4.6.9  The ICP filing is compulsory for all websites based in mainland China, including 
those offering advertising services such as banner ads and sponsored content. This regulation 
is integral to ensuring comp liance with national standards governing digital platforms.  The 
process for obtaining an ICP filing requires submission through platforms such as the Alibaba 
Cloud/AWS/ Huawei ICP Filing System. Applicants must provide detailed information, 
including the company name, address and phone number, along with a Chinese verification 
document. Additionally, the application must include the legal representative's name, phone 
number, email address and proof of identity. The person responsible for the website must also 

 
 
88 
 
provide their name, phone number, email address and proof of identity. Other required details 
include the website's emergency contact phone number, a photograph of the person 
responsible for the website, the IP address, ISP, server location and a list of domains where 
the website will be accessible. This detailed and structured process ensures adherence to 
regulatory requirements and enhances oversight over websites/web apps/mobile apps 
operating in mainland China. 
National Press and Publication Administration (NPPA) – China  
4.6.10  The National Press and Publication Administration (NPPA) is the designated 
authority in the People's Republic of China responsible for regulating the gaming industry 
and approving or rej ecting games for release within the country. The approval process 
enforced by NPPA includes several mandatory requirements: games must comply with 
Chinese laws and regulations, secure copyright registration from the National Copyright 
Administration (NCAC)  and obtain an Internet Content Provider (ICP) certificate. 
Additionally, an anti -addiction system must be embedded to regulate user engagement. 
Developers are required to implement mechanisms for user registration with real names and 
ID verification. Furt hermore, the NPPA mandates the monitoring of gaming time and in -
game purchases to ensure compliance with national policies on responsible gaming.  
4.6.11  NPPA imposes strict restrictions on game content to uphold societal and cultural 
values. Games are prohibited from depicting obscenity, pornography, nudity, homosexuality, 
polygamy, adultery, or any form of sexual content. Depictions of violence, terror and cruelty 
are strictly barred, as are scenes, characters, or images considered excessively frighteni ng. 
Content that insults or slanders others, endangers social morality, or undermines national 
cultural traditions is not permitted. Additionally, the promotion of law violations, drug use, 
drug trafficking, or any form of criminal behaviour is strictly for bidden. In 2024, the NPPA 
has approved an average of 107 games per month, reflecting its robust operational framework 
and commitment to regulating the gaming industry in alignment with national interests and 
ethical standards. 
European Cybersecurity Competence Centre (ECCC) 
4.6.12  The European Cybersecurity Competence Centre (ECCC) plays a critical role in 
enhancing the cybersecurity resilience of the European Union by strategically guiding 
investments in research, innovation and the industrial sector. The ECCC aligns with the goals 
set out in the EU Cybersecurity Strategy for the Digital Decade, focusing on the coordination 
and implementation of cybersecurity measures through both the Digital Europe Programme 
(DEP) and Horizon Europe (HE). A key aspect of the ECCC’s mandate is its collaboration 
with the Network of National Coordination Centres (NCCs) to develop and deploy Security 
Operations Centres (SOCs) across sectors, as well as strengthen the capabilities of national 
CSIRTs (27 NCCs have been assigned) . These efforts contribute to improving the Union’s 
ability to prevent, detect and respond to cyber incidents while fostering synergies between 
civilian and defence cybersecurity initiatives. In doing so, the ECCC supports the 
development of a trusted and secure digital environment within the Union, taking into 
account the requirements of key legislative frameworks such as the NIS2 Directive and the 
Cyber Resilience Act. Furthermore, the ECCC is responsible for guiding the implementation 
of coordinated vuln erability disclosures and facilitating cross -border information sharing, 
which ensures a harmonized response to cybersecurity threats across Member States.  

 
 
89 
 
4.6.13  ECCC aims to strengthen the Union's cybersecurity capabilities by investing in the 
education, certification and upskilling of cybersecurity professionals. Through initiatives 
such as the European Cybersecurity Skills Framework (ECSF), the ECCC promotes 
standardised curricula, cross -border education opportunities and the certification of 
competencies, which collectively ensure that the EU has a skilled workforce capable of 
meeting emerging cybersecurity challenges. Additionally, Small and medium -sized 
enterprises (SMEs) often face increased risks due to limited resources and expertise. To 
address this, the ECCC provides targeted funding opportunities through National 
Coordination Centres (NCCs) and supports initiatives such as cybersecurity maturity 
assessments, development of risk modelling tools and vulnerability management solutions 
aimed specifically at SMEs. The ECCC also fosters collaboration among academia, industry 
and public authorities to address common cybersecurity goals, with an emphasis on 
strengthening coordination through Information Sharing and Analysis Centres (ISACs). 
These collective efforts not only bolster the cybersecurity maturity of the Union but also 
serve as key measures to prevent cybercriminal activities and safeguard critical infrastructure, 
ensuring a secure and trustworthy digital ecosystem for all stakeholders. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.6.14  The Committee observes that it is imperative to strengthen bilateral and 
multilateral agreements with international law enforcement agencies. To combat 
cybercrime, the Committee recommends effective Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties and 
Memoranda of Understanding are necessary and efforts may be taken to achieve this 
goal. The Committee notes that difference in law enforcement expertise hinder effective 
investigations and therefore recommends regular joint training sessio ns focused on 
digital forensics, blockchain analysis and virtual asset tracing, involving both domestic 
and international partners.  
4.6.15  The Committee recommends the development of secure, interoperable platforms 
for real -time cyber threat intelligence  sharing between countries and releva nt 
organisations. The Committee further recommends establishing a multilingual, user -
friendly online platform through which citizens can easily report cybercrimes, 
improving response times and data collection. Recognizi ng the vital role of public -
private collaboration, the Committee further recommends closer partnerships with 
global technology, financial and telecommunications sectors, as this would facilitate 
better monitoring, detection and coordinated takedown of malicious infrastructure.  
4.7  Innovative measures adopted by States to deal Cybercrime 
4.7.1  Police and public order are subjects in the State List. Many States and Union 
Territories (UTs) have strengthened their ability to address cyber threats by implementing 
innovative initiatives such as specialized cyber units, advanced police training programs and 
robust public awareness campaigns. All these efforts not only have improved the preventive 
and investigative capabilities but also set benchmarks for  others, contributing to a 
coordinated and stronger national response to cybercrime. The following segment will 
highlight certain exemplary measures adopted by different States and UTs. 
Telangana State Cyber Security Bureau (TGCSB) 
4.7.2  The Telangana Sta te Cyber Security Bureau (TGCSB), was established in 2023 in 
Hyderabad, is a specialized bureau set up by the Government of Telangana to tackle 

 
 
90 
 
cybercrime and strengthen cybersecurity throughout Telangana. With state -wide jurisdiction 
and support from all departments, TGCSB aims to protect citizens, institutions and 
infrastructure from cyber threats while fostering a secure digital environment. TGCSB’s core 
responsibilities include registering, investigating and prosecuting cybercrimes, setting up 
mechanisms to detect and counter threats and enhancing cyber safety awareness in 
partnership with various stakeholders. The Director of TGCSB also serves as the Chief 
Information Security Officer (CISO) for the Police Department and other organisations as 
directed by the Government. It serves also serves as State Cyber Crime Coordination Centre 
and nodal agency to coordinate with I4C, national agencies, IT industry and law enforcement 
agencies of other States, Intelligence Department etc. It also commissions studies  and 
research to understand various cybercrimes, provides training, conducts special operations 
against cyber offenders and submits recommendations for necessary policy changes.  
4.7.3  TGCSB is led by its Director and divided into four main branches: the Cybercrime 
Branch, Cyber Security Branch, Administration and Logistics Branch and Auxiliary Units. 
The Cybercrime Branch is headed by Superintendent of Police (SP) and has dedicated cyber 
police stations and forensic units, while the Cyber Security Branch is also headed by SP and 
focuses on threat intelligence, training, audits and research. The Auxiliary Units consist of 
cybercrime police stations in six Commissionerates and 21 district -level coordination cells. 
With a sanctioned strength of 501, TGCSB com prises officers, technical experts, legal 
advisors and other professionals. The Bureau has established 7 new cybercrime police 
stations, booked 472 cases since April 2024 and arrested over 160 cyber offenders. 
Financially, TGCSB safeguarded over ₹283 crore s from fraud, including ₹179.38 crores in 
the current year and has conducted more than 30,511 public awareness programs. Arrested 27 
offenders in the first inter -state operation conducted in Rajasthan, blocked thousands of 
fraudulent SIMs, IMEIs and URLs/a pps and detected 817 accused connected to 134,218 
cases nationwide, with 16,925 cases in Telangana alone.  
Cyber Command and Control Centre - Maharashtra 
4.7.4 The Maharashtra Cyber Security Project is a landmark initiative aimed at elevating 
cybersecurity and digital policing across Maharashtra, with its state -of-the-art Cyber 
Headquarters located in Mahape, Navi Mumbai. The centre is equipped with a platform that 
integrates over 50 global forensic technologies, 17 threat intelligence tools and 13 
cybersecurity tools leveraging AI and blockchain technologies. It also consists of a highly -
skilled team of over 150 experts in cyber forensics, investigation and technology. It also 
houses the Nodal Cyber Police Station and 50 district cyber police stations will use the 
Centre’s resources to investigate citizen and enterprise complaints. The Centre serves as an 
integrated grievance redressal hub accessible via helpline, web portal and mobile app, 
strengthening the State’s ability to tackle a wide range of cyber complaints. The project 
operates across six key domains:- 
(i) The Nodal Cyber Police Station supports operational needs of all 50 district labs in 
resolving complex cyber cases and upholds digital law and order; 
(ii) The Command  & Control Centre manages helpline 1930 and the newly developed 
helpline 14407, providing a unified response point for cyber fraud, online 
harassment and similar threats; 

 
 
91 
 
(iii) Technology Assisted Investigation (TAI) utilises the latest forensic tools and will 
assist in investigations of digital devices like PCs, mobiles  and hard drives, as well 
as conduct malware analysis, thus enabling faster resolution of cybercrime cases; 
(iv) Computer Emergency Response Team - Maharashtra (CERT-MH) safeguards the 
State’s critical infrastructure and Government resources, shielding it from cyber -
attacks; 
(v) Centre of Excellence (COE) focuses on training 5,000 police officers over five years 
and raising public awareness about cyber safety and emerging threats; 
(vi) Security Operations Centre (SOC) protects Maharashtra’s cyber infrastructure and 
its 50 district labs from unauthorised access and digital breaches. 
Cyberdome – Kerala 
4.7.5  Cyberdome, an initiative by Kerala Police, serves as an advanced technological 
research and development centre aimed at becoming a centre of excellence in cybersecurity 
and technology augmentation for effective policing. Established as a high -tech public-private 
partnership, Cyberdome integ rates resources from Government agencies, academia, private 
industry, ethical hackers and civil society to build a resilient cyber threat mitigation 
ecosystem. Its mission focuses on protecting citizens from evolving cyber threats through 
collaboration and innovation. 
4.7.6  The operational framework of Cyberdome includes key divisions such as Cyber 
Intelligence, Cyber Security, Incident Response, Cyber Forensics, Research and 
Development and Training & Awareness. Its network spans 20 companies, 6 academic 
institutions, 4 NGOs, 5 government agencies, 3 international bodies and all RBI -regulated 
banks. Over 2,500 experts and a Mobile Technicians Group of 250 statewide members 
contribute their technical skills and knowledge. 
4.7.7  Cyberdome has implemented va rious strategic initiatives to strengthen Kerala’s 
cybersecurity landscape and modernize law enforcement through advanced technology. 
These include Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing (VAPT) on critical 
Government websites, specialized cybercr ime investigation training in partnership with 
regulatory bodies, such as RBI and “Kid Glove” workshops to raise cyber awareness among 
students, educators and parents. It also operates a financial fraud monitoring cell addressing 
online banking frauds and employs AI and machine learning in smart policing tools like 
facial recognition and traffic violation detection. Additional projects include the 
establishment of a Cyber -Security Operations Centre (C -SOC), a Robotics and Automation 
Research unit for law en forcement technology needs and extensive capacity -building 
programs to enhance Government employees’ cybersecurity skills. Cyberdome has also 
established a presence in Metaverse to actively counter threats in virtual spaces, showcasing 
its forward-looking approach. 
4.7.8  To further public safety and policing efficiency, Cyberdome has developed multiple 
applications. The BSafe app to protect against fraudulent calls, OTP and UPI scams; the e -
Curfew Pass System to facilitate emergency travel during lockdowns ; the Shops App to 
enable home delivery of essentials; POLKART for digitizing police personnel shopping at 
Central Police Canteens; and the BSafe Quarantine Tracker for real -time monitoring of 

 
 
92 
 
COVID-19 quarantined individuals. Further, Grapnel, a Darkweb m onitoring tool, supports 
tracking and reporting illicit online activities. 
Operation P-Hunt – Kerala 
4.7.9  Operation P -Hunt is an initiative led by the Counter Child Sexual Exploitation 
(CCSE) Unit of Kerala Police aimed at combating online child sexual a buse and the 
distribution of Child Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Material (CSEAM). The operation 
targets individuals involved in disseminating CSEAM, utilising data from sources such as 
Cyber Tipline Reports, the Internet Crimes against Children Child Onli ne Protection System 
(ICACCOPS), social media and anonymous complaints. The CCSE processes this 
information to identify suspects’ critical details including IP addresses, emails, phone 
numbers and device types, which are then organized for focused action. 
4.7.10  The operation is conducted on a date designated by the Director General of Police 
and the CCSE shares suspect data with all District Police Chiefs. Specialized teams, 
including cyber experts, locate suspects prior to coordinated raids conducted sim ultaneously 
across all districts. Devices found containing CSEAM content are seized, arrests are made 
and cases registered under the IT Act and POCSO Act. The CCSE Centre centrally 
coordinates these operations to maintain uniformity. Since inception, 18 st atewide P -Hunt 
operations have been conducted, resulting in 6,146 searches, 1,758 cases filed, 351 
individuals arrested and seizure of 3,305 devices. Additionally, 1,994 reports have been 
submitted to courts under relevant legal provisions. This ongoing, s ystematic effort 
demonstrates Kerala Police’s strong commitment to addressing and reducing online child 
sexual exploitation in the State. 
Cyber Helpline 1930 Call Centre – Haryana 
4.7.11  The Cyber Helpline 1930 Call Centre in Haryana operates 24x7 and is fully 
integrated with the 112 emergency response service, ensuring continuous, immediate support 
to cybercrime victims and improving public accessibility and trust. It is staffed by 70 trained 
personnel skilled in victim support and cybercrime management, enabling fast and effective 
complaint resolution.  
The helpline has established a formal partnership with banks/financial institutions, with 15 
nodal officers from ten major banks deployed at the helpline centre to provide real -time 
coordination for freezing fraudulent transactions. This collaboration has played a crucial role 
in reducing financial losses for cybercrime victims and strengthening the overall response 
mechanism. Due to these improvements, the recovery rate of defrauded funds has increased 
significantly from 6% in September 2023 to 27% in September 2024, reflecting the enhanced 
efficiency and effectiveness of Haryana’s cybercrime response system. 
4.7.12  Operation on Suspect locations projected on PRATIBIMB 
(i) Operation Anti-Virus – Rajasthan 
Operation Anti -Virus, launched by Rajasthan Police in the Mewat region, 
represents a proactive shift in combating cybercrime through stringent legal 
actions, including filing FIRs under session trial sections and arresting offenders. 
A comprehensive Criminal Di rectory is maintained to track arrested and wanted 
cybercriminals, classified into categories like fake SIM providers, fake bank 

 
 
93 
 
account creators, mule account operators and perpetrators of scams such as honey-
trapping and phishing. 
The operation is suppor ted by a dedicated "War Room" at the range office with a 
cyber-technical team that sets daily targets for the Range Special Team (RST) in 
collaboration with District Special Team (DST) and District Deeg Police to 
conduct coordinated enforcement. Daily stra tegic meetings with the 
Superintendent of Police, Deeg to oversee the planning and monitor crime trends 
via the Pratibimb portal. Villages are categorized geographically into A, B, C 
based on criminal activity, allowing targeted cordon - and -search operati ons by 
RST, DST and district police to dismantle cybercriminal networks 
comprehensively. 
Over the past nine months in 2024, the Rajasthan police have registered 314 suo-
moto cases and arrested 1,138 cybercriminals, reducing the district’s share of 
national cybercrime suspects from 20% to 4%. Legal and administrative measures 
include seizing criminal assets (vehicles and properties) and opposing bail 
applications using strong evidence and arguments. Preventive measures like strict 
legal actions are taken aga inst individuals attacking police officers and lawful 
measures to demolish illegal constructions owned by cybercriminals to undermine 
their operational bases.  
(ii) Jharkhand  Police 
The Jharkhand Police have shown notable diligence and innovation in tackling 
cybercrime, focusing especially on high -incidence districts like Jamtara and 
Deoghar. They have also taken a proactive approach to emerging cybercrime 
threats in newly emerging identified hotspots including Giridih, Dhanbad, Bokaro, 
Hazaribagh and Koderma. Through sustained and coordinated efforts, the police 
have successfully disrupted cybercriminal networks, leading to the arrest and 
prosecution of numerous offenders, thereby strengthening public security in these 
vulnerable areas. 
The police's key strateg y encompassed the identification of cybercrime hotspots 
via comprehensive data analysis and intelligence gathering, pinpointing Jamtara 
and Deoghar while recognizing the emergent threat landscape in other districts. 
The deployment of the 'Pratibimb' crime mapping module facilitated real -time 
location tracking and the precise pinpointing of cybercriminal activities, thereby 
expediting response measures. Coordinated intelligence sharing across districts 
through 'Pratibimb' platform led to targeted operations that effectively disrupted 
organized cybercriminal activities and culminated in the apprehension of a 
substantial number of cyber fraudsters. 
Centre for Cyber Operations and Security (CenCOPS) - Chandigarh 
4.7.13  The Centre for Cyber Operations and Security (CenCOPS) is a strategic initiative by 
Chandigarh Police in partnership with the Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(DRDO) aimed at strengthening cybersecurity infrastructure and operational capacity across 
northern India. It has four core functions data analytics and predictive policing, evidence 
collection with advanced forensics, cybersecurity and cybercrime investigation and Open 
Source Intelligence  (OSINT) and social media monitoring. It serves mu ltiple States/UTs 

 
 
94 
 
including Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Haryana, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and 
Chandigarh, providing a unified platform for digital forensics, cybercrime prevention and 
advanced analytical competencies, thereby boosting regional cyber resi lience and 
investigation effectiveness. 
4.7.14  CenCOPS is equipped with sophisticated tools for cybercrime investigation and 
forensic analysis, such as malware examination, forensic data recovery and real -time event 
monitoring. It also facilitates sentiment analysis to support predictive policing and enhance 
public safety. The data and command centre of CenCOPS integrates data from varied sources 
including the Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) and city -wide 
CCTV systems, enabling proactive crime prevention and detection. 
4.7.15  Additionally, CenCOPS incorporates citizen engagement initiatives and leverages 
advanced technologies like facial recognition to improve public safety. Its core functions 
encompass data analytics and pre dictive policing, advanced evidence collection and 
forensics, cybersecurity and cybercrime investigation, as well as Open Source Intelligence 
(OSINT) and social media monitoring making it a comprehensive hub for regional cyber 
operations and security enhancement. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.7.16  The Committee appreciates and acknowledges the commendable efforts 
undertaken by certain State Governments like Telangana, Maharastra, Kerala, etc., in 
implementing innovative and effective measures to prevent cyb ercrime and safeguard 
the people. Considering these successful models adopted by those State Governments, 
the Committee recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs to coordinate with other 
States to adopt these proven best practices and support them in setting  up effective 
cybercrime prevention mechanisms as it will not only enhance their capacities to 
combat cyber threats but will also fortify the nation’s overall cyber resilience.  
 
***** 
 
 
 
  

 
 
95 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
The Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) 
The Committee appreciates the comprehensive legislative framework provided 
by the Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act) and its associated rules, which 
collectively serve as the cornerstone for regulating digital platforms and safeguarding 
Indian cyberspace.  
(para 3.2.12) 
 
The Committee observes that currently the existing law does not differentiate 
between synthetically generated and user -created content. Considering the increasing 
misuse of deepfakes and AI tools for generating harmful or misleading content, the 
Committee recommends that the legal framework be further strengthened to include 
express provisions in the legislation for handling content generated using Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and similar emerging technologies. The Committee further 
recommends that to address issues of deepfake or obscene content being uploaded in the 
social media, MeitY should consider developing an innovative technological framework 
mandating all photos, videos and similar content shared on digital platforms to have a 
watermark as it would help to prove the origin of the content and make it more difficult 
to fake or edit/manipulate. The Committee is of the view that to make this initiative 
functional, MeitY should set up uniform technical standards for media provenance, 
while CERT -In would act as the coordinator for monitoring and issuing detection 
alerts.    
(para 3.2.13) 
 
The Committee is of the view that the grievance redressal system should be made 
more user -friendly and transparent to enhance public trust and ensure effective 
resolution of complaints. The Committee, therefore, recommends establishing a uniform 
format for filing complaints, setting clearly defined timelines for acknowledgment and 
resolution, and ensuring public disclosure of grievance statistics, including the number 
of complaints received, resolved and pending. The Committee further recommends that 
integrating the grievance redressal mechanism system with emerging data protection 
frameworks would help to create a more holistic regulatory environment that addresses 
concerns related to privacy, content moderation and cybersecurity in a cohesive and 
coordinated manner. 
(para 3.2.14) 
 
Recognising the challenges posed by technologies such as the metaverse, 
blockchain and generative AI, the Committee recommends the development of forward-
looking, flexible regulatory guidelines. The Committee is of the view that the safe 
harbour protection s available to intermediaries under the IT Act, 2000 should be 
reviewed periodically to strike a balance between their liability immunity and the need 
for greater accountability, especially where platforms fail to act on unlawful content. 
The Committee als o recommends a periodic review of enforcement mechanisms and 
penalty provisions under the IT Act, 2000 to ensure their deterrent effect remains 
robust.  
(para 3.2.15) 

 
 
96 
 
The Committee has observed that certain social media intermediaries at times 
fail to coop erate with law enforcement agencies and legal provisions in promptly 
removing unlawful content, including morphed videos, fake profiles, misinformation 
and content promoting violence based on religion or caste, thereby potentially abetting 
criminal activit ies and undermining public order. To address this critical gap, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice, 
should consider amendin g the Information Technology Act, 2000, to introduce specific 
provisions that hold social media intermediaries legally accountable as when they fail to 
comply with lawful takedown orders within prescribed timelines. Such amendments 
should include graded pe nalties, including monetary fines and potential suspension of 
operations for persistent non -compliance, while ensuring that due process and appeal 
mechanisms are preserved to maintain the balance between content regulation and 
freedom of expression. 
(para 3.2.16) 
 
The Committee notes that the OTT platforms have emerged as a primary source 
of entertainment in India, with a reach that surpasses traditional cinema, including a 
substantial audience of minors. The Committee believes that unlike films, which requ ire 
mandatory pre -certification under the Cinematograph Act, OTT content currently 
operates under a self -classification system with post -release grievance redressal as per 
the IT (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021. The 
Committee further believes that although the rules require age ratings, parental 
controls and a grievance mechanism, the lack of pre -release checks and weak age 
verification still leave minors exposed to harmful content. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government may consider establishment of a recognized panel of 
experts comprising child development specialists, educators, legal experts, social 
scientists and community representatives who will monitor the new OTT releases. The 
Committee is of the  view that the Post Release Review Panel will watch the flagged or 
trending content post release based on user complaints submitted through a 
standardised grievance mechanism. The Committee recommends that the Panel shall 
devise suitable norms and guidelines keeping in view the cultural ethos and sensitivity of 
the country. The Committee further recommends that the panel may also workout 
suitable penalties in case of infringement of these norms/guidelines. The Committee also 
recommends that OTT platforms mu st be required to adopt more strong technology 
enabled age verification systems and effective parental control mechanisms, going 
beyond simple self -declaration, to better restrict minors' access to age -inappropriate 
material. The Committee is of the view t hat regional language content classification and 
parental guidance notices should be mandated to offer better protection for rural and 
semi-urban viewers. 
 (para 3.2.17) 
 
  

 
 
97 
 
The Committee is of the view that enhanced coordination between Governmental 
agencies, regulators, technology platforms and civil society would be beneficial to 
strengthen the country’s ability to respond to cyber challenges. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the establishment of formal ways for these groups to work 
together for  knowledge sharing, joint decision -making and capacity building in the 
cyberspace domain. 
(para 3.2.18) 
 
The Committee recommends that all apps should comply with a strict data 
protection and security standards as prescribed in applicable laws and regulations. The 
Committee also suggests setting compliance requirements for app stores, including 
regular audits to prevent malicious or harmful apps from being distributed. The 
Committee also recommends for development of an indigenous app store to facil itate 
Indian startups. 
(para 3.2.19) 
 
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) 
 
The Committee is of the view to introduce a strong verification system for 
offshore advertisers. The Committee recommends that the offshore advertisers must 
undergo a thorough digital verification process, like uploading official documents, 
completing a live video identification, etc., to prove their identity and must use zero -
trust frameworks during verification, where every access request from offshore 
advertisers (including changes to ads, payment details, or identity information) must be 
continuously authenticated and monitored to curb fraudulent and deceptive advertising 
targeting Indian users. 
(para 3.3.4) 
 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
 
The Committee commends the DoT for its significant initiatives to tackle 
cybercrime using telecom resources, highlighting the successful Sanchar Saathi portal 
that engages citizens in protecting digital identities. The Committee notes the strong 
impact of technologies l ike the Centralized International Out Roamer (CIOR) system 
blocking over 1.35 crore spoofed calls in a day and reducing such incidents by 98% 
along with the use of AI, facial recognition and the Financial Fraud Risk Indicator 
(FRI) for innovative preventio n. The Committee also acknowledges the Digital 
Intelligence Platform (DIP) for fostering real -time collaboration among key sectors to 
fight cybercrime. To keep pace with evolving fraud techniques, the Committee 
recommends deeper integration and automation of data flow between existing systems 
such as the Sanchar Saathi portal, Digital Intelligence Platform and law enforcement 
databases. 
(para 3.4.8) 
 
 

 
 
98 
 
Considering the importance of public awareness in cybercrime prevention, the 
Committee observes that sustai ned multilingual and cross -platform campaigns should 
be intensified particularly in regional and rural areas so that more citizens know how to 
report fraud and reclaim control over their mobile credentials. The Committee 
recommends that it would be valuabl e to take the Mobile Number Validation Service 
(MNVS) beyond the current stage and implement it nationwide in collaboration with 
banks, NBFCs and fintech platforms to limit the use of mobile numbers in fraudulent or 
mule accounts. 
(para 3.4.9) 
The Committee notes that the regulatory frameworks governing the use of 
telecom channels such as automatic calls, bulk SMSs and Voice over Internet  Protocol 
(VoIP) to be strengthened in order to prevent misuse of these services for phishing 
campaigns. The Comm ittee recommends continued investment in indigenous AI 
technologies like Artificial Intelligence and Facial Recognition powered Solution for 
Telecom SIM Subscriber Verification (ASTR) to ensure that SIM card issuance with a 
focus on preventing identity fraud at the point of issue.  
(para 3.4.10) 
 
The DoT informed the Committee that about 570 banks and financial 
institutions (FIs) use the Digital Intelligence Platform (DIP) to access Mobile Number 
Revocation List (MNRL) and financial fraud indicators for act ing on suspicious bank 
accounts, leading to action on 20.89 lakh accounts. The Committee commends these 
efforts to tackle telecom-linked financial fraud and recommends that efforts should also 
be made to ensure swift sharing of risk alerts and revocations from all these institutions, 
thus minimizing manual delays in addressing fraud. 
(para 3.4.11) 
 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) 
 
The Committee appreciates TRAI’s commendable efforts in organizing over 650 
consumer awareness initiatives and driving proactive public outreach to promote 
telecom cybersecurity awareness. The collaborative efforts involving Telecom Service 
Providers (TSPs), NGOs and educational institutions reflect a strong commitment to 
inclusive digital l iteracy. Since TRAI has not yet directly collaborated with MeitY's 
Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) project, the Committee 
recommends that TRAI should be encouraged to partner with MeitY’s  ISEA project to 
expand digital safety outreach through role -based learni ng modules and online self -
learning platforms. Further, the Committee recommends that in order to strengthen its 
capacity in dealing with emerging regulatory and technological issues, the Ministry of 
Communications may be approached to expedite the proposa l to enhance TRAI’s staff 
strength. 
(para 3.5.16) 
 
 

 
 
99 
 
With respect to the awareness programmes conducted by TRAI, the Committee 
is of the view that TRAI can also work with universities and research groups to create a 
system to check how effective its awareness programs are working, especially for people 
in rural areas and other vulnerable groups. The Committee feels that a dedicated 
budget may also be considered for cyber literacy pilot projects in schools and 
communities, with regular reviews jointly conducted by DoT, MeitY and TRAI. 
Further, the Committee suggests that the Government may consider the creation of new 
expert verticals within TRAI to address cyber threats, quantum -safe networks and the 
economic challenges of fast -developing telecom techn ologies, enabling a secure digital 
transition for the country. 
(para 3.5.17) 
 
 Considering the steady increase in complaints related to Unregistered 
Telemarketers (UTMs), the Committee is of the view that it is essential to focus on 
targeted actions to address this challenge more effectively. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that measures should be taken to enhance real -time detection mechanisms 
to identify and block UTMs proactively. The Committee suggests that a centralized 
blacklist database shoul d be maintained and it needs to be shared across all telecom 
service providers to ensure swift disconnection of offending numbers. 
(para 3.5.18) 
 
Reserve Bank of India 
 
The Committee appreciates the RBI’s comprehensive framework for Customer 
Due Diligence and Fraud Risk Management, which reflects a strong commitment in 
securing the financial system through rigorous KYC practices, proactive monitoring 
and robust supervisor y oversight. The Committee is of the view that increasing 
collaboration and real -time information sharing between financial institutions and law 
enforcement agencies can accelerate response times and improve the effectiveness of 
preventive measures.  
(para 3.6.30) 
The Committee recommends that banks should regularly train their employees 
and organise awareness programs for customers about the latest methods that 
fraudsters use. The Committee is of the view that by doing so, both staff and customers 
will be better prepared to recognise and respond to new types of scams and thereby 
complementing technological solutions with human vigilance. 
(para 3.6.31) 
The Committee notes the deadline fixed by RBI to all banks to complete the 
migration process to the exclusi ve Internet Domain ‘.bank.in’ is 31 st October, 2025 with 
the Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT) 
designated as the registrar for this process. The Committee believes that till date no 
major banks have migrated to the domain. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
RBI should supervise the entire migration process, ensuring that all banks adhere to the 
schedule and complete the migration process within the prescribed deadline. The 
Committee further recommends that the RBI s hould conduct public awareness 

 
 
100 
 
campaigns to educate consumers on identifying genuine ‘.bank.in’ domains, thereby 
reinforcing public trust. The Committee also suggests that to have an audit mechanism 
for verifying the domain usage and security standards, as  it would further strengthen 
the preventive impact of this initiative.  
(para 3.6.32) 
 The Committee appreciates the good progress made in connecting banks with 
the Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C) portal through Application 
Programming Interface (API) integration. This integration is important for improving 
how cybercrime complai nts and financial fraud cases are handled. So far, 19 banks 
have fully completed the API integration and over 350 banks have joined the Citizen 
Financial Cyber Fraud Reporting and Management System (CFCFRMS) platform. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends t he RBI to extend this API integration to all 
remaining banks, including smaller and cooperative banks, to ensure full coverage and 
a strong nationwide cybersecurity response. The Committee also recommends that a 
clear deadline should be set for completing this integration. Further, the Committee 
suggests that the RBI may provide support to banks facing technical or vendor -related 
difficulties by offering dedicated technical help or setting up a centralized helpdesk to 
resolve issues quickly. The Committee b elieves that RBI, together with I4C, needs to 
have a regular review process to closely monitor the progress of this integration effort. 
The Committee recommends initiating early collaboration among stakeholders to 
develop and implement quantum -resistant cryptographic solutions, ensuring a smooth 
shift from legacy systems to future-proof technologies.  
 (para 3.6.33) 
 The Committee acknowledges the RBI’s proactive and innovative approach  
through the Digital Payment Intelligence Platform (DPIP). It is truly i mpressive, 
showcasing a strong commitment to safeguarding the digital payments ecosystem. 
However, the Committee recommends setting  a timeline for the rollout of the DPIP, 
ensuring its speedy implementation to address the rising digital payment frauds 
effectively.  
(para 3.6.34) 
The Committee also appreciates the implementation of MuleHunter.ai, as a pilot 
phase, in the four banks Canara Bank, Punjab National Bank, Bank of Baroda and 
Bank of India to validate the tool's effectiveness and accuracy in detecting mule 
accounts. Considering the promising results of MuleHunter.ai, the Committee 
recommends that MuleHunter.ai be gradually expanded to other banks, both public 
and private sector banks, to cover a broader segment of the digital payments ecosyste m. 
The Committee further recommends that the upcoming Central Payment Fraud 
Information Registry (CPFIR) be fully leveraged as a centralized, comprehensive fraud 
data repository to facilitate sector -wide analysis, coordination and mitigation of 
emerging fraud threats. 
(para 3.6.35) 
  

 
 
101 
 
The Committee notes that the Reserve Bank -Integrated Ombudsman Scheme 
(RB-IOS) provides a mechanism for victims of digital payment fraud to lodge 
complaints, reflecting RBI’s commitment to consumer protection. However, the 
increasing turnaround time (TAT) for resolving unauthorised transaction complaints 
from 36.3 days in FY 2022-23 to 68.3 days in FY 2024-25 indicates a growing backlog or 
complexity in case resolution. The Committee, therefore, recommends the RBI to 
consider enhancing the Ombudsman’s opera tional capacity by adopting advanced 
digital case management tools, streamlining complaint resolution workflows and 
possibly increasing staffing to reduce delay in resolving the complaints.  
(para 3.6.36) 
 The Committee appreciates the proactive stand take n by RBI in addressing 
quantum computing threats through coordinated efforts and the formation of an Inter -
Departmental Group in this regard is commendable. The Committee suggests that the 
Regulated Entities (REs) need to accelerate the development of thei r Cryptographic Bill 
of Material (CBoM) to ensure a smoother transition to quantum-safe technologies. 
(para 3.6.37) 
 The Committee notes the concern about illicit deposits into account holders’ 
banks without their knowledge and it is good that existing laws protect innocent account 
holders from criminal liability. However, considering the unauthorised transactions 
including facilitating money laundering or fraud, the Committee recommends that the 
approval of recipient should be necessary for receiving money  in their account, actively 
involving customers in their own protection. The Committee feels that this measure can 
also ensure that money do not get transferred to mule account. 
(para 3.6.38) 
The Committee advises the integration of digital ID checks like Aadhaar-based 
e-KYC to ensure every person initiating a deposit is authentic, thereby limiting 
anonymity that criminals exploit. The Committee observed that, despite the 
implementation of KYC measures, mule accounts continue to be opened at banks, 
indicating lapses or negligence on the part of bank personnel. The Committee 
recommends that strict action be taken against those found responsible to ensure 
accountability and deter future violations. The Committee suggests exploring the 
implementation of behavio ural biometrics that analyse customer pattern, like typing 
speed or mouse movement of users to spot unusual activity and alert the bank or 
temporarily block suspicious deposits. 
(para 3.6.39) 
 The Committee appreciates the RBI’s well -structured liability limits to protect 
customers by fairly assigning zero or limited liability based on timely reporting and 
accountability, thereby fostering trust in digital banking. The Committee feels that 
liability limits be made more customer -centric and effective by personalizing them 
according to individual security behaviour. The Committee suggests RBI to explore the 
possibility of rewarding users who adopt strong digital hygiene and report fraud 
promptly with lower liability.  
(para 3.6.40) 

 
 
102 
 
The Committee recommends the introduction of affordable micro -insurance 
policies designed to protect customers against losses exceeding standard liability limits, 
thus providing a reliable financial safety. The Committee believes that banks should use 
AI tools to proactively reduce customer liability upon detecting suspicious activity, even 
before formal complaints are made. The Committee recommends exploring the zero 
liability periods and providing personalized assistance for vulnerable groups such as the 
elderly or differently -abled to enhance inclusiveness. The Committee also suggests 
enabling trusted family members/friends to assist in reporting unauthorised 
transactions to support customers who may be unable to act qui ckly themselves. The 
Committee recommends establishment of a forgiveness program for first-time victims of 
fraud, who maintain good security practices afterward, in order to restore confidence 
and encourage continued digital adoption. 
(para 3.6.41) 
 The Committee appreciates the extensive and sustained efforts of RBI in 
enhancing financial literacy and digital payment awareness across diverse 
demographics, reflecting a strong commitment to financial inclusion and consumer 
protection. The Committee rec ommends that the awareness programs should be 
conducted both in Government and private schools so that the budding generation 
becomes aware of cybercrimes and is less likely to fall prey to it. The Committee also 
recommends that the awareness programs shou ld reach at the grassroots level through 
active involvement of Panchayat representatives, local community leaders and 
representatives of people of the concerned constituencies. The Committee feels that to 
foster inclusive participation integrate financial literacy sessions into village level 
gatherings, cooperatives, self-help groups and local festivals.  
(para 3.6.42) 
Department of Financial Services (DFS) 
The Committee observes that financial intermediaries operating in different 
segments such as banks, stock brokers, insurance companies and mutual fund platforms 
have developed distinct user interfaces and operational frameworks, leading to 
inconsistencies in user experience. The Committee further observes that this 
fragmentation creates barriers for users to m igrate from one platform to another, 
resulting potential security vulnerabilities as users struggle to adapt to varying 
authentication methods, transaction processes and interface designs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the DFS in coordination w ith relevant regulators including 
RBI, SEBI, IRDAI and PFRDA, should implement standardized guidelines for user 
interface design and customer experience across all financial platforms. The Committee 
further recommends that the DFS should also mandate the a doption of standardized 
APIs and data portability features that enable users to seamlessly transfer their 
financial profiles including Demat accounts transaction history, and preferences across 
platforms, thereby reducing switching costs.  
(para 3.7.4) 
The Committee notes that despite advanced AI, transaction monitoring and data 
sharing, mule accounts persist in banks. The Committee feels that current technologies 
have not fully stopped fraudsters. The Committee observes that fraudsters often recruit 
vulnerable people via social media, scams and local networks. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends creating a formal network involving local communities, 
Panchayats, local groups, NGOs, etc., to watch and report suspicious mule recruitment. 

 
 
103 
 
The Committee further  recommends that training these groups and offering small 
rewards to them will motivate timely reporting of suspicious activities. The Committee 
feels that combining this human intelligence with existing technology is necessary to 
build a stronger defence against mule accounts. 
(para 3.7.5) 
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) 
The Committee notes that cybersecurity incidents in the financial market sector 
can cause large -scale data breaches, operational disruptions, and significant financial 
losses. The Committee also notes that these threats are growing in sophistication and 
increasingly target trading systems, depository operations, and sensitive investor data. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends SEBI to establish a robust, multi -layered 
cybersecurity framework; mandate regular independent audits; implement real -time 
incident-disclosure protocols; and develop collaborative platforms for proactive risk 
monitoring. 
(para 3.8.8) 
The Committee has observed the growing phenomenon of unsolicited a nd 
unregistered financial influencers on social media platforms who promise exorbitant or 
unrealistic returns to the public, often leading to misinformation, financial losses and 
potential scams. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Significant So cial 
Media Intermediary (SSMIs) be directed to allow only SEBI registered financial 
influencers to advice and to do marketing on social media platforms. The Committee 
further recommends SEBI for exploring the possibility of "verified tick" (a verification 
mark indicating that an account or entity has been authenticated and confirmed as 
legitimate by a platform or service) for the SEBI registered investment advisors on 
social media platforms. The Committee also recommends that such registration should 
be sub ject to prescribed disclosure norms and conduct guidelines, including the clear 
display of registration numbers, disclaimer and any potential conflicts of interest on 
social media profiles. The Committee recommends that SEBI, in collaboration with 
MeitY, establish a robust mechanism for identifying unregistered financial influencers 
and swiftly issuing legally binding takedown orders to social media intermediaries for 
specific content found to violate SEBI regulations. The Committee also recommends 
that SEBI should make suitable mandatory legal provisions for violation of disclosure 
norms and take strict actions against those who disseminate misleading information. 
(para 3.8.9) 
  The Committee is of the view that SEBI should collaborate with social media 
platforms to develop mechanisms for identifying and curbing unregistered financial 
influencers, including leveraging artificial intelligence tools for content monitoring and 
enabling public reporting of suspect financial promotions. The Committee further 
recommends that SEBI should also take strict enforcement actions against those who 
disseminate misleading information.  The Committee is also of the view that SEBI 
should conduct re gular awareness campaigns to educate investors on the risks of 
following unverified financial advice. 
 (para 3.8.10) 
 

 
 
104 
 
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) 
The Committee appreciates NPCI’s comprehensive and proactive efforts to 
secure India’s digital payment ecosystem, like consistent issuance of security guidelines, 
strict enforcement of compliance among stakeholders and rigorous annual audits to 
identify promptly and address vulnerabilities. The Committee notes that NPCI provides 
a real -time fraud monitoring system free of cost to over 500 banks. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends NPCI that this valuable service be expanded and made available 
to a greater number of banks, including smaller regional and cooperative banks, to 
enhance overall security coverage across the entire banking ecosystem. The Committee 
is of the view that widening access will strengthen early detection and prevention of 
fraudulent transactions nationwide, thereby improving consumer protection and 
reinforcing trust in digital payment platforms. 
(para 3.9.8) 
 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
The Committee in CBI’s reply noted that certain States have withdrawn general 
consent required under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (DSPE Act). It 
creates major hurdle in the seamless investigation and asking specific consent again on 
a case-to-case basis is time consuming, creates stress on resources and manpower, can 
hamper the quality of investigation and is detrimental to timely and prompt 
investigation. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that the MHA must engage in 
active consultation with those State Governments that have not given consent in order 
to resolve this issue. Further the Committee is of the view that the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 19 46 may be amended in order to empower the CBI to investigate 
the cybercrime cases in the country, without the consent of the State. 
 (para 3.10.15) 
National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
The Committee notes the legal and procedural gaps identified by the NIA,  
particularly concerning delays in early stage data preservation. The Committee 
recommends MHA for the establishment of standardised protocols and robust 
monitoring mechanisms to ensure the preservation requests and also to issue necessary 
directives mandating State police to initiate data preservation requests within the first 
24 hours of a cybercrime report to mitigate the risk of losing volatile evidence, such as 
IP logs and server files, when NIA assumes investigation from the State police. The 
Committee further recommends that the SSMIs be required to ensure timely provision 
of required data to NIA, regardless of the physical location of the data centers. 
(para 3.10.30) 
Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) 
The Committee suggests exploring the possibilities of conversion of complaints 
reported on the National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP) into e -FIRs thereby 
resolving legal issues arising during the refunding of the lien amount to the victims on 
account of non-registration of the FIRs. 
(para 3.11.9) 

 
 
105 
 
The Committee is of the view that standardisation of cybercrime units at the 
State level. The Committee, therefore, recommends  establishing State Cybercrime 
Coordination Centres (S4C) in all States/UTs, on lines similar to Indian Cyber Crime 
Coordination Centre (I4C), to ensure seamles s coordination between I4C and S tate-
level units for effective intelligence sharing. 
(para 3.11.10) 
National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) 
To strengthen national cybersecurity resilience, the Committee recommends that 
NCIIPC should consider Sector -specific Computer Security Incident Response 
Teams(CSIRTs), such as CSIRT in Finance sector (CSIRT -Fin) and CSIRT in Power 
sector (CSIRT -Power) to be expanded to more critical information infrastructure 
sectors such as healthcare, road transport, railways, aviation and telecommunications, 
where they can address sector -specific threats like ransomware in hospitals, 
cyberattacks on transport infrastruc ture, and network intrusions in telecom systems to 
improve cyber resilience within respective critical sectors. The Committee is of the view 
that a national coordination mechanism should be established to unify sectoral CSIRTs 
through a central hub that facilitates real-time threat intelligence sharing, joint incident 
response protocols and secure communication channels.  
(para 3.12.9) 
MEA and International Cooperation 
Recognising the critical need for rapid international cooperation, the Committee 
suggests instituting a dedicated 24x7 fusion desk or contact point staffed with 
multilingual, legally trained personnel, as envisioned under Article 42 of the UN 
Cybercrime Convention (2024). The Committee is of the view that such a unit would 
facilitate swift com munication and coordination with foreign agencies on preservation 
and cooperation requests, thereby mitigating the currently prolonged execution 
timelines of MLATs and Letters Rogatory. 
(para 3.13.5) 
The Committee observes the challenge posed by the l ack of a statutory mandate 
for compelling data disclosure from foreign service providers (cloud/email/VoIP), where 
most critical data is stored outside India. The Committee is of the view that relying on 
voluntary cooperation and slow Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) processes 
delays access to vital digital evidence, affecting cybercrime investigations. To address 
this, the Committee recommends pursuing legal and diplomatic measures to enable 
enforceable and timely data disclosure. 
(para 3.13.6) 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
The Committee appreciates the insightful and forward -thinking of C -DAC to 
harness Artificial intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) technologies for 
predictive cyber threat intelligence, which is crucial f or safeguarding critical national 
infrastructure in today’s rapidly evolving cybercrime. The Committee recommends C -

 
 
106 
 
DAC to explore the development of an AI/ML -powered that predicts cyber threats to 
critical sectors by integrating data from existing tools s uch as Deepfake Detection, 
Vishleshak, CDACSIEM and Rakshak DNS, along with external global threat 
intelligence. The Committee suggests creation of a national training platform for 
cybersecurity that uses virtual reality (VR), thereby offering realistic pr actice sessions 
and certification program to build a skilled workforce across the law enforcement 
agencies, judiciary and enterprise. 
(para 3.14.8) 
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In)  
The Committee acknowledges CERT -In’s crucial role in safe guarding India’s 
cybersecurity by effectively managing threat detection, incident response and 
coordination across multiple sectors. To strengthen its capabilities further, the 
Committee recommends the adoption of an AI -driven Cyber Threat Intelligence 
Platform that enables quicker and more intelligent identification and handling of cyber 
threats. Further, the Committee encourages CERT-In to build strong partnerships with 
start-ups and academic institutions to foster innovation and develop a skilled 
cybersecurity workforce. The Committee also recommends conducting regular, flexible 
cybersecurity drills in collaboration with sectoral teams to ensure CERT -In remains 
agile and prepared to tackle emerging cyber challenges promptly. 
(para 3.15.6) 
Ministry of Education 
The Committee recommends that to effectively build a resilient digital 
generation, cybercrime prevention and cyber hygiene education should be integrated 
into the school curriculum starting from early grades to senior secondary level. The 
Committee f urther recommends that this curriculum inclusion be mandated for all 
schools irrespective whether it governed by Central board or State board to ensure no 
child is left behind. The Committee also recommends for introduction of mandatory 
cyber education sub ject in non -technical courses across colleges and universities, 
integrating modules on cyber awareness, digital safety, responsible online conduct and 
basics of data privacy. 
(para 3.16.7) 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 The Committee appreciates the comprehensive and robust cybersecurity 
measures already implemented in MCA21 portal to protect India’s corporate 
regulatory ecosystem. However, recognizing the increasing sophistication of cyber 
threats, especially those exploiting shell companies and frau dulent corporate entities, 
the Committee recommends the Ministry of Corporate Affairs the adoption of an AI -
powered, blockchain -based verification and continuous monitoring system integrated 
into MCA21. The Committee is of the view that this framework shou ld enable seamless 
and automated collaboration with law enforcement and regulatory agencies for rapid 
investigation and action of any fraudulent activities. 
(para 3.17.9) 

 
 
107 
 
Legal framework available to prevent cybercrimes 
 The Committee appreciates that the Government has put in place strong legal 
frameworks to effectively address and prevent cybercrime. However, the Committee 
observes persistent and evolving challenges driven by technological advances and agile 
cybercriminal tactics. The Committee recommends  that while enforcing the CERT -In 
mandates with respect to VPN logging to aid in prevention of cybercrime, a balanced 
approach must be adopted to protect citizens’ right to privacy. The Committee suggests 
that mandatory data retention and reporting obligat ions for VPNs be accompanied by 
strict safeguards, including limiting data access solely to authorised investigations 
subject to judicial oversight, along with conducting periodic compliance audits to 
maintain transparency. The Committee encourages the use  of privacy -preserving 
technologies, to enable lawful access verification while minimizing exposure of sensitive 
data. Further, the Committee also recommends conducting public awareness 
programmes on responsible VPN use and cybersecurity hygiene.  The Committee notes 
that some IT Intermediaries have failed to comply with the legitimate request made by 
the Law Enforcement Agencies for data request and removal of online unlawful 
content. Hence, the Committee recommends that the existing provisions of Sect ion 79 of 
the IT Act, 2000 pertaining to safe harbour needs to be revisited to ensure 
accountability of IT intermediaries whose platforms are being misused. 
(para 4.1.7) 
 The Committee observes that the current rules require grievance and nodal 
officers on ly for Significant Social Media Intermediaries (SSMIs), leaving other IT 
intermediaries without designated contacts, which hampers effective communication 
and timely data access for law enforcement agencies. Further, many intermediaries are 
foreign-based without any mandatory registration or local presence, causing delays and 
non-responsiveness. The Committee, therefore recommends establishing a mandatory 
national registration system for all IT intermediaries operating in India, regardless of 
size or origin , requiring them to appoint local grievance officers and nodal contact 
persons with clear timelines for responses. Further, for SSMIs, (Facebook, WhatsApp, 
Telegram etc), the Committee suggests increasing the number of nodal officers by 
appointing regional representatives to facilitate faster and region specific coordination 
with law enforcement agencies.  
(para 4.1.8) 
The Committee appreciates that the IT Act and BNSS empower law enforcement 
agencies to take action against cybercrimes and other offences, r egardless of where the 
crime occurs, as long as the impact or the perpetrator involves India. However, the 
Committee observes that significant practical challenges in cross -border enforcement 
due to jurisdictional conflicts and limited international cooper ation, which hinder 
effective action against cybercriminals operating globally. The Committee recommends 
exploring the possibility for the establishment of a dedicated International Cybercrime 
Liaison Unit with specialized legal and technical experts to resolve the problem. 
(para 4.1.9) 
 The Committee notes that many provisions in the IT Act, 2000 are bailable and 
attract low penalties. The accused can get bail easily and the punishments or fines for 
these crimes are relatively low. The Committee, therefore , recommends reviewing and 
amending the IT Act to impose harsher penalties on offenders. 
(para 4.1.10) 

 
 
108 
 
 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that there is no provision in 
the IT Act, 2000 that holds IT intermediaries liable for compensating v ictims for 
financial losses, psychological harm, or reputational damage caused due to their 
inaction even after being alerted by G overnment agencies about unlawful or malicious 
content. The Committee, therefore, recommends amending the IT Act, 2000 to 
introduce provisions in the IT Act, making IT intermediaries to compensate victims for 
such acts. 
(para 4.1.11) 
 The Committee notes that Section 78 of the IT Act, 2000 mandates that any 
offence under the Act be investigated by a police officer not below the rank of Inspector. 
The Committee recommen ds that for more effective hand ling of cybercrime cases, 
investigations should be assigned only to police officers senior to the rank of Inspector. 
The Committee also recommends that those officers must be well-versed in all aspects of 
cybercrime, including digital forensics, cyber laws, investigative techniques, cyber 
hygiene and incident response as this will help to resolve cybercrimes efficiently and 
quickly. 
(para 4.1.12) 
In its meeting the Committee noted that, in view of the rapidly evolving nature of 
cyber threats and the increasing complexity of technology -enabled crimes, it is essential 
that India’s cybercrime legal framework undergoes regular updates to remain effective 
and future -ready. The Committee recomm ends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, Ministry of 
Law & Justice and relevant regulators, institutionalize a structured, multidisciplinary 
review mechanism to assess cybercrime la ws periodically. Adopting such a systematic 
and periodic legislative review will foster a proactive, resilient and future -ready 
legislative ecosystem allowing India to remain adaptive to emerging threats and to 
safeguard national security, digital innovati on, and citizen rights in the face of a fast 
changing cyber world.  
(para 4.1.13) 
The Committee notes that ambiguity in the suspension of suspicious transactions 
has caused inconsistent responses from financial institutions, weakening efforts against 
cybercrime and money laundering. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
financial institutions may add provisions to incorporate immediate suspension of 
suspicious transactions upon alerts from monitoring systems or law enforcement  
agencies. The Committ ee specifies that those provisions should clarify that such 
preventive actions comply with all regulatory obligations and include provisions for 
disciplinary measures against officials negligent or complicit in facilitating illicit 
activities. 
(para 4.1.14) 
The Committee recommends that a certified foundational course in  
cybersecurity be made a prerequisite for entry-level police recruitment. The Committee 
observes that such recruited personnel would be in a position to better  handle modern 
digital threats from the outset of their policing careers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the G overnment may consider integrating this requirement into the 
recruitment and training framework. 
(para 4.1.15) 

 
 
109 
 
 
 The Committee recommends that the capacity of Law Enforcement Agencies 
(LEAs) be enhanced through regular specialized training for police officers, prosecutors 
and judicial officials in areas such as cyber forensics, investigative techniques, cyber 
hygiene and cyber laws.  The Committee is of the view that States and Union Territories 
should be supported in establishing dedicated cybercrime training and research centers 
to ensure a consistent and high standard of skill development among LEA personnel 
nationwide. The Comm ittee further recommends investing in advanced forensic 
infrastructure, including state -of-the-art labs that cover Memory Forensics, Network 
Forensics, Image Enhancement, Malware Analysis, Cryptocurrency Forensics and 
Mobile Forensics, making these facilities accessible to LEAs across the country.  
(para 4.1.16) 
 The Committee observes that at present, regulation of online gaming in our 
country is overseen by various Ministries and various State Governments resulting in a 
fragmented and at times, inconsiste nt approach to enforcement and consumer 
protection. Recognizing these challenges, the Committee recommends the Central 
Government for the establishment of a dedicated ecosystem for Online Gaming in the 
country through a comprehensive consultative process. The Committee is of the view 
that this system should not only oversee the sector to address concerns related to real 
money/betting apps but also foster the development of a vibrant multimedia/animation/  
gaming ecosystem within the country. 
(para 4.1.17) 
 The Committee notes that cybercrime laws in India are currently scattered 
across multiple statutes, creating enforcement and judicial challenges. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that there is an urgent need for comprehensive, unified 
cybercrime legislation. This new legislation should clearly define cyber offences, address 
emerging technologies and provide strong, adaptable penal provisions. The Committee 
further recommends the establishment of a specialized, dedicated Integrated 
Cybercrime Task Force,  exclusively focused on investigating cybercrime. The 
Committee suggests that this Task Force should operate nationally with the mandate 
and capacity to tackle complex, multifaceted and transnational cyber offences. 
(para 4.1.18) 
Practices adopted by countries to prevent Cybercrime 
 The Committee observes that it is imperative to strengthen bilateral and 
multilateral agreements with international law enforcement agencies. To combat 
cybercrime, the Committee recommends effective Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties and 
Memoranda of Understanding are necessary and efforts may be taken to achieve this 
goal. The Committee notes that difference in law enforcement expertise hinder effective 
investigations and therefore  recommends regular joint training sessions focused on 
digital forensics, blockchain analysis and virtual asset tracing, involving both domestic 
and international partners.  
(para 4.6.14) 
 

 
 
110 
 
The Committee recommends the development of secure, interoperable p latforms 
for real -time cyber threat intelligence sharing between countries and  relevant 
organisations. The Committee further recommends establishing a multilingual, user -
friendly online platform through which citizens can easily report cybercrimes, 
improving response times and data collection. Recognizing the vital role of public -
private collaboration, the Committee further recommends closer partnerships with 
global technology, financial and telecommunications sectors, as this would facilitate 
better monitoring, detection and coordinated takedown of malicious infrastructure.  
(para 4.6.15) 
Innovative measures adopted by States to deal Cybercrime 
The Committee appreciates and acknowledges the commendable efforts 
undertaken by certain State Governments like Telangana, Maharastra, Kerala, etc., in 
implementing innovative and effective measures to prevent cybercrime and safeguard 
the people. Considering these successful models adopted by those State Governments, 
the Committee recommends the Ministry of Home Aff airs to coordinate with other 
States to adopt these proven best practices and support them in setting up effective 
cybercrime prevention mechanisms as it will not only enhance their capacities to 
combat cyber threats but will also fortify the nation’s overall cyber resilience. 
(para 4.7.16) 
 
***** 

NOTES OF DISSENT

No. HB25/HOC/DL0823
18 August 2025
Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal, MP ,
Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Subject: DissentNote and Proposed Amendments to the Recommendations in
the Draft Two Hundred Fifty-Fourth Report on ‘Cyber Crime – Ramifications,
Protection and Prevention’
Dear Chairman Sir,
I extend my sincere appreciation for the Committee's diligent and comprehensive
work in producing Report No. 254. I have gone through the draft 254 th report of the
Standing Committee. I have the following suggestions for your kind consideration:
1. In recommendation no. 3.11, which relates to the Indian Cyber Crime
Coordination Centre (I4C), I suggest that the I4C be given
statutory backing so that it possesses the necessary powers to
deal with cybercrimes. At present, it is functioning under an
executive order.
2. Under recommendation no. 3.10 with respect to the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI), the last sentence (3.10.15) reads as follows:
“Further the committee is of the view that the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act 1946 may be amended in order to empower
the CBI to investigate cybercrime in the country, without the
consent of the State.” This sentence may be deleted, as it may
impinge upon cooperative federalism. During the hearing, it was
informed to the committee that several states have not given their
consent. Therefore, we may not be able to speculate on the
HARIS BEERAN
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
(RAJY A SABHA)
Member:
Ministry of Home Affairs
Parliamentary Standing Committee
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
ParliamentaryConsultativeCommittee

reasons why the majority of states have not given consent, and it
may not be appropriate to recommend such sweeping
amendments under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act.
These are my suggestions for your kind perusal.
Thanking you for your attention.
Yours Sincerely,
(Haris Beeran)
09810010789
Address: E6, Dhawan Deep, 6 Jantar Mantar Road, New Delhi -110001.
Q-4 /106, KGL Marina Majestic, Marine Drive, Kochi, Kerala, 682018.
Mobile: 09499100789, E-mail: harisbeeranmp@gmail.com


AJAY MAKAN 1
FINAL DISSENT NOTE OF Sh. AJAY MAKAN
To,
The Honourable Chairman,
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
Parliament of India, New Delhi
Subject: Dissent Note and Proposed Amendments to the Recommendations in the Draft
Two Hundred Fifty-Fourth Report on ‘Cyber Crime – Ramifications, Protection and
Prevention’
Respected Chairman,
I extend my sincere appreciation for the Committee's diligent and comprehensive work in
producing Report No. 254. The report meticulously details the grave and escalating threat of
cybercrime, which poses a significant danger to our citizens' financial security, psychological
well-being, and national stability. I completely agree with the report's core objective: to create
a robust legal and institutional framework to protect the people of India from cybercriminals,
financial fraudsters, and malicious actors who exploit our burgeoning digital ecosystem.
However, while I fully support the intent to strengthen our defences against crime, I am
compelled to register my profound concerns regarding several key recommendations. In their
current form, these proposals risk creating a legal architecture that, while intended to enhance
security, could be used to curtail fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution
disproportionately. Specifically, I am concerned about the potential for these measures to
stifle freedom of expression, undermine the operational viability of neutral and independent
digital news media, and erode the privacy of our citizens. The liberal voices of civil society,
which are the bedrock of a healthy democracy, could be inadvertently silenced.
Our challenge is to fight crime without sacrificing liberty. To this end, I wish to propose the
following specific, point-wise amendments to the Committee's recommendations. These
suggestions are offered in a constructive spirit and aim to achieve a more judicious balance
that protects our security and our democratic values.
Several draft recommendations could be weaponised against neutral digital news and civil
society—especially the proposals to (a) “review” safe-harbour and (b) addgraded penalties
up to suspensionof platforms for takedown delays, and (c)mandatory pre-certification of
OTTcontent by CBFC. These need tight constitutional guardrails to avoid prior restraint,
coercive censorship, or licensing-by-stealth.

AJAY MAKAN 2
FINAL DISSENT NOTE OF Sh. AJAY MAKAN
Proposed Amendments to the Recommendations of the Committee
1. Regarding the Review of "Safe Harbour" Protections (Reference: Para 3.2.15 &
4.1.7)
• Existing Recommendation:The Committee recommends a periodic review of "safe
harbour" protections under Section 79 of the IT Act, 2000, to strike a "balance"
between intermediary immunity and accountability.
• Concern:The vague call to "review" and "rebalance" the safe harbour principle
threatens to dilute the crucial legal standard set by the Supreme Court inShreya
Singhal v. Union of India. This could compel platforms to engage in pre-emptive
censorship of legitimate content—including critical journalism and civil society
discourse—to avoid legal liability.
• Proposed Amendment:I propose that the recommendation be amended to uphold
and reinforce the core principle of intermediary immunity explicitly as mandated by
the Apex court in the Shreya Singhal case. Instead of a general review, the focus
should be on strengthening procedural safeguards. The amended recommendation
should read:
"The Committee recommends that the principle of 'safe harbour' under Section 79 of the IT
Act, 2000, be preserved. T o enhance accountability, the process for content takedown must be
strengthened. It should be explicitly codified that an intermediary's obligation to take down
content is triggeredonly upon receiving a formal, legally vetted order from a competent
court of law or a duly constituted independent quasi-judicial body.This will prevent the
arbitrary removal of content and ensure that any restriction on speech is subject to judicial
oversight. Nothing in this review shall dilute the standard laid down in Shreya Singhal v.
Union of India: platforms acquire ‘actual knowledge’ only upon a court order or order by a
competent authority under Section 69A.”

AJAY MAKAN 3
FINAL DISSENT NOTE OF Sh. AJAY MAKAN
2. Regarding Penalties for Non-Compliance, including Suspension of Operations
(Reference: Para 3.2.16)
• Existing Recommendation:The Committee recommends amending the IT Act to
introduce graded penalties for non-compliance with takedown orders, including
"potential suspension of operations" for social media intermediaries.
• Concern:Granting the executive the power to suspend a platform's operations is
disproportionate and dangerous. It acts as a "kill switch" that can be used to coerce
platforms into complying with politically motivated takedown demands, thereby
silencing dissent and independent media.
• Proposed Amendment:I strongly urge theremoval of the "suspension of
operations" clause. The recommendation should be revised to focus on proportionate
financial penalties adjudicated by an independent body. The amended
recommendation should state:
"The Committee recommends that a system of calibrated and proportionate monetary
penalties be introduced for non-compliance withreasoned court orders or orders under
Section 69A and its 2009 Rules. The imposition of any such penalty must be subject to a
transparent process and an effective right to appeal before an independent judicial tribunal,
ensuring that the executive cannot unilaterally impose punitive measures."
3. Regarding Mandatory Pre-Certification for OTT Content (Reference: Para 3.2.17)
• Existing Recommendation:The Committee recommends amending the IT Rules,
2021, to introduce a "mandatory pre-certification process for OTT content" under a
body similar to the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC).
• Concern:This is a regressive proposal that seeks to apply an anachronistic censorship
model to the dynamic and diverse world of digital media. It is logistically unworkable
and would severely stifle artistic freedom and creativity. Crucially, since "digital
media" includes news and current affairs, this could subject journalistic work like
documentaries to state censorship before publication.
• Proposed Amendment:This recommendation should bewithdrawn in its entirety.
Instead, we should focus on empowering users and strengthening the existing self-
regulatory framework. The alternative recommendation should be:

AJAY MAKAN 4
FINAL DISSENT NOTE OF Sh. AJAY MAKAN
"The Committee recommends that the Government should mandate OTT platforms to
implementtechnologically robust and reliable age-verification mechanismsand enhance
the efficacy and awareness of parental controls. This approach empowers viewers to make
informed choices while preserving the creative freedom that defines the digital medium. Thus,
it should be ensured that the OTTmaintain self-classification with independent self-
regulatory bodies, require robust age-assurance and parental controls, and set fast post-
publication grievance/appeal timelines for demonstrably harmful content to minors.”
4. Regarding Mandatory National Registration for IT Intermediaries (Reference: Para
4.1.8)
• Existing Recommendation:The Committee recommends establishing a "mandatory
national registration system for all IT intermediaries operating in India".
• Concern:A mandatory registration regime shifts the regulatory model from one
based on conduct to one based on permission. This creates a significant barrier to
entry for smaller, innovative startups and provides the government with a tool to deny
market access for arbitrary reasons.
• Proposed Amendment:The goal of accountability can be achieved through less
intrusive means. I propose amending the recommendation to:
"The Committee recommends that all IT intermediaries operating in India, regardless of their
size or origin, be required toappoint and publicly disclose the details of a resident
Grievance Officer and a Nodal Contact Personfor 24x7 coordination with law enforcement
agencies. This ensures a formal point of contact for legal processes without creating a
permission-based system that could stifle innovation."
Suggestions For Additions:
A) The Need for Independent Judicial Oversight
A common thread running through my concerns is expanding executive power at the expense
of judicial oversight. To address this systemic issue, I propose an additional, overarching
recommendation:
"The Committee recommends the establishment of an independent Digital Tribunal,
headed by a retired judge of a High Court or the Supreme Court. This Tribunal shall serve

AJAY MAKAN 5
FINAL DISSENT NOTE OF Sh. AJAY MAKAN
as the primary appellate body for all disputes related to content moderation, takedown
orders, and penalties imposed under the IT Act and its Rules. This will ensure that
decisions impacting the fundamental rights of citizens and the freedom of the press are
subject to impartial judicial review, not executive discretion."
B) Cross-cutting DPDP alignment (place after para 3.2.14)
3.2.14 already urges integrating grievance redressal with emerging data-protection
frameworks.
My proposed amendment
“All data-access, retention, and KYC obligations recommended herein shall comply with
the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 and its Rules at notification—ensuring
purpose limitation, storage limitation, audit trails, and security safeguards.” (DLA Piper
Data Protection)
Reason
The DPDP Draft Rules, 2025 were released for consultation on January 3, 2025 and full
enforcement was still pending as of August 2025; this clause future-proofs compliance and
protects privacy.
C) Directions by the Government Agencies Vs Court Orders/ Orders under 69 A of
the IT Act
“Wherever in the Report there is “written orders by Government Agencies”, they should be
replaced with or construed to be Court Orders or Orders under 69A of the IT Act under
relevant circumstances.”
Reason
1. Directly Rectifies the Ambiguity in Paragraph 4.1.11
• The Original Problem:As it stands, Para 4.1.11 recommends making intermediaries
liable for compensating victims for inaction "even after being alerted by Government
agencies about unlawful or malicious content". The term "alerted" is dangerously
vague. It could mean anything from a formal notice to an informal email or phone
call, creating an environment where platforms could be held liable for failing to act on
non-binding or even illegitimate requests. This would inevitably lead to over-
compliance and the suppression of legitimate speech to avoid risk.

AJAY MAKAN 6
FINAL DISSENT NOTE OF Sh. AJAY MAKAN
• How This Amendment Fixes It:This amendment completely transforms this
recommendation. An intermediary's liability would no longer be triggered by a vague
"alert" but only by their failure to comply with a formal Court Order or a procedurally
sound Order under Section 69A. This introduces due process and a high legal
threshold, ensuring that a platform's duty to act is based on a formal, legally
adjudicated determination of unlawfulness, not the discretion of an agency.
2.Clarifies "Lawful Takedown Orders" in Paragraph 3.2.16
• The Original Problem:Para 3.2.16 recommends introducing penalties, including
"potential suspension of operations," for intermediaries that fail to comply with
"lawful takedown orders". The critical ambiguity here lies in who determines if an
order is "lawful." Without clarification, a government agency could issue an order and
unilaterally declare it to be lawful, placing an immense coercive burden on
platforms.
• How This Amendment Fixes It:This amendment provides a precise and
constitutionally sound definition for "lawful takedown orders." By applying this
principle, these orders would be understood to mean only Court Orders or Orders
under 69A. This prevents the executive from becoming the judge in its own cause and
ensures that the most severe penalties are reserved for non-compliance with orders
that have already passed a legal or stringent procedural test.
3.Strengthens "Safe Harbour" Protections Discussed in Paragraphs 3.2.15 and 4.1.7
• The Original Problem:Both paragraphs recommend a review of the "safe harbour"
protections under Section 79 of the IT Act, citing intermediaries' failure to act on
"unlawful content" or non-compliance with "legitimate request made by the Law
Enforcement Agencies". These recommendations open the door to weakening
intermediary immunity based on vague and subjective criteria.
• How This Amendment Fixes It:This amendment provides a clear and objective
benchmark for evaluating an intermediary's conduct. The discussion about revoking
safe harbour would no longer be about a platform's general failure to moderate
content, but about its specific and repeated defiance of Court Orders or Orders under
69A. This aligns the report with the spirit of the Supreme Court's judgment in Shreya
Singhal v. Union of India, which established that an intermediary's "actual

AJAY MAKAN 7
FINAL DISSENT NOTE OF Sh. AJAY MAKAN
knowledge" of unlawful content is triggered by a formal order, thereby protecting
platforms from arbitrary private or executive censorship.
Respected Chairman, my intention in presenting these amendments is not to dilute our fight
against cybercrime but to ensure that our response is precise, proportionate, and in harmony
with the constitutional ethos of our great nation. We must craft laws that are sharp enough to
target criminals but not so broad that they ensnare the innocent, the critical, and the creative.
Kindly treat it as a minute of dissent under 274(2) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha).
With sincere regards,
AJAY MAKEN

To,
The Honorable Chairman,
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
Parliament of India, New Delhi
Subject:
Minute of Dissent – Rule 274 of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in the Council of States.
Proposed Amendments to the Recommendations in the Two Hundred and
Fifty Fourth Draft Report on ‘Cyber Crime – Ramifications, Protection
and Prevention’
Respected Chairman,
I would like to place on record my appreciation for the diligence with which the
committee has produced draft report #254. The draft report has outlined in great
detail, the significantly increased threat to our national assets, infrastructure,
and the financial, physical and psychological well-being of our citizens, all of
which are paramount and must be secured at all costs.
The objective to create a robust legal and institutional framework to protect the
nation from cybercriminals, financial fraudsters and malicious actors is well
served by the report’s recommendations however they also bring to light some
imperative concerns within the realm of privacy, personal and creative
freedoms, and Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India.
In this regard, my colleagues from the Congress party have already placed
before the committee, a set of recommendations with which I am in agreement
and I wholly endorse. I do not wish to repeat them here. However, I would like
to add the following points for your perusal:

1. Mandatory Pre-certification for OTT content (Para 3.2.17)
As per the draft report “The Committee, recommends that the
Government may consider amending the IT Rules, 2021 to introduce a
mandatory pre-certification process for OTT content, by establishing an
OTT content regulatory ecosystem within the ambit of CBFC, bringing
it in line with CBFC practices for films and ensuring that explicit or
culturally sensitive material is reviewed prior to public release”.
As regards the above recommendation, I suggest the following:
•“Aside from the extremely grave objections cited by my colleagues
in their recommendations addressing the issue of the Fundamental
Rights of Freedom of speech and expression being curtailed by the
above recommendation, its implementation is likely to prove
practically inefficient and virtually impossible. The number of
films produced by the entire Indian film industry is far exceeded by
the number of films, videos, reels, and other content produced
across the range of OTT platforms. Funnelling all these through a
single, central board equivalent to the CBFC will create a massive
backlog and regulation will become extremely problematic”.
•“This will also seriously affect the OTT industry in terms of the
frequency and ease of content distribution which will in turn affect
employment opportunities in which a large number of youth are
now engaged”.
•“Since the stated objective appears to be primarily curbing access
to adult content by minors, it would be more feasible to allow these
platforms to continue self-regulating and self-rating while
interfacing with them to apply more stringent parental controls”.
•“Instituting a joint forum at which stakeholders can formulate
norms and guidelines that are conducive to required cultural and
social standards as agreed upon by the said stakeholders (if
required to be separate from those of other countries) should be
considered and such guidelines released as directives to be
followed by the OTT platforms. Infringement of the guidelines can
be made to attract relevant penalties.”

•“It is also to be noted that OTT platforms are not the primary
platforms for minors to access adult material. These are already
better regulated than other social media apps and platforms on
which such material is far more easily accessible”.
2. Regulation of Financial Influencers (Para 3.8.9)
As per the draft report “The Committee further recommends SEBI for
exploring the possibility of "verified tick" (a verification mark
indicating that an account or entity has been authenticated and
confirmed as legitimate by a platform or service) for the SEBI
registered investment advisors on social media platforms”.
As regards the above recommendation, I suggest the following:
•“In addition, a mandatory legal provision may be made for
financial influencers to disclose all conflicts of interest on each
video in a standardised, visible manner so as to warn the consumer
of any beneficial interest in disseminating financial advice. Non-
compliance should attract punitive legal action”.
3. Definition of Cybercrime and Organised Cybercrime
As per the draft report, “The National Cybercrime Reporting Portal
(NCRP) defines the Cybercrime as “any unlawful act where a
computer, computer network, or electronic device is used as a tool or
target to commit or facilitate a crime.” This definition includes both
traditional crimes that are facilitated by technology, as well as new age
crimes that specifically target digital systems. Traditional crimes in
cyber space include theft, fraud, forgery, defamation and mischief, all
of which can be committed using electronic devices or networks. There
are some new-age crimes that are emerging, these offenses are
specifically enabled by technology, such as hacking, denial-of-service
attacks, phishing, malware distribution, cyber terrorism, etc.”

As regards the above recommendation, I suggest the following:
• “Crimes committed by minors against minors (which form a
significant part of Cybercrimes) must be differentiated within the
ambit of Cybercrimes as applicable laws will be different”.
• “A clear differentiation between less serious crimes such as uploading
defamatory content and more serious crimes such as disseminating
child pornography for example, should be made and commensurate
laws applied”.
• “Crimes infringing on the privacy of an individual that are enabled by
technology should be given adequate recognition and punitive
measures for the same should be clearly defined”.
• “The definition of Organised Cybercrimes should be made to include
large organisations (corporate and political entities) directing
Cyberattacks on individuals and other organisations so as to cause
them physical, psychological, defamatory, criminal or financial harm.
For example, the use of corporate machinery and finance to engage
trolls and other technological means to attack the reputation of another
corporate entity in an organised fashion”.
4. Size and Origin of IT intermediaries and appointment of local
grievance officers (Para 4.1.8)
As per the draft report “The Committee, therefore recommends
establishing a mandatory national registration system for all IT
intermediaries operating in India, regardless of size or origin, requiring
them to appoint local grievance officers and nodal contact persons with
clear timelines for responses. Further, for SSMIs, (Facebook,
WhatsApp, Telegram etc), the Committee suggests increasing the
number of nodal officers by appointing regional representatives to

facilitate faster and region specific coordination with law enforcement
agencies”.
As regards the above recommendation, I suggest the following:
• “Many IT Intermediaries are small enterprises that may not be able to
afford such appointments and services. It is advisable to allow those
smaller than a defined size to operate without appointments of such
nodal contact persons or local grievance officers and enforce this
recommendation for such intermediaries that are in the position to
afford the same. This distinction can be made according to
standardised norms”.
In addition, I suggest the following recommendations in reference to
regulatory measures mentioned in the draft report:
• “Especially with regard to operators of YouTube channels, news
portals, influencers, comedians, musicians, film makers and digital
news portals, safeguards should be provided for their ability to express
and disseminate their views without oppression by regulatory
mechanisms, harassment by agencies and other means of suppression.
These measures should be clearly articulated and laid out”.
• “Regulatory measures should not be allowed to become excuses for
pressurising or arm-twisting individuals, intermediaries, SSMI/SMI
and IT companies into suppressing material, altering content or
limiting the views of any content for political or ideological reasons.
They should be confined to regulating the entities within the limits of
legality and for the express purpose of curbing Cybercrime of any
kind. A clear policy regarding this distinction should be articulated
and instituted.”

The above suggestions do not in any way, dilute the pressing need to ensure
Cyber security for our citizens, they simply attempt to balance the realistic
environment with the need to regulate and control the players within it.
Our constitution guarantees us the Fundamental Right to Free Speech and
Expression, both of which have flourished in creative form both as part of our
freedom movement and as an integral part of the fabric of our Nationhood since
India’s Independence. It is imperative for us to preserve and strengthen these
Rights that are the bedrock of our democracy while simultaneously doing all we
can to protect and secure our citizens.
It is in this belief that I place on record my agreement and strong endorsement
of the concerns expressed by my colleagues in the Congress Party regarding the
balance between securing our Fundamental Rights and the protection of our
Nation and its Citizens from the menace of Cybercrimes of all kinds. I do hope
that you will accept these recommendations in the same spirit.
Yours sincerely,
Priyanka Gandhi Vadra


127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  
 
  

128 
 
IV  
 
FOURTH MEETING 
  
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee met at 2.30 p.m. 
on Thursday, the 9th January, 2025 in Main Committee Room, PHA, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
1.   Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal      -   Chairman 
2.   Shri Haris Beeran 
3.   Shri Neeraj Shekhar   
4.   Shri G.K.Vasan 
5.   Shri Sanjay Yadav 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
6. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
7. Shri Ashish Dubey  
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri Naveen Jindal 
10. Smt. Delkar Kalaben Mohanbhai  
11. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
12.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13. Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
14. Shri Amrinder Singh Raja Warring 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
1. Shri Govind Mohan, Union Home Secretary 
2. Dr. Rajendra Kumar, Secretary (BM) 
3. Shri Praveen Vashista, SS (IS) 
4. Shri Rakesh Kumar Singh, AS (P-1) 

129 
 
5. Shri Piyush Goyal, AS (NE, Admin CIC) 
6. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Jindal, AS (DM/PM) 
7. Shri Mritunjay Kumar Narayan, AS (P-II/RGI) 
8. Shri Nitesh Kumar Vyas, AS  
9. Shri Rupinder Singh, AS&FA 
10. Shri Rajeev Kumar, JS (LWE /Parl.) 
11. Shri Anil Subramaniam, JS (IS-I /F-I) 
12. Shri Prashant Lokhande, JS (JKL/WS) 
13. Shri Abhijit Sinha, JS (CTCR/P-II) 
14. Shri Niraj Kumar Bansod, JS (Coord/IS-II) 
15. Shri Mihir Kumar, JS (BM-I) 
16. Shri G. Parthasarthi, JS (CS/Public/Judicial) 
17. Shri Rajesh Gupta, JS (DM) 
18. Shri Praveen Kumar Rai, JS (UT) 
19. Shri Rakesh Kumar Pandey, JS(CIS) 
20. Ms. Pausumi Basu, JS (BM-II) 
21. Ms. Saheli Ghosh Roy, JS (IC) 
22. Shri B.C.  Joshi, JS (F-II) 
23. Ms. TCA Kalyani, Pr. CCA  
 
Representative of Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre 
1. Shri Rajesh Kumar, CEO 
  
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee  xxx1  xxx  xxx  the Committee would also hear the 
views of the Home Secretary and senior officers of the Ministry on the subject 
“Cyber Crime-Ramifications, Protection and Prevention”. 
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3.       The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and senior Officers of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs to the meeting. He reminded the Home Secretary that in 
the previous meeting of the Committee which was held to hear the views of the 
representatives of th e Ministry on the functioning of the Ministry, the Members of 
the Committee had desired to seek further clarification from the officials of the 
Ministry. Therefore, he may first provide clarifications to the Members on the 
                                                           
1 xxx       Relates to other matter.   

130 
 
functioning of the Ministry and thereafter make a presentation on the subject “Cyber 
Crime-Ramifications, Protection and Prevention”. He asked him to apprise the 
Committee about the initiatives that have been taken to strengthen the existing laws 
and rules available for controlling cyber crime; how far the existing laws have been 
successful in providing relief to the common man who has become victim of the 
cyber fraud or cyber crimes; coordination of the agencies under the MHA with 
police forces and various State agencies for handling cybe r crimes; and the best 
practices adopted by the other countries to control and prevent cyber crimes.  
  
4.       After the introduction of the representatives of the Ministry, the Home 
Secretary stated that the Ministry has submitted written replies to the  queries raised 
by the Members in the previous meeting of the Committee. If there are any 
additional questions about the replies, the Ministry is prepared to respond today or 
will provide written answers. The Chairman and Members agreed to this. Thereafter, 
the Home Secretary informed the Committee that country has an impressive 
telephone subscriber base, around 85% of tele -density, which indicates the 
proliferation of telecommunications across population. He stated that this has made a 
valuable contribution to economic development, but along with that the cyber crimes 
have also increased. Mobile phone has become a very powerful medium for 
committing such crimes. He briefly apprised the Committee about the scale of cyber 
crimes in the country and the steps a nd initiatives that have been taken by the 
Ministry to control these crimes and also highlighted the major achievements of the 
Ministry in this direction.  
  
5.       Thereafter, the CEO of the Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C) 
made a detailed pr esentation on the subject which,  inter-alia, provided information 
on cyber crimes cases; data of National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) from 2020 
to 2022; I4C data on cyber crime complaints from 2019 to 2024; Cyber helpline Call 
Centers operational in the St ates/UTs; cyber crime hotspots in the country; and 
various forms of cybercrime trending in 2024. He also apprised the Committee about 
the  initiatives taken to tackle cyber crimes which included establishing cyber   crime 
reporting portal- Citizen Financial Cyber Frauds Reporting and Management System 
(CFCFRMS); and Cyber Fraud Mitigation Centre (CFMC) at I4C to take real time 
action on high priority frauds and inter agency coordination; Sahyog portal  for 
removal of unlawful content from internet by authori sed agencies under IT Act, 
2000; capacity building initiatives to train judicial officers, prosecutors and police 
officers; setting up of labs for investigation; training set -up in States and UTs; 
launch of cyber commando courses across the country at vari ous institutions; 
Samanvay portal for inter agency coordination, threat monitoring and public 
awareness  programmes; adherence to RBI advisories on mule accounts; compilation 
of suspect registry for preventing cyber -enabled frauds; initiatives for addressi ng 
transnational cyber crimes; collaboration with various stakeholders in prevention of 
cyber crimes, etc.  

131 
 
  
6.       After the presentation, the Chairman and Members of the Committee 
expressed concerns on various issues pertaining to the subject and rais ed queries 
which inter-alia, related to the use of mobile phone which have been inactive for 
long time to make threat calls for cyber crime; recovery rate of money lost through 
cyber crime; punishment for SIM providers or Service providers, if a SIM card i s 
acquired without proper documentation; no relief for majority of financial fraud 
victims;  online gaming fraud; role of State Governments  to deal with cyber crimes; 
actions and cooperation of States in Sahyog and Samnavay portals, increase in cyber 
crimes beyond hotspots, need for cyber hygiene; awareness programmes; rise in 
crimes cases due to hate speech; training for police; posting of trained police 
personnel in cyber cells, issuing of advisories to State Governments, registration of 
immediate FIR; j urisdictional issues; decrease rate in charge sheet; conviction rates 
disclosure; requirement of evidence collection; money not being returned to the 
victim despite being recovered from the financial fraud due to tedious legal 
procedures; conviction rate i n cyber crimes; phishing frauds;   digital arrest; leakage 
of Aadhar data; use of artificial intelligence for blackmailing or tarnishing one’s 
image; provision to seek explanation from social media platforms regarding misuse 
of these platforms for committing cyber crime;  deep fake crimes; and preparation of 
any roadmap and strategies by Ministry to deal with cyber crime over the next 
decade. 
7.       The Members also sought information from the officials of the Ministry on the 
steps taken by the Ministry to  enhance data privacy, to prevent identity theft, to 
prevent misuse of artificial intelligence to commit cyber crime, challenges faced by 
the MHA to deal with transnational cyber crimes and support from international 
agencies to tackle such cyber crimes.  
8.       The Chairman and Members made some suggestions to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs that included strengthening of existing laws to deal with cyber 
crimes;  focused approach to control crimes in hotspots of cyber crime; increasing 
awareness programmes with more outreach especially district level and in rural 
areas;  enhancing capacity building programmes for police personnel; provision of 
giving incentives to individual as well as police personnel who help in resolving 
cyber crimes; sharing best practic es among peers to tackle cyber crimes; 
implementation of Kerala State's Cyber Dome   program in other States; posting of 
well trained police personnel in cyber cells; more effective resolution measures to 
deal with cyber crimes; creation of exclusive law fo r cyber crimes; reduce the limit 
of issuance of SIM Cards to individuals; incorporating awareness programmes in 
school education;   creation of dedicated law enforcement agency to tackle cyber 
crimes; necessity to legislate a new law for cyber crime; creati on of fast track court 
to clear pendency of cyber crime cases; etc.    
9.  At the conclusion, Chairman also mentioned about a cyber attack incident 
which he personally experienced. He also raised a query on how effective is cyber 

132 
 
crime helpline number for public and what follow up action is taken after receiving 
such calls. The Chairman emphasised the need for expansion of I4C   to the role of a 
coordinating agency with all the police, financial institutions, stakeholders  and  state 
agencies till the conclu sion of every cyber case reported to them. He also expressed 
his concerns about the misuse of social media, the contract conditions outlined with 
these organisations and the nature of its legal binding. 
10.    The Home Secretary and representatives of the Ministry replied to some of 
these queries. On the other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written replies 
to the Secretariat within 10 days.  
  
 (Witnesses then withdrew) 
11.     Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee discussed the future 
course of action of the Committee and the next schedule of the meetings to be held 
by the Committee on the subject. 
12.     A Verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13.     The meeting, then, adjourned at 5:00 p.m. 
   
  

133 
 
  
IX  
  
NINTH MEETING 
  
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 2 nd July, 2025 in the Main Committee Room, 
PHA, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
   
1. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal              -        Chairman 
2. Shri Haris Beeran 
3. Shri Ajay Makan 
4. Shri Nabam Rebia 
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
6. Shri G.K. Vasan 
   
 LOK SABHA 
  
7. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam  
9. Shri Saumitra Khan  
10. Smt. Delkar Kalaben Mohanbhai 
11. Shri Jai Parkash 
12. Shri Muhammed Hamdullah Sayeed 
13. Adv. Chandra Shekhar 
14. Smt. Supriya Sule 
15. Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti 
16. Shri Amrinder Singh Raja Warring 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Deputy Secretary 
  
  

134 
 
WITNESSES 
 
At 11.00 A.M. 
 
Representatives of Department of Financial Services (DFS) 
1. Shri M. Nagaraju, Secretary  
2. Shri Ashish Madhaorao More, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Parshant Kumar Goyal, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Abhijit Phukon, Economic Adviser    
5. Shri Sudhir Shyam, Economic Adviser 
6. Ms. Puspamitra Sahu, CGM, RBI 
7. Shri S S K Pradhan, CGM, RBI 
8. Shri Sibi Mathews, GM, RBI 
9. Shri C.S. Setty, Chairman, SBI 
10. Shri Debadatta Chand, MD&CEO, Bank of Baroda 
11. Shri Ashok Chandra, MD&CEO, Punjab National Bank 
12. Shri Prashant Mehra, Group Head, HDFC Bank 
13. Shri Manish Agrawal, Sr. Exec. VP,  HDFC Bank 
14. Shri Pravin Kumar, Chief Market Information Security and Data Protection 
Officer, NPCI 
15. Shri Hardik Dixit, Head-Fraud Risk Management, NPCI 
 
At 2.30 P.M. 
 
Representatives of Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
  
1. Dr. Neeraj Mittal, Secretary (Telecom) 
2. Shri Anand Khare, Member (Services) 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Sharma, DDG (AI&DIU) 
 
Representatives of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)  
  
1. Shri Anil Kumar Lahoti, Chairman 
2. Shri Atul Kumar Chaudhary, Secretary 
3. Shri Pushpendra Kumar Singh, Principal Advisor (QoS, IT&CA) 
4. Shri Deepak Sharma, Advisor (QoS- II) 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) and  CERT-In 
1. Shri S. Krishnan, Secretary, 
2. Shri Ajit Kumar, Joint Secretary, 
3. Shri Deepak Goel, Scientist-G, Cyber Law, 
4. Shri Sanjay Bahl, DG, CERT-In, 
5. Shri Notan Roy, Scientist-E, Cyber Law 

135 
 
6. Shri Girija Jaiswal, Scientist-D, Cyber Law 
7. Dr. Debjit Kar, Scientist-C, Cyber Law 
8. Shri Krishna Kumar B, Scientist-E, CERT-In  
  
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee.  xxx2  xxx  xxx Thereafter, he  informed the Members 
about the agenda of the meeting that Committee will have the presentation of 
Secretary, Department of Financial Services (DFS), along with representatives of 
Public/Private Banks, Secretary, Department of Telecommunications (DoT), 
Chairman,  Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI); Secretary, Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) and DG, Indian Computer 
Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) on the subject ‘Cyber Crime - 
Ramifications, Protection and Prevention’. 
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3.  The Chairman welcomed Secretary, Department of Financial Services (DFS), 
Chairman, SBI; Managing Directors of Punjab National Bank and Bank of Baroda; 
and representatives of HDFC Bank, RBI and National Payments Corporation of 
India (NPCI) to the meeting of the Committee. The Chairman initiated the 
discussion on above -mentioned subject and asked the Secretary, DFS to make a 
presentation on the subject. 
4.     After the introduction of the representatives of the organisations, t he Secretary, 
DFS briefed the Committee about the key points on the subject and thereafter, the 
representative of the Ministry made a presentation which inter alia  included 
information about the cyber security architecture in financial services sector; 
institutional framework and responsibilities of various Ministries/Organisations 
namely NSCS (National Security Council Secretariat), MHA, MeitY, DoT, NCPIIC 
(National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre) and DFS acting as 
nodal for BFSI (Bank ing Financial Services and Insurance); evolution of cyber 
threat landscape along with the growth of digital economy, penetration of internet, 
smartphone, digital payments, emerging techs - cloud computing, artificial 
intelligence, machine learning etc.; vol umes and value of domestic payment frauds 
in last two financial years;  cyber frauds reporting and management process in place 
i.e. CFCFRMS (Citizen Financial Cyber Frauds Reporting and Management 
System); customer centric support in unauthorized electronic  transactions; 
preventive regulatory measures taken by the DFS and related 
Ministries/Departments of Government; regulatory guidelines issued by RBI on 
cyber security and additional measures taken in this regard; regulatory measures by 
NPCI; remedial measures taken by banks on cyber financial frauds and action taken 
by banks on mule accounts in the financial year 2024 -25; etc. The representatives of 
SBI, PNB, Bank of Baroda and HDFC Bank also expressed their views on the 
subject. 
                                                           
2 xxx       Relates to other matter.   

136 
 
5.       After the presenta tion, the Chairman and Members raised few queries that 
inter alia included how the fraud is being defined by the organizations; actions taken 
by banks on mule accounts; challenges being faced by fintech platforms to report 
cyber frauds in police stations a nd any guidelines that can be shared with MHA to 
strengthen police stations to deal with cyber crimes; increase in crypto attacks, 
malware, ransomeware and internet of things attacks in past years; concrete steps to 
be taken to create a single unified system for measuring the true economic impact of 
these crimes to know the seriousness of the situation and to tackle it; primary 
bottlenecks preventing the universal real time implementation of the Citizen 
Financial Cyber Fraud Reporting And Management System across all financial 
institutions, especially smaller urban cooperative banks and Regional Rural Banks; 
the long -term research and development strategy for the banking sector to move 
from a reactive to predictive posture against AI -powered threat; any advi sories 
issued by DFS to banks and their fintech partners to deliver regional language alerts 
and scam warnings to better reach rural and first -time digital users; awareness in 
rural and interiors areas about cyber threat; steps to be taken   for upgrading banking 
infrastructure; actions to be taken against bank officials if mule accounts are opened 
with their connivance.; etc. 
6.     The representatives of DFS and other organisations replied to some of the 
queries raised by the Members. On other queries, the y were asked to furnish written 
replies to the Secretariat within five days. 
  
(The witnesses withdrew) 
(The Committee re-assembled at 02:30 p.m. to hear the views of Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), Telecom Regulatory Authority of India(TRAI), 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) and Computer 
Emergency Response Team –In (CERT-In) on the subject) 
7.        The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, DoT, Chairman, TRAI, Secretary, 
MeitY and DG, CERT -In and their officers to the meeting  of the Committee and 
asked them to make a presentation on the subject ‘Cyber Crime - Ramifications, 
Protection and Prevention’ one after the other.  
8.       At first, the representative of DoT informed the Committee about its  work to 
prevent the misuse o f telecommunication resources in cyber crimes or cyber frauds 
and made a detailed presentation on the subject. It inter alia included information on 
misuse of telecom resources in cyber frauds such as procuring SIM with fake 
documents, phishing attack, spoofed calls, misuse of telecom banking resources; the 
problems of different sectors and the need for coordination among them; initiatives 
taken by the DoT to deal with cyber crimes, i.e. development of integrated platform 
for stakeholders for information sharing related to misuse of telecom resources, 
launch of Artificial Intelligence and Facial Recognition (ASTR)    and 'Sanchar 
Saathi'; engagement with stakeholder such as law enforcement  agencies, banks, 
telecom service providers, SEBI, NPCI etc.   through 'Digital Intelligence Platform'; 

137 
 
new initiatives like ‘Financial Fraud Risk Indicator and Mobile Number Validation 
Service’ to know the ever changing modus operandi in cybercrime and how  to deal 
with it, the awareness programmes of the Department; etc. The Committee was also 
apprised about the Spoofed Calls Prevention System to deal with the problem of 
cross-border spoofed calls; collaboration between telecom and financial sector; 
Mobile Number Validation Service (MNVS) for handling mule accounts in digital 
and banking ecosystem and  digital intelligence platform called ‘Chakshu ’ to report 
fraud call.  
9.       Members of the Committee raised queries about spam calls and the initiatives 
taken by the Department to protect the customers, more awareness programmes for 
people living in small town and villages, mechanism to monitor prolonged calls 
especially in the light of rising cases of digital arrest.   The representatives the 
Department replied to the queries.  
10.     Thereafter, presentation was made by the representative of the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI).   They briefed the Committee about their 
methods to prevent cyber crime; framework for controlling spams such as 
registration of telemarketers and Principal Entities by the access providers, use of 
specially designated series numbers for making commercial calls, blockchain based 
ecosystem for customers’ preference, consent and complaint management ; salient 
features of late st amendments to TCCCPR (Telecom Commercial Communication 
Customer Preference Regulation); role of different agencies in prevention cyber 
crime; status of legitimate commercial communication; important measures taken by 
TRAI, Joint Committee of Regulators (JCoR) for c ross-sectoral collaboration with 
the other sector regulators and government departments to lay down the policies, 
practices and processes to detect and prevent spam and fraud; etc.   
11.     The Secretary, Ministry of Electronics and Informatio n Technology (MeitY) 
made a presentation on the legal provisions which relate to cyber crime and cyber 
security within the ambit of the Ministry. The Committee was informed about the 
major types of cyber crimes in India such as hacking and unauthorized acc ess, 
identity theft and phishing, online financial frauds and UPI frauds, obscene or 
offensive content dissemination, etc.; cyber crimes covered under the IT Act, 2000; 
protective legal framework under the IT Act, 2000 and under the DPDP Act, 2023 
(Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023); cyber security directions 2022 issued 
by CERT-In; cyber Crime in India addressed through various legislations;   Sahyog 
Portal developed by Indian Cybercrime Coordination Center (I4C),   MeitY's 
coordination with MHA and  DoT; advisories issued by MeitY; Virtual Private 
Network (VPN) ecosystem; security framework for CCTV systems in India; etc.     
12.     The Committee was also apprised about the initiatives taken by CERT -In 
which inter alia, included tracking of cyber sp ace through Cyber Swachhta Kendra 
(CSK), National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC), CTI (Cyber Threat 
Intelligence) & RVDP (Responsible Vulnerability Discloser Programme) for 
determining cyber threats to alert organisations and users; 24x7 incident respons e 

138 
 
help desk; implementation of Cyber Crisis Management Plan (CCMP) to counter 
cyber attacks and cyber terrorism; international cooperation; etc.   
13.     During the course of the meeting, the Members raised certain queries/issues 
about deepfake videos, ci rculation of obscene and defamatory material on various 
platforms; mechanism to check compliance of advisories issued by MeitY by banks 
and financial institutions; mandatory cyber security audit by all digital entities in 
critical sectors like information and infrastructure; etc. 
14.     The representatives of MeitY and CERT -In replied to some of the queries 
raised by the Chairman and Members. On other queries, they were asked to furnish 
written replies to the Secretariat within five days. 
 (Witnesses withdrew) 
15.     A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
16.      The meeting, then, adjourned at 5.00 P.M. 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

139 
 
X 
 
TENTH MEETING 
  
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 3 rd July, 2025 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground 
Floor, PHA, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
1.     Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal      -   Chairman 
2.     Shri Haris Beeran 
3.     Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
4.  Shri G.K.Vasan 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
5.    Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
6.    Shri Ashish Dubey 
7.    Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
8.    Shri Sumitra Khan 
9.    Smt. Delkhar Kalaben Mohanbhai 
10.    Shri Jai Parkash 
11.    Smt. Mala Roy 
12.    Shri Muhammed Hamdullah Sayeed 
13.    Adv. Chandra Shekhar 
14.    Smt. Supriya Sule 
15.    Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti 
16.    Shri Amrinder Singh Raja Warring  
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Deputy Secretary 
  
  

140 
 
WITNESSES 
 
At 11.00 A.M. 
  
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs 
  
1. Ms. Sripriya Ranganathan, Additional Secretary (Admn.) 
2. Ms. Pratibha Parkar, Joint Secretary (Parliament and Coordination) 
3. Shri Amit A. Shukla, Joint Secretary (Cyber Diplomacy) 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
  
1. Ms. Deepti Gaur Mukerjee, Secretary 
2. Shri Inderdeep Singh Dhariwal, Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Balamurugan D., Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Sidhil Sasi, Deputy Director General 
5. Shri Kiran Reddy T., Director 
6. Shri Samir Ashwin Vakil, Director, SFIO 
Representative of Financial Intelligence Unit-INDIA 
1. Shri Manish K. Hairat, Director 
2. Shri V. Ilancheliyan V., Joint Director 
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs 
  
Shri Rajesh Kumar, CEO, I4C 
  
At 2.30 P.M. 
  
Representatives of Central Bureau of Investigation 
  
1. Shri Praveen  Sood, Director 
2. Shri A.Y.V. Krishna,  Additional  Director 
3. Dr. Nitin  Deep Blaggan, Joint  Director  (Policy) 
4. Shri Abhinav Khar,  DIG, CBI  
  
Representatives of National Investigation Agency 
  
1. Shri Sadanand Date, Director General 
2. Shri Rakesh Aggarwal, Additional Director General 
3. Shri Santosh Rastogi, Inspector General 
4. Ms. K. B. Vandana, Inspector General 
  
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and apprised them that as per the agenda, the Com mittee will hear the 

141 
 
views of Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
(MCA),Financial Intelligence Unit, IND (FIU-IND), Central Bureau of Investigation 
(CBI) and National Investigation Agency (NIA) on the subject 'Cyber Crime – 
Ramifications, Protection and Prevention’.  
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3.       The Chairman welcomed the Additional Secretary, Ministry of External 
Affairs, Secretary Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Director, FIU and other senior 
officers of the Ministries to the meeting of the Committee.   The proceedings of the 
meeting commenced with the presentation from the MEA, followed by MCA, and 
then FIU-IND.  
4.       The AS, MEA gave a brief overview of the role of   the MEA in combating 
cyber crime at international level, thereafter the representative of the Ministry made 
a presentati on before the Committee which, inter-alia, included the information 
about the role of the Ministry in combating cyber crime and cyber threats; bilateral, 
regional and multilateral collaborations with other countries, including sharing best 
practices, cyber threat alert tools, response strategies and data protection measures; 
promoting cyber capacity building activities; cyber threat exercises, workshops, 
webinars, seminars, conferences, trainings on combating cyber crimes; coordinating 
negotiations and adop tion of the UN Convention against cyber crime;   cyber crime 
arising from South -East Asia countries affecting India; regular advisories by our 
Missions/Posts against illegal agents, social media recruitments, fake job rackets; 
regular coordination between MEA/Missions/Posts and MHA on these issues, etc. 
5.       The next presentation was made by the Secretary, MCA. She informed the 
Committee about the regulatory role of the Ministry in addressing cyber crime, 
Companies Act, 2013 and associated rules under it  to maintain secure digital 
records, backups, audit trails and protect data integrity; its role in preventing fake 
companies, identity theft and digital fraud; initiatives by the Ministry for secure e -
governance & digital filings; compliance with CERT -In, NCIIPC and MeitY cyber 
advisories; its responsibility in enabling investigation & enforcement like 
investigating complex frauds including cyber-enabled corporate frauds under various 
Sections of the Companies Act and   IT Act; tracking of shell companies; m ule 
accounts and siphoning of funds; inter -agency collaboration on cyber crime; actions 
for promoting cybersecurity awareness and professional training. 
6.        Thereafter, a presentation was made by the Director, FIU on the subject. He 
apprised the Comm ittee about FIU -IND activities in connection with combating 
cyber crime that inter alia included its role as the central national agency responsible 
for receiving, processing, analyzing and disseminating information relating to 
suspected financial transact ions; how it works closely with all the stakeholders in 
combating cyber frauds such as I4C (Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre), RBI 
(Reserve Bank of India), DFS (Department of Financial Services), DoT (Department 
of Telecommunications), State Law enforcement Agencies and the wider network of 
financial institutions. He also highlighted the FIU -IND’s role in regularly providing 

142 
 
all the financial institutions with feedback and guidance notes on the evolving trends 
in Anti-Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism( AML/CFT) risks 
with suggestions on mitigating cyber fraud risks; regular coordination with the banks 
and payment intermediaries to identify latest trends on cyber frauds; sharing of cyber 
crime related Operational Analysis (OA) report s related to suspected cyber frauds 
with law enforcement agencies.  
7.       The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some issues to the 
representatives of MEA pertaining to cyber attack by  some hostile countries , 
bilateral talks with different Sta tes to combat cyber crime; efforts for rescue and 
repatriation of victims of fake job rackets from some South East Asian countries, 
rising cases of digital arrest scam, technology initiatives to combat cyber crime 
incidents, difficulties being faced by the  Ministry while combating cyber crime, 
coordination between MHA and MEA to deal with cyber crime, cross -border cyber 
attacks as instruments of hybrid warfare, coordination mechanism of the Ministry 
with the friendly foreign Governments to track these down and then counterattack, 
cyber diplomacy through international cooperation, mechanism that need to be 
developed for statutory and legal framework to deal with perpetrator of cyber crime 
who is outside the territorial jurisdiction of the country; tangible ou tcomes of the 
bilateral dialogues with foreign countries in terms of operational cooperation in 
cyber crime investigation, information sharing or capacity building efforts; issues 
raised by the nation for United Nation Convention on cyber Crime. 
8.     The Chairman and Members of the Committee also raise some issues pertaining 
to the MCA that inter-alia included preventive measures to be taken against 
siphoning of money, particularly from financial institutions, by fraudulent/shell 
companies as well as comp anies which are duping the innocent citizens through 
investment and other schemes, need to strengthen SFIO (Serious Fraud Investigation 
Office) ;coordination between law enforcement agencies like MCA, SFIO, CERT -
IN, NIA etc.; any relation between mule acco unts and shell companies, number of 
corporate cyber cases transferred to CBI and conviction rate; whether MCA21 
application data enables the Ministry to get insights related to cyber crimes or cyber 
frauds committed through its applications, any existing s ystem for identifying the 
shell companies and initiating actions against such companies.  
9.     The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Corporate Affairs and 
Financial Intelligence Unit -IND replied to some of the queries raised by the 
Members. On other queries, they were asked to furnish written replies to the 
Secretariat within five days. 
(The witnesses withdrew) 
(The Committee re-assembled at 02:30 p.m. to hear the views of Central 
Bureau of Investigation and National Investigation Agency on the subject) 
10.       The Chairman welcomed the Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
and Director General of National Investigation Agency (NIA) and their Officers to 

143 
 
the meeting of the Committee. He asked the Director, CBI to make a presentation on 
the subject, followed by presentation from NIA.  
11.     After the introductions of the team of officers of CBI, the representative of the 
CBI made a presentation on the subject. He informed the Committee about CBI’s 
institutional setup for deal ing with cybercrimes, its specialized units dealing with 
cyber crime, i.e., a dedicated cybercrime branch, specialized anti human trafficking 
unit dealing with incidents of cyber slavery, specialized unit for dealing with 
offences related to online sexual abuse of children, INTERPOL Cooperation Unit, 
co-ordination with international agencies and acting as bridge between States for 
assisting cybercrime investigations, etc. He also informed about the cybercrime 
enabling factors such as increased connectivity,  digital economy, cases handled by 
CBI which are cross -jurisdictional involving serious interstate or international 
ramifications or of national interest; important cases taken up by CBI like critical 
infrastructure attacks affecting national security, tra nsnational organised frauds 
targeting Indian national, loan app scams, investment frauds, digital arrests, call 
centre scams referred by foreign countries, cases against cybercrime 
infrastructure;  CBI’s strategic approach to cybercrime; landmark cybercrim e 
investigations by handled by CBI, its investigative strengths, bottlenecks and legal 
challenges. 
12.       After the completion of the presentation by CBI, the representative of NIA 
made a presentation before the Committee which, inter-alia included the 
information about the mandate of the NIA, its power to investigate cyber -terrorism 
under Section 66F of the IT Act, 2000, which covers cyber acts intended to threaten 
unity, integrity, security, or sovereignty of India, causing terror, leadin g to harm, 
destruction, or disruption of essential services or critical infrastructure; number of 
cases of cyber terrorism investigated by NIA; strengths of NIA in cyberspace 
investigations which include systematic collection of data and its forensic analysis in 
every case, IPDR (Internet Protocol Detail Record) analysis, exclusively trained 
personnel within NIA, analysis of encrypted data and records, analysis of email IDs, 
encrypted platforms, browsers, crypto forensic tools to analyse flow of funds 
through cryptocurrency; challenges faced by law enforcement agencies. 
 13.       The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some queries which 
inter alia included issues pertaining to the States which have not given their consent 
to CBI to investigate cyb er crime under IT Act, 2000; shortage of adequate number 
of forensic labs, actions taken in this area in last five years; availability of SOP 
(Standard Operating Procedure) to coordinate among state police, cyber cells and 
central agencies like I4C, CBI, N IA while dealing with cyber crimes; shortage of 
investigating officers for dealing with cyber crimes; misuse of VPN networks; CBI 
being still governed under Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946, whether 
there is need for a new Act; the technology -driven solutions to deal with dark net, 
deep fake, mechanism to be one step ahead of cyber criminals; use of artificial 
intelligence and machine learning to resolve cyber crime; number of cyber cases 
investigated by CBI and how many led to convictions; etc.  

144 
 
14.     The queries were also raised pertaining to the NIA which included whether 
provision can be made to stop circulation of viral audio -videos made by designated 
terrorist containing anti national warnings through media platforms; whether media 
houses can be held liable for circulating such videos under the laws; quantum of 
terror funding in the country in comparison to the economy of the country; 
challenges being faced by NIA while registering cases on hate speech on social 
media that might radicalize people; number of cases pending trial in NIA courts and 
the specific number of cases pending due to the lack of prosecutors and judges; 
whether NIA gets inter -agency support and cross -border digital cooperation to deal 
with hoax bomb calls; etc. Members a lso made some suggestions that included use 
of advanced tools for dealing with cyber threats, provision of fast track courts to deal 
with cyber crimes. 
15.     The representatives of CBI and NIA replied to some of the queries raised by 
the Members. On othe r queries, they were asked to furnish written replies to the 
Secretariat within five days. 
                                                  (Witnesses withdrew) 
16.     A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
17.     The meeting adjourned at 04:24 p.m. 
 
  
  
  
 
  

145 
 
XI 
 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
  
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 10 th July, 2025 in Main Committee Room, PHA, 
New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
1.     Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal      -   Chairman 
2.     Shri Samik Bhattacharya 
3.     Shri Ajay Makan  
4.     Shri Neeraj Shekhar  
5.     Shri G.K.Vasan 
6.     Shri Sanjay Yadav 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
7. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
8. Shri Ashish Dubey 
9. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam  
10. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
11. Shri Jai Parkash      
12. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
13. Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
14. Smt. Supriya Sule  
15. Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti 
16. Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra 
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Deputy Secretary 
  
  

146 
 
WITNESSES 
 
At 11.00 A.M. 
  
Representatives of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
1. Shri Swaminathan J., Deputy Governor 
2. Shri Rohit Jain, Executive Director 
3. Smt. Puspamitra Sahu, Chief General Manager 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
1. Shri Rakesh Kumar Pandey, JS 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar, CEO, I4C 
  
At 2.30 P.M. 
  
Representatives of Department of School Education & Literacy  
  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar, Secretary 
2. Ms. A Srija, Economic Adviser, DoSE&L 
3. Sh. Rahul Singh, Chairman, CBSE 
  
Representatives of Department of Higher Education 
  
1. Shri Syed Ekram Rizwi, Joint Secretary  
2. Prof. T.G. Sitharam, Chairman, AICTE 
3. Dr. M.M. Waware, Joint Secretary, UGC 
  
Representatives of Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
 
1. Shri Magesh Ethirajan, Director General 
2. Shri Niranjan Vaishnaw, Registrar 
3. Dr. Ch. A. S. Murty, Scientist - G & CISO 
4. Shri Vinu Kumar  A R, Scientist - G 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
1. Shri Rakesh Kumar Pandey, JS 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar, CEO, I4C 
  
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee meeting 
and appreciated the contributions made by them in the last two meetings of the 
Committee held on 2 nd and 3 rd July, 2025. Thereafter, he informed the Members 
about the current agenda of the meeting that the Committee will   hear the views of 

147 
 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI); Department of School Education & Literacy and 
Department of Higher Education of Ministry of Edu cation; and Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing (C -DAC) on the subject 'Cyber Crime – 
Ramifications, Protection and Prevention’. 
 (On arrival of witnesses) 
3.      The Chairman welcomed the Deputy Governor and other senior officers of the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and asked him to make a presentation on the 
subject.  The proceedings of the meeting then commenced with a presentation on the 
subject by the representative of the RBI.  
4.      The presentation, inter-alia included information about the RBI’s proactive 
and adaptive approach in combating cyber frauds like strengthening the regulatory 
and supervisory frameworks across all Regulated Entities, supervisory measures and 
enforcement actions, stakeholder engagement - collaborating with various 
stakeholders such as MHA, Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Telecommunications and 
various law enforcement agencies, customer service, awareness initiatives etc.; 
regulatory measures like master direction on Know Your Customer (KYC) and fraud 
risk management, cyber security framework in banks, master circular on customer 
service in banks, Reserve Bank – Integrated Ombudsman Scheme, 2021 and 
prevention of financial frauds perpetrated by using voice calls and SMS. The 
Committee was also apprised about the regular inspections and steps undertaken by 
the RBI such as onsite/offsite surveillance covering KYC/AML (Anti -Money 
Laundering) and fraud monitoring processes in banks, as part of regular inspections; 
monitoring cash withdrawal thro ugh overseas ATMs and ATMs outside state of 
customer’s location; putting in place IP based transaction monitoring; monitoring of 
current accounts of sole proprietary firms with high transaction volume; the major 
communications sent by RBI to the banks to d eter cyber-enabled frauds; advice to 
banks to monitor the social media and to act on suspicious messages; advisory 
issued to the banks/Financial Institutions to integrate with Financial Fraud Risk 
Indicator (FRI) system developed by the DoT; payment relate d security measures; 
supervisory vigil and enforcement actions; engagement with stakeholders; 
MuleHunter.ai- a supervised machine learning (ML) model designed for near -real-
time identification of mule accounts; awareness and education initiatives of RBI; etc.  
5.       The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some queries which 
inter alia  included seeking information on digital payment intelligent platform; 
financial literacy programs; mule accounts and MuleHunter.ai; issues pertaining to 
Cyber Secu rity Cell in RBI; financial literacy programs; outreach of these 
programmes among masses; publicizing of quiz progrmmmes organized for 
students; firewalling of fintech companies from cyber frauds, crimes through digital 
payment; mule accounts and MuleHunte r.ai; awareness programmes in villages and 
small hamlets; fraud financial transactions; frequency and enforcement of KYC done 
by banks; high value loan frauds; high value digital payment frauds; complaints 
registered in NCRP portal; integration of solution s received through HaRBInger 

148 
 
Hackathon; implementation of 1600 and 140 number series for banking related calls; 
high value loan frauds and high value digital payment frauds, specific supervisory 
actions to address these divergent risk profiles; the responsibility of account holder if 
he receives money in his account without his knowledge or permission.  
6.     The representatives of the RBI replied to some of the queries raised by the 
Chairman and Members of the Committee. On other queries, they were asked to 
furnish written replies to the Secretariat within five days. 
(The witnesses withdrew) 
 [The Committee re-assembled at 02:30 pm to hear the views of Department of 
School Education & Literacy (DoESL) and Department of Higher Education 
(DoHE) of Ministry of Education and Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing(C-DAC)] 
  
7.       The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of School Education & 
Literacy, Joint Secretary, Department of Higher Education and Director General, C -
DAC and the other Office rs to the meeting of the Committee. He asked the 
Secretary, Department of School Education & Literacy to give the presentation on 
the subject, to be followed by Department of Higher Education of Ministry of 
Education and thereafter C-DAC.  
8.       After a brief introduction of the team of officers of the Department of School 
Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education, the Secretary, made a presentation 
before the Committee which, inter-alia included the information about the increased 
vulnerability of chi ldren from digital exposure; effects of cybercrime on physical, 
emotional and mental well -being of children; measures taken by the Department to 
ensure cyber security - regular awareness and training programs on cyber safety for 
teachers, staff and officers , installation of firewalls, antivirus software and threat 
detection tools in networks, access control to only authorized people for sensitive 
school data, use of strong passwords and multi -factor login systems, incident 
response, integration of cyber safe ty and digital citizenship topics in   curriculum, 
Ministry guidelines on School Safety and Security (2021). The presentation also 
covered information about introduction of cyber safety in NCERT curriculum in 
class 9 to 12 syllabus and textbooks, other meas ures initiated by NCERT for cyber 
safety like guidelines, booklets and brochures regarding cyber safety & security for 
schools, teachers, students and parents; development of online courses on safety in 
cyber space; cyber security initiatives by CBSE; etc. 
9.       After the completion of the presentation by DoSE&L, the representative of 
Department of Higher Education (DoHE) made a presentation before the Committee. 
He informed the Committee about the ramifications of cybercrime on students i.e. 
excessive a nd unregulated use of internet, mental health issues, academic decline, 
loss of privacy and identity theft, social isolation. He also informed about the Ccber 
security curriculum developed and introduced by the UGC and AICTE - around 
649+ Cyber security co urses were offered in technical institutions; 15 courses on 

149 
 
cyber security were hosted on Swayam portal (a tech -enabled learning platform of 
MoE); development of programmes for capacity building of teachers and students by 
the Department which inter alia i ncluded training of the Faculties/Teachers under 
Malaviya Mission by IIT Madras, Faculty Development Programme(FDPs) and 
cyber security internships for students  by AICTE. The presentation also covered the 
initiatives undertaken to promote awareness on cyb er security such as cyber 
Jaagrookta Diwas, cyber clubs, webinars, workshops, digital poster competition, 
hygiene handbook, UGC’s Chetna Lecture Series by experts on themes like cyber 
hygiene in HEIs (Higher Education Institutions), cyber security, cyber l aw and AI 
trends in HEIs, busting digital arrest, cyber etc. 
10.     The final presentation of the meeting was made by the Director -General, C-
DAC. He gave information about the driving forces behind cybercrimes and the 
most prevalent cybercrimes such as p hishing & QR -code scams, data breaches, 
online investment & trading related scams, digital arrest scams, SIM swap/SIM 
closure frauds, online harassment/abuse, fake job scams, crypto fraud etc. The 
Committee was also apprised about some solutions developed by C-DAC to counter 
cybercrimes i.e. deepfake detection tool; M -Kavach 2 - a comprehensive mobile 
device security solution addressing threats in Android mobile devices; Vishleshak: 
mobile security & threat analysis platform; Parikshan: insightful mobile app security 
platform; Praamaanik- a solution powered by blockchain technology to verify app 
origins; Security Testing and Evaluation Lab for the Internet of Things (STEaLTh). 
The presentation also contained information on security audit categories and 
standards followed by C -DAC; Information Security Education and Awareness 
(ISEA) program and future roadmap towards protection and prevention of cyber 
crime by C-DAC.  
11.     After these presentations, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised 
queries on  various issues pertaining to the number of schools which have been 
covered under digital awareness programme; system to be developed to ensure tab 
facilities provided to young school children be used for education purpose only, it 
should not be misused; m easures to be taken after cyber crime is committed against 
minors; provisions for counselling of child post becoming victim of cyber crime; 
sensitization programme for minors so that they may not become   perpetrators of 
cyber crime themselves; availability  of cyber awareness curriculum in regional and 
local languages in various States; capacity building programmes for teachers, 
awareness programme below ninth standard school students; percentage of teacher 
aware about cyber crime and cyber security; risk of  cognitive skill impairment 
among young children due to availability of AI and cyber tool facilities; cyber 
bullying, participation of universities in cyber security awareness programmes; 
courses offered in cyber security in higher education, promotion of courses in cyber 
security, country’s position in cyber literacy; mechanism for prevention and 
mitigation of cyber crimes; compulsory courses for every student to become cyber 
literate; development of forensic tools by C -DAC, like Deepfake detection tool; M -

150 
 
Kavach 2, a mobile -based application to detect threat to mobile phone by other 
downloaded applications.  
  
12.     The representatives of Department of Higher Education and Department of 
School Education & Literacy (Ministry of Education) and C-DAC replied to some of 
the queries raised by the Members. On other queries, they were asked to furnish 
written replies to the Secretariat within five days.  
                                                  (The witnesses withdrew) 
13.     A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
14.     The meeting adjourned at 05:00 p.m. 
  

151 
 
XII 
  
 TWELFTH  MEETING 
  
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 11 th July, 2025 in Committee Room ‘2’,   Block-A, 
PHA-Extension Building, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
1. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal              -        Chairman 
2. Shri Samik Bhattacharya 
3. Shri Ajay Makan 
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri G.K. Vasan 
  
  LOK SABHA 
  
6. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
7. Shri Ashish Dubey 
8. Shri Saumitra Khan 
9. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
10. Shri Jai Parkash 
11. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
12. Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
13. Smt. Supriya Sule 
14. Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti 
15. Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra 
16. Shri Amrinder Singh Raja Warring 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Deputy Secretary 
  
  

152 
 
WITNESSES 
 
At 11.00 A.M. 
  
Representatives of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) 
1. Shri Kamlesh Chandra Varshney, Whole Time Member 
2. Shri Jeevan Sonparote, Executive Director 
3. Shri Sunil Kadam, Executive Director 
4. Shri Avneesh Pandey, Chief General Manager 
5. Shri Amit Pradhan, Regional Director, SEBI, NRO 
  
Representatives of National Stock Exchange (NSE) 
1. Shri  Rajesh Thapar, Chief Information Security Officer 
 
Representatives of National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) 
1. Shri Viswanath K., Chief Risk Officer  
2. Shri Kunal Kalawatia, Chief Products 
3. Shri Hardik Dixit, Head FRM 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
1. Shri Rajesh Kumar, CEO, I4C 
2. Shri Rakesh Kumar Pandey, JS 
  
At 2.30 P.M. 
  
Representatives of National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection 
Centre (NCIIPC) 
 
1. Shri Navin Kumar Singh, Director General 
2. Shri Lokesh Garg, DD  
3. Mohammad Zaki Ahmad, DD 
4. Shri Akhilesh B. Variar, Director  
  
Representatives of National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
1. Shri Alok Tiwari, Deputy Director General 
2. Shri Naveen Kumar Deputy Director General  
3. Shri Hitain Singh, Scientist B 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
1. Shri Rajesh Kumar, CEO, I4C 
2. Shri Rakesh Kumar Pandey, JS 

153 
 
  
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and apprised them that as per the agenda, the Committee will he ar the 
views of representatives of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), National 
Stock Exchange (NSE), National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), National 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) and National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) on the subject 'Cyber Crime – Ramifications, Protection 
and Prevention’.  
 (On arrival of witnesses) 
3.  The Chairman welcomed Whole Time Member, Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI); Chief Information Security Officer, National Stock 
Exchange (NSE) and Chief Risk Officer, National Payments Corporation of India 
(NPCI) and other senior   officers to the meeting of the Committee.   The proceeding 
of the meeting was commenced with the presentation of the SEBI followed by NSE 
and thereafter, NPCI. 
4.       After the introduction of the representatives of the organisations, the Whole 
Time Member, SEBI gave a brief overview of the role of SEBI in combating cyber 
crime.  He informed the Committee about how the innocent retail investors are often 
subjected to fraud by using social media platforms; a series of measures that aims at 
enhancing investor protection and market integrity; as a policy move, SEBI has 
prohibited registered intermediaries from associating with unregistered 
“fininfluencers” to curb financial misinformation.   He also informed that on the 
enforcement front, SEBI has conducted inspections and search -and-seizure 
operations in cases of market manipulation and expanded investor awareness 
initiatives through intermediaries and m utual fund associations. He mentioned that 
to counter fraudulent investment software apps (applications), SEBI has introduced 
an optional centralized fee collection system for registered advisors and is going to 
introduce a UPI -based validation mechanism t o ensure investor funds are routed 
only to SEBI -registered entities. The Committee was apprised that the lists of 
legitimate investment software apps are now available on NSE and BSE websites, 
and SEBI is working with app stores and social media platforms to implement 
verified identification marks. It was also informed that SEBI has a cybersecurity and 
resilience framework for all registered intermediaries, with safeguards, and to secure 
IT system whenever there is a cyber attack.  
5.       The next present ation was made by the Chief Information Security Officer, 
National Stock Exchange (NSE). The presentation covered in detail about key 
aspects of the NSE which included information  on Indian capital market ecosystem; 
layers of control which are put up to m ake it resilient and available for all the 
investors and customers at all points of time; technology operations initiatives i.e. 
intelligent monitoring and quick incident response, automated operations, 
identification of single point of failure, contingenc y drill, seamless switchover, 
process improvements to better efficiencies, increase flexibility and enhancement 

154 
 
of  IT service performance; technology infrastructure of NSE with state of the art co-
location facility, Multi -tier security with appropriate se gmentation fully resilient 
Infrastructure, fault tolerant servers with an uptime guarantee of 99.999%, etc.   He 
also informed about the threat intelligence backdrop, specific to capital markets; the 
potential impact of cybercrime on market integrity; globa l threat updates and 
evolving attack vector patterns over time like DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service), 
ransomware, data based attacks, application attacks;  supply chain attacks; cyber 
security tools of NSE and its cyber security framework. 
6.       After the completion of the presentation by NSE, the representative of 
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) made a presentation before the 
Committee. The Committee was informed about the various key aspects, including 
the role of NPCI in the payments ecosystem and an overview of the Unified 
Payments Interface (UPI) landscape which has played a significant role in driving 
digital payments and it accounts for roughly 80% of all payments nowadays.   The 
representative also briefed the Committee on prevaili ng scams, particularly current -
day frauds and investment scam flows, challenges in the system and nuances of 
money movement. The Committee was apprised of the actions taken by NPCI to 
combat fraud, like device binding and 2FA, cooling period & Debit/Credit  side 
limits, a real time Fraud Risk Monitoring (FRM) Solution with AI/ML based risk 
scoring, close coordination with agencies like I4C, FIU, DoT, IB, Banks, fintechs 
and Law enforcement agencies, sending information on suspicious MULE accounts 
to Banks, implementation of an early warning system for UPI payments. Further, the 
Committee was informed about the ongoing fraud awareness campaigns and media 
engagement initiatives aimed at educating users and enhancing security. The 
presentation was concluded with  an emphasis on targeted awareness campaigns, 
collaborative efforts for strengthening the digital payments ecosystem and stringent 
law to ensure convictions and create a deterrent for fraudsters.  
7.       After the presentation, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised 
some issues that inter-alia included seeking clarification pertaining to unregistered 
identities promoted on social media platforms; unregistered influencers; fake 
investment apps whether SEBI proposed to take any legal action on such platforms; 
any cyber drills conducted by SEBI in collaboration with major financial 
institutions; awareness programmes for investors from villages and small towns; 
action against shell companies. The information was also sought regarding any plan 
of SEBI to strengthen its surveillance of social media platforms which are 
increasingly being used by pump and dump schemes; plan to improve infrastructure 
status of local offices of SEBI in small cities;  whether SEBI has found any cyber 
security weakness or loophole that high frequency trading firms could use to unfairly 
affect the market, steps taken by SEBI to keep a check on such firms. The 
representative of NSE was asked whether NSE has implemented an y partnership 
with cyber security firms or any academic institutions to build threat intelligence or 
R&D in market security.  During the meeting queries were raised about NPCI’s 
coordination with banks and RBI in case of cyber frauds involving Bhim, UPI or  

155 
 
Rupee platforms; matters related to linking UPI and demat accounts; the provisions 
to deal with authorized push payment frauds and mule accounts and similarly, the 
responsibility of account holder if he receives money in his account without his 
knowledge or permission. 
8.  The representatives of SEBI, NSE and NPCI replied to some of the queries 
raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. On other queries, they were 
asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within five days.  
(The witnesses withdrew) 
(The Committee re-assembled at 02:30 p.m. to hear the views of National 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) and National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) on the subject). 
9.     The Chairman welcomed the Director General, Na tional Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC), and Deputy Director General, National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) and other senior officers to the meeting of the Committee 
and asked them to make a presentation on the subject ‘Cyber Crim e - Ramifications, 
Protection and Prevention’ one after the other.  
 10.     After the introductions of the team of officers from NCIIPC, representative of 
the Centre made a presentation before the Committee. The presentation covered an 
overview of NCIIPC, including its mandate and functions. It inter- alia included the 
significance of protection of Critical Information Infrastructure (CII); the critical 
sectors identified in India; various CII protection -related activities and support from 
the NCIIPC such as capacity building/raising cyber security awareness, sharing 
vulnerabilities/ threats, risk assessment and practical suggestions for mitigation, 
cross sectoral exchange/ dissemination of best practices, etc. The Committee was 
also apprised about the Auto mated Threat Dissemination Platform (ATDP), an 
indigenously developed platform for sending real time cyber threat intelligence to 
more than 180 organisations; incident response activities; cyber security gap 
analysis; and risk assessments undertaken by NCI IPC for Critical Sector Entities 
(CSE); new protection strategies, mechanisms developed for monitoring CIIs and 
the Sectoral Coordinator -based System for monitoring critical sectors; constitution 
of the Information Security Steering Committee (ISSC) by org anisations having 
protected systems.  
11.     At the end, the DDG, NIC apprised the Committee that the NIC provides 
technology-driven solutions to enhance capacities at Central, State, and District 
levels, offering services through its organizational struc ture, and services/enterprise 
level applications to many sectors in Government of India & State Governments. 
The presentation on the subject also highlighted information on National Data 
Centres and the Government of India’s National Cloud initiative- MeghRaj, aimed at 
optimizing e -Governance; Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
Network; National Knowledge Network - multi-gigabit PAN -India 
network;  maintaining a secure digital environment for government infrastructure. It 
was informed that NIC's cyber security framework covers computer network, 

156 
 
sensitive information and data, software applications, individual devices, data and 
services in cloud environments, managing user access to systems & data. NIC 
implements a comprehensive cybersecurity strat egy through technical, 
administrative, and physical measures, as well as continuous maintenance, 
monitoring, and deployment of specialized tools, ensuring robust protection for 
government IT infrastructure. 
12.     The Chairman and Members of the Committee  also raised several issues 
relating to the NCIIPC, which inter alia included recent vulnerability assessments; 
details of cyber attacks on critical infrastructure —such as their origin, mitigation 
efforts; and response strategies; cyber intrusions/attacks by some hostile countries 
and changes in cyber threat levels and mitigation measures to counter these attacks. 
Updates were sought on data protection protocols, safeguards against insider threats 
and the role of AI in countering such risks. Additionally, q ueries were also raised 
about NCIIPC’s balance between intelligence gathering and collaborative protection, 
adherence to quarterly ISSC meetings by 114 notified entities, measurable 
improvements in cyber security, and frameworks for evaluating cyber maturi ty 
levels in these organizations. 
13.       The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some issues with the 
representative of National Informatics Centre (NIC) regarding clearance and 
approval process for infrastructure upgrades and cyber security pr otocols; whether 
the existing data centres are adequate; suggestions for expansion to meet growing 
cyber resilience needs. Clarification was also sought on whether existing data 
centres function as data recovery centres.  
  
14.     The representatives of NCIIPC, NIC and MHA replied to some of the queries 
raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. On other queries, they were 
asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within five days.  
                                                (The witnesses withdrew) 
15.     A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
16.     The meeting adjourned at 04:56 p.m. 
  

157 
 
XIII 
  
 THIRTEENTH   MEETING 
  
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 22 nd July, 2025 in Committee Room ‘C’, PHA, 
New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
1. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal              -        Chairman 
2. Shri Haris Beeran  
3. Shri Samik Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Ajay Makan 
5. Shri Derek O' Brien 
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri Sanjay Yadav  
  
  LOK SABHA 
  
8. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai  
9. Shri Ashish Dubey 
10. Shri Naveen Jindal 
11. Shri Saumitra Khan 
12. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato  
13. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran  
14. Smt. Delkar Kalaben Mohanbhai 
15. Shri Jai Parkash  
16. Shri B Y Raghavendra  
17. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
18. Shri Muhammed Hamdullah Sayeed  
19. Adv. Chandra Shekhar  
20. Smt. Supriya Sule  
21. Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Deputy Secretary 
  

158 
 
WITNESSES 
  
Domain Experts   
  
1. Dr. Pavan Duggal, Founder & Chairman, International Commission on Cyber 
Security Law and Advocate, Supreme Court of the India; and 
2. Shri Trishneet Arora, CEO, TAC Security 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
Ms. Roopa M., Inspector General 
  
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and stated that the Committee has already heard the views of the related 
Ministries and some Organisations on the subject 'Cyber Crime – Ramifications, 
Protection and Prevention’. He apprised them that as per the agenda, in the present 
meeting, the Committee will hear the views of two domain experts on the subject, 
namely Dr. Pavan Duggal, Founder & Chairman, Internat ional Commission on 
Cyber Security Law and Shri Trishneet Arora, CEO of TAC Security who have been 
invited to share their views on the subject.  
 (On arrival of witnesses) 
3.       The Chairman welcomed Dr. Pavan Duggal, Founder & Chairman, 
International Commission on Cyber Security Law and Shri Trishneet Arora, CEO of 
TAC Security to the meeting of the Committee and requested them to present their 
views on the subject 'Cyber Crime – Ramifications, Protection and Prevention’.  The 
proceedings of the meeting commenced with the presentation by Dr. Pavan Duggal. 
4.       Dr. Pavan Duggal informed the Committee that cyber crimes has become an 
epidemic and it is thriving due to fear and panic among general public and these 
factors are being misused by cyber crim inals to commit frauds. He made a detailed 
presentation before the Committee and informed the Committee about the best 
practices adopted by major countries in preventing cyber crime which includes 
robust laws & public -private collaboration; harmonized regu lations & focus on 
privacy; comprehensive strategy & cyber hygiene culture; intelligence -driven 
defence & innovation. The Committee was also provided information on cyber 
crime caseloads and convictions; international nature of cybercrime & preventive 
steps; global Treaties and Conventions; international agencies in cybercrime 
prevention; global cybercrime bodies & coalitions; best practices by Indian States 
and Police agencies like cybercrime portals & helplines, cybercrime training & 
capacity building, sp ecialized units & policies, use of advanced 
technology;  limitation of IT Act, 2000 to deal with cyber crime; challenges in 
enforcement & obtaining evidence; role of Government Ministries in preventing 
cyber crimes; etc. 
  

159 
 
5.       To strengthen cybercrime  legislation, he suggested that a dedicated 
comprehensive cybercrime Law is to be formulated to consolidate offences and 
expand definitions for modern crimes like ransomware, DoS (denial of Service), and 
phishing, explicitly criminalize modern cybercrimes and provide graded 
punishments for organized or repeat offenders and mandate cybersecurity audits and 
breach disclosure for companies, with penalties for negligence. He also suggested 
for aligning with global cybercrime frameworks, incorporating provisions  like 
expedited data preservation and cross-border data sharing into Indian laws, ensuring 
crime definitions match global standards for easier cooperation.   Other suggestions 
inter alia  included specialized cybercrime courts; strengthening of data protecti on 
and privacy; need for legislation on misuse of Artificial Intelligence; strengthen 
provisions for courts to award restitution or compensation to cybercrime victims as 
part of sentencing; strengthening of legal & regulatory framework; capacity building 
for law enforcement agencies; public awareness and digital literacy; improving 
cyber hygiene across organizations; etc.  
6.       The next presentation was made by Shri Trishneet Arora, while making his 
presentation he highlighted the financial frauds, Stat e-sponsored cyber threats by 
hostile neighbouring countries; threats to critical infrastructures; technology gaps; 
involvement of multiple ministries and organisations to deal with cyber frauds, cyber 
threats and cyber security; need for comprehensive sing le nodal agency to deal with 
matters related to cyber security; best practices adopted by major countries, like 
creation of cyber security ministry. He suggested there is a need to assess the current 
state of cyber security of nationwide critical infrastru ctures, like, energy, power 
grids, ports, airports, defence system, etc.   He also suggested that only Indian origin 
cyber auditing companies be considered for auditing of national critical 
infrastructures, creation of an organisation to help victims especi ally women who 
become victims of cyber crime, online harassment; nation -wide cyber awareness 
campaign; provision for enforcement of cyber insurance for common citizens in case 
one falls victim to cyber frauds; provision for cyber ambulance facility, etc.  
7.       The Chairman and Members raised some queries and sought clarification 
pertaining to best global practices for victim compensation, responsibility of banks 
in case of financial frauds, need for improvement and changes in existing laws; 
strengthening of infrastructure, sufficient funds; very low conviction rate; children 
becoming victims of cyber crimes, best mechanism to tackle this menace and 
increase conviction, cyber attacks from hostile countries, capacity building of 
personnel of law enforcemen t agencies, cyber army and commandos for cyber 
security, time taken by Indian law enforcement agencies and US agencies to 
investigate cyber crimes, provision of cyber insurance and cyber ambulance, cyber 
threats to power grids, etc. 
8.     The experts replied to some of the queries raised by the Members and on other 
queries, they were asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within a week. 
                                                  (Witnesses withdrew) 

160 
 
9.       A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.     The meeting adjourned at 5:10 p.m. 
  
 
 
  
  
  

161 
 
XIV 
  
 FOURTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
met at 9.15 A.M. on Monday, the 18 th August, 2025 in Committee Room - 2, Block 
A, PHA Extension Building, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal              -        Chairman 
2. Shri Haris Beeran  
3. Shri Samik Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Ajay Makan 
5. Shri Nabam Rebia 
6. Shri G.K. Vasan  
  LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri Naveen Jindal 
10. Shri Saumitra Khan 
11. Smt. Delkar Kalaben Mohanbhai 
12. Shri Jai Parkash  
13. Shri B Y Raghavendra  
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
15. Shri Muhammed Hamdullah Sayeed  
16. Adv. Chandra Shekhar  
17. Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra  
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Deputy Secretary  
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them of the 
agenda of the sitting, i.e., to consider and adopt the draft 254 th Report of the 
Committee on the subject “Cyber Crime – Ramifications, Protection and 
Prevention.” 
3.      Taking up the draft Report for consideration and adoption, the Chairman 
invited Members to share their views, if they so desired.   Some Members expressed 

162 
 
their views on the recommendations, raised certain issues, and requested time for 
submission of dissent notes. 
4.       Prior to the adoption of the Report, certain Members suggested some changes 
in the recommendations which were discussed in detail.  
5.  Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft 254th Report. 
6.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical or 
factual corrections in t he Report and undertake, if necessary, further vetting in the 
light of suggestions received from Members and finalize the date of 
presentation/laying of the Report in the current Session of Parliament and to 
nominate Members for presentation/laying thereof  in the Rajya Sabha and the Lok 
Sabha.  
7.  The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the 
deliberations and for their constructive suggestions to improve and strengthen the 
framework for combating cyber crime. He also commended the  Committee on the 
successful completion of its work and concluded the proceedings. 
8.       The meeting, then, adjourned at 10.37 AM. 
  
  
  
***** 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 