Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 420
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON  HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED FOURTEENTH REPORT
Working conditions in Border Guarding Forces (Assam Rifles,
Sashastra Seema Bal, Indo-Tibetan Border Police and
Border Security Force)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (vi)-(xii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-109
Chapter I: Introduction.................................................................................. 1-2
Chapter II: Assam Rifles (AR)........................................................................ 3-23
Chapter III: Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)........................................................... 24-46
Chapter IV: Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)................................................ 47-67
Chapter V: Border Security Force (BSF)......................................................... 68-96
Chapter VI: Issues Common to the Border Guarding Forces............................. 97-109
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................... 1 10-137
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 139-158

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Pratap Keshari Deb
#3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
@6. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
%9. Vacant
10. Shri R.K. Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
12. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
20. Shri Kaushal Kishore
21. Shri Ashwini Kumar
22. Shri P . Nagarajan
(i)
#Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi nominated w.e.f. 2nd June 2018 consequent upon the vacancy arose on the expiration of term
of Shri K. Rahman Khan from the membership of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2018
@Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia, Member, Rajya nominated w.e.f. 9th July, 2018 in place of Shri Derek O'Brien
% Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh, Member, Rajya Sabha resigned from the Membership of DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.f. 2nd
June, 2018

(ii)
*23. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
24. Shri Dilip Patel
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
26. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
27. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
28. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
30. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
$31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
*Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani, MP , Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f.  6th April, 2018 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of
Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda, MP, Lok Sabha to Committee on Industry
$ Vacant consequent upon resignation of Shri B. Sriramulu from Lok Sabha Seat ( i.e., Bellary Parliamentary Constituency of
Karnataka) w.e.f.  18th May, 2018.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st  September, 2018)
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
3. Shri Pratap Keshari Deb
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
8. Shri R.K. Sinha
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan
12. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Anupam Kher
19. Shri Ashwini Kumar
20. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
21. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed
22. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
23. Shri Nagarajan P.
24. Shri Jagdambika Pal
(iii)

25. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
26. Shri Dilip M. Patel
27. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil
29. Shri Ashok Gajapathi Raju Pusapati
30. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
31. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Fourteenth Report on 'Working Conditions in Border Guarding Forces (Assam Rifles, Sashastra Seema Bal,
Indo-Tibetan Border Police and Border Security Force)'.
2. The Committee, in its meeting held on 24th October, 2017 decided to examine the subject 'Working
conditions in Central Armed Police Forces' and in its meetings held on 18th January, 21st May and 26th
June, 2018 heard the views of the representatives of MHA and Directors General of various CAPFs,
including Assam Rifles, SSB, ITBP and BSF. The Committee decided to give two reports on the subject;
one on the Working Conditions in Border Guarding Forces viz. Assam Rifles, SSB, ITBP and BSF; and
another on the Working Conditions in the remaining forces viz. NSG , CRPF and CISF.
3. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, has mainly relied upon the following
documents:-
(i) Background Notes furnished by the Ministry for various meetings;
(ii) Presentations made by Home Secretary, DGs of respective CAPFs and other officials during
various meetings of the Committee;
(iii) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the questionnaires on the subject sent
by the Secretariat; and
(iv) Replies to the queries/comments/suggestions of the Members, raised during the Committee's
meetings, as furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 25th October, 2018 and adopted
the same.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. For further convenience, abbreviations used
in the report have been compiled in a table under the Acronyms section.
   N
EW D ELHI; P . CHIDAMBARAM
25th October, 2018 Chairman,
Kartika 3, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
2 I/C : Second-in-Command
AR : Assam Rifles
AOR : Areas of Responsibility
ARGIS : Assam Rifles Group Insurance Scheme
ACP : Ambush cum Patrol
AMC : Army Medical Corps
AP AR : Annual Performance Assessment Report
A WO : Assistant W elfare officer
ARMC : Assam Rifle Medical Corps
ARD : Automatic Rescue Device
ARTC&S : Assam Rifles Training Centre & School
ARBF : Assam Rifle Benevolent Fund
ADG : Additional Director General
ASI : Assistant Sub-Inspector
ANO : Anti Naxal Operations
AC : Assistant Commandant
BSF : Border Security Force
BGFs : Border Guarding Forces
BP : Border Pillar
BADPs : Border Area Development Programmes
BTC : Basic Training Centre
BOO : Build, Own, Operate
BOP : Border Out Posts
BPRD : Bureau of Police Research and Development
CI/CT : Counter-Insurgency/Counter-Terrorism
CAPF : Central Armed Police Force
CMO : Chief Medical Officer
(vi)

(vii)
COB : Company Operating Base
CIJW : Counter Insurgency and Jungle Warfare
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
CSMT : Central School of Motor Transport
CPFs : Central Police Forces
CGHS : Central Government Health Scheme
CRPF : Central Reserve Police Force
CPMF : Central Para-Military force
COS : Committee of Secretaries
CPOs : Central Police Organisations
CSD : Canteen Stores Department
CCS : Central Civil Service
CPC : Central Police Canteen
CPMF : Central Para Military Force
CIBMS : Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System
CAPs : Civic Action Programmes
CDO : Chief District Officer
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force
CWO : Central Welfare Officers
CSG : China Study Group
CGEGIS : Central Government Employees Group Insurance Scheme
CT : Constable
CAO : Chief Administrative Officer
CPGRMS : Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System
DC : Deputy Commandant
DPCs : Departmental Promotion Committee
DWO : District Welfare Officers
DoPT : Department of Promotion and Training

DFMD : Door Frame Metal Detectors
DSMD : Deep Search Metal Detectors
DIG : Deputy Inspector General
DGAR : Directorate General of Assam Rifles
DSPT : Digital Satellite Phone Terminal
DIPAS : Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences
DTH : Direct-to-Home
DRDO : Defence Research Development Organisation
DACP : Dynamic Assured Career Program
ECHS : Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme
E-TAS : E-Transfer Application System
ED : Explosive Detective
EHA : Extreme Hard Area
EGoM : Empowered Group of Ministers
ECC &E : Extreme Cold Clothing and Equipment
EPIS : Employee Personnel Information System
ESC : Education & Stress Counsellor
FSSAI : Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
FHQ : Frontier Headquarters
FRP : Fibre Reinforced Plastic
GREF : General Reserve Engineer Force
FDLs : Forward Defense Location
GD : General Duty
GDMO : General Duty Medical Officers
GJSPKK : Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach
GoM : Group of Ministers
GO : Gazetted Officer
GPS : Global Positioning System
(viii)

HSCL : Hidustan Steelworks Construction Limited
HIV : Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HQ : Head Quarter
HRA : House Rent Allowance
HAPO : High-Altitude Pulmonary Edema
HAG : Higher Administrative Grade
HLEC : High Level Empowered Committee
HAMTS : High Altitude Medical Training School
HR : Human Resources
HHTI : Hand Held Thermal Imager
HC : Head Constable
H A : Hard Area
IGAR : Inspector General Assam Rifles
IEDs : Improvised Explosive Device
IPS : Indian Police Service
IIGs : Indian Insurgent Groups
IMB : Indian-Myanmar Border
IGR : Inspector General of Registration
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
ICMR : India Council of Medical Research
IT : Information Technology
IFD : Internal Finance Division
IPS : Indian Police Service
IPP : Intranet Prahari Project
IBB : India Bangladesh Border
ITBP : Indo-Tibetan Border Police
JAKLI : Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry
JEB : Junior Establishment Board
(ix)

KLP : Key Location Positions
LWE/IS : Left Wing Extremism/Internal Security
LAC : Line of Actual Control
LPTA : Long Platform Truck with All Wheel Drive
LA TCs : Light Armoured Troop Carrier
LORROS : Long-Range Reconnaissance and Observation System
LoC : Line of Control
L&O : Law & Order
LP A : Liberalized Pensionary Awards
LDC : Limited Departmental Competitive
LIA : Lead Intelligence Agency
LRPs : Long Range Patrols
LRF : Long range forecasting
MO : Medical Officer
MT : Motor Transport
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
MoD : Ministry of Defence
MoF : Ministry of Finance
MSP : Military Service Pay
M&SI : Mountaineering and Skiing Institute
MPVs : Mine Protected Vehicles
MOSB : Medical Officers Selection Board
MPV/LATC : Mine Protected Vehicles/Light Armoured Troop Carriers
MACP : Modified Assured Career Progression
NCR : National Capital Region
NSG : National Security Guard
NSCN-K : Nationalist Socialist Council of Nagaland-Khaplang
(x)

NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NBCC : National Building Construction Cor poration
NLJD : Non Linear Junction Detector
NPS : New Pension Scheme
NCC : National Coordination Committee
NABL : National Accreditation Board for Laboratories
NTCD : National Training Centre for Dogs
NGOs : Non Gazetted Officers
NOK : Next of Kin
NVDs : Night Vision Device
OBC : Other Backward Classes
ORs : Other Ranks
OFC : Optical Fiber Cable
PICB : Permanent Integrated Composite Building
PMFs : Para Mi litary Forces
PMSP : Para-military Service Pay
PBOR : Personnel Below Officers' Rank
RTC : Road Transport Corporation
R VC : Remount and Veterinary Corps
RR : Recruitment Rules
RMP : Recruitable Male Population
RDA : Recommended Dietary Allowance
RMA : Ration Money Allowance
RCC : Reinforced Cement Concrete
RCIEDs : Radio-Controlled Improvised Explosive Device
RO : Reverse Osmosis
SC : Scheduled Castes
ST : Scheduled Tribes
(xi)

SDG : Special Director General
SFF : Special Frontier Force
SSB : Sashastra Seema Bal
SSC : Staff Selection Commission
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure
SEB : Senior Establishment Board
SOs : Subordinate Officers
SI : Sub Inspector
SSG : Special Security Group
SMS : Short Messaging Service
SCME : Special clothing and mountaineering equipments
SMO : Senior Medical Officer
SUVs : Sport Utility Vehicles
SWO : State Welfare Officers
SA : Soft Area
SCME : Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipments
SoP : Standard Operational Procedure
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
UA Vs : Unmanned aerial vehicles
UVSM : Under Vehicle Search Mirror
VVIP/VIP : V ery Very Important Person/Very Important Person
VRS : Voluntary Retirement Scheme
VPN : Virtual Private Network
VIS : Vehicle Information System
VIP : Very Important Person
W AN : Wide Area Network
W ARB : Welfare and Rehabilitation Board
(xii)

CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
1.1.1 India, like many other countries, is facing a host of unconventional security threats and challenges.
Many of the internal security challenges such as terrorism, Left-Wing Extremism (LWE), and insurgency
have serious external dimensions. The state police forces alone are unable to tackle these challenges
because of the lack of advanced equipments and arms, inadequate training of personnel and the inability
of the State Governments to modernize their police forces. This is happening primarily due to the fact
that most of the States are facing a financial crunch and are thus unable to give due priority to the
modernization of their police forces. Moreover, there is an external dimension to the country's security
scenario which limits the role of the state police forces and this necessitates the intervention of the
Central Government. These challenges are primarily a matter of internal security, but because of their
external dimensions the role of the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) comes to the fore.
1.1.2 India has seven Central-level Armed Police Forces under the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) that
constitute the CAPFs. These Forces were raised and declared as the Armed Forces of the Union through
different Acts of Parliament.
1.2 WORKING CONDITIONS IN CAPFS
1.2.1 The MHA through its background note and in the various meetings held to discuss the working
conditions of the CAPFs, apprised the Committee on several structural and functional issues pertaining
to various aspects that have a direct impact on the working conditions in CAPFs. These aspects are
mostly relating to deployment in difficult geographical and climatic conditions, personnel management,
pay and pension, stagnation and attrition across various ranks, the structural and psychological disconnect
across the ranks, training and capacity building, inadequate infrastructure, lack of basic amenities and
medical facilities, grievance redressal mechanism, coordination between the state police forces and
CAPFs, and the procurement of arms, ammunitions and combat-ready equipments.
1.2.2 Thus, the Committee decided to examine these and other related issues affecting the working
conditions in the CAPFs. To streamline the examination of this subject, the Committee decided to submit
two reports on this subject. In this report, issues pertaining to the working conditions in the four border
guarding forces have been covered.
1.2.3 Out of these seven CAPFs, four CAPFs namely Assam Rifles (AR), Border Security Force (BSF),
Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) and Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) are the 'Border Guarding Forces
(BGFs)'. This report is about these four BGFs.
Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs)
Border Guarding Forces Special Task Force Forces For Internal Security
AR BSF ITBP SSB NSG CISF CRPF

2
1.2.4 The AR are deployed in the North Eastern region to tackle insurgency and guard the India-
Myanmar border; the BSF is deployed on the India-Bangladesh and India-Pakistan borders; the ITBP is
deployed on the India-China border; and the SSB is deployed on the India-Nepal and India-Bhutan
borders.
1.3 Assam Rifles (AR)
1.3.1 The AR has a sanctioned strength of 66,412 personnel split into 46 battalions. The AR has been
deployed in the North-Eastern States in a counter-insurgency role and also guards the India-Myanmar
border, which is spread over a length of 1,631 kms.
1.4 Border Security Force (BSF)
1.4.1 The BSF has a sanctioned strength of 2,43,161 personnel. The BSF is spread along 6,386.36 kms
of the international borders along Pakistan and Bangladesh. It is also deployed on the Line of Control
(LoC) in J&K under the operational control of the Army. In the last few years the BSF, in addition to
its regular duties, has been deployed for counter insurgency and internal security duties.
1.5 Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
1.5.1 ITBP guards 3,488 kms of the Indo-China border and has a sanctioned strength of 89,433
personnel and 60 battalions. It has been deployed primarily to safeguard the security of the Indo-China
border, to promote a sense of security among the people living in the border areas, and to prevent trans-
border crimes, smuggling and unauthorized entry into or from the territory of India.
1.6 Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
1.6.1 Following the Kargil intrusion and on the recommendations given by a Group of Ministers on 19th
June 2001, the Special Service Bureau was mandated to guard 1751 kms of the India-Nepal border. The
Special Service Bureau was re-christened as the Sashastra Seema Bal and designated as a border guarding
force. Later, in March 2004, the SSB was further mandated to guard the 699 kms long India-Bhutan
border. The SSB has also been declared as the Lead Intelligence Agency (LIA) along the India-Nepal and
India-Bhutan borders. Currently it has a sanctioned strength of 97,014 personnel and has 73 battalions.

3
CHAPTER-II
ASSAM RIFLES (AR)
2.1 Historical Background
2.1.1 The AR is the oldest paramilitary force in India. It was raised as the 'Cachar Levy' in 1835 to guard
the alluvial plains of Assam. The Force was designated by different names from time to time and was
given the name 'The Assam Rifles' in 1917.
2.2 Genesis of Deployment
2.2.1 After India gained its independence, the AR was placed under the command of the Ministry of
External Affairs as part of the North Eastern Frontier Agency. The grave threat posed by the insurgency
in the North Eastern States necessitated the expansion of the AR. The force was once again engaged
in a combat role in 1959 when the Chinese annexed Tibet. The Force was placed under the administrative
control of the MHA while the operational control remained with the Army.
2.2.2 The Committee has been given to understand that the terrain along the Indian-Myanmar border is
mountainous, rugged, underdeveloped and covered with dense jungles. The weather is inclement for over
eight months in a year with nullahs and rivulets in full spate during the monsoons. Surface communication
and road infrastructure are very poor. The terrain necessitates the deployment of BGFs along India-
Myanmar border on a pattern similar to the operational deployment pattern adopted along LoC with
Pakistan in Jammu & Kashmir and along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) with China.
2.2.3 The MHA pointed out that as the security situation in the States along the India-Myanmar border
is fragile, the security forces are deployed for Counter-Insurgency/Counter-Terrorism (CI/CT) operations
as and when the exigency arises. There are a number of camps of the Indian Insurgent Groups (IIGs)on
both sides of the border with Myanmar. The modus operandi of the IIGs is to infiltrate from the camps
across the border, strike against the Security Forces along the India-Myanmar border as well as in the
hinterlands and thereafter exfiltrate to the safe havens across the border. Moreover, given that the option
of fencing the India-Myanmar border being implausible, the deployment cannot be along similar lines as
the one existing along the Gujarat/Rajasthan/Punjab border. The deployment has to be operational, seamless
and grid-based, incorporating areas along the India-Myanmar border as well as in the hinterlands.
2.2.4 Due to mountainous, rugged and underdeveloped terrain, no fence exists. As the population along
the India-Myanmar border has similar ethnicity, there exists a 'Free Movement Regime' that permits
movement upto 16 kms on either side of the India-Myanmar border. The population also has a soft
corner for IIGs due to their shared ethnicity. Due to the threat of IIGs on the movement of troops and
stores which can be from behind as well as the front, there is a requirement of deployment in a grid
pattern to secure the lines of communication. The task of border guarding is further complicated due
to the lack of special powers being given to the AR.
3

4
2.3 Organizational Structure, Administrative Issues and Dual Control System
2.3.1 At present, the AR works under the operational control of the Ministry of Defence (Indian Army)
and the administrative control of the MHA. Almost 80 percent of the officers in the AR are on deputation
from the Indian Army.
2.3.2 Regarding the organizational structure, the Committee was apprised that the Force is commanded
by an officer of the rank of Lieutenant General of the Army. The Headquarters of the Force, known as
HQ Directorate General of Assam Rifles (DGAR),is located at Shillong. The AR area region-specific force
with their operational role in the North East and therefore the HQ, DGAR is also located in the North
East, unlike the headquarters of other CAPFs that are located in Delhi. The HQ Inspector General Assam
Rifles (IGAR) is next in the chain of command after HQ DGAR. HQ IGAR is commanded by an officer
of the rank of Major General from the Army and exercises command and control over the Sector HQs.
2.3.3 The Sector Headquarters are commanded by officers of the rank of Brigadier from the Indian
Army. The Sector Headquarters exercises direct command and control over the AR battalions deployed
in their respective Areas of Responsibility (AOR). A graphical representation depicting the organizational
structure of the AR is given below:
2.3.4 The AR are under the operational control of the Army. This is exercised through the Inspector
General (IGARs) and Sector HQs that are operationally placed under the Headquarters of the Eastern
Command of the Indian Army. The command and control of the Force, in all matters other than the
operational ones, vests with the DGAR.


5
2.4 Recruitment, Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
2.4.1 In the background note of the MHA it has been stated that the AR began conducting their own
recruitment drives with effect from the year 1982. After 1985, recruitment drives were carried out on
an all-India basis.
2.4.2 As per the current scheme for recruitment in Central Paramilitary Forces, 60 per cent of the
vacancies are allotted to the States/Union Territories on the basis of 'Recruitable Male Population' (RMP)
while 20 per cent of the vacancies in the BGFs are allotted to the border districts, which fall within the
responsibility of the Force and 20 per cent of vacancies in BGFs are allotted to the areas that are affected
by militancy and Naxalism. Reservations for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes (SC), the
Scheduled Tribes (ST), the Other Backward Classes (OBC), ex-servicemen and other reserved categories
are in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of India from time to time.
2.4.3 The MHA, in its background note on the subject, also informed the Committee that it has ensured
that all the personnel get their promotion on time and the personnel, who are superceded due to lack
of qualifications, are motivated to acquire the requisite qualification for further promotion. However, there
is a challenge of stagnation at the entry level of Rifleman (General Duty). In an effort to offset this
challenge, the Ministry approved the upgradation of the post of Constable (Rifleman) as Head Constable
(Havildar) in each Section, thereby reducing residential service from 22-23 years to approximately 17
years. The Ministry submitted the details pertaining to the authorized strength, posted strength (as on
31st December 2017) and residential service required at various ranks as follows:
Rank Feeder (Authorized Strength) Posted Strength Length of Service
DG/Lieutenant 01 01 -
General
SDG - -

6
Rank Feeder (Authorized Strength) Posted Strength Length of Service
ADG/Major 01 01 -
General
IG/Major General 03 03 -
DIG/Brigadier 22 (Include 20 Brig of 21 (Include 19 Brig of -
Indian Army and 02 DIG Indian Army and 02 DIG
(Med Cadre of CAPF) (Medical Cadre of CAPF).
Commandant/ 92 (Include 74 129 (Include 76 Col of 15 Years
Colonel/CMO Col of Indian Indian Army, 18 Commissioned
(NFSG) Army and 18 Commandants of Assam Service
Commandant of 176 (MO to Rifles Cadre, 35 (CMO)
Assam Rifles) CMO) NFSG of Assam Rifles
Medical Cadre)
2IC/Lieutenant 86 (Include 40 193 (Include 123 11 Years
Colonel/CMO Lt Col of Indian Lieutenant Colonel of Commissioned
Army and 46 2IC Indian Army , 46 2IC of Service
of Assam Rifles) Assam Rifles Cadre, 23
CMO of Assam Rifles
Medical Cadre and 01
on deputation to ARGIS)
Deputy 514 (Include 382 Major of 363 [Include 254 Major 6 Years
Commandant/ Indian Army, 80 Deputy of Indian Army , 77 Commissioned
Major/SMO Commandant and 52 Major Deputy Commandant of Service
of AMC. Assam Rifles Cadre, 30
(Senior Medical Officer)
of Assam Rifles Medical
Cadre and 02 on
deputation with NSG]
Assistant 370 (Include 292 Capt of 396 (Include 314 Captain Minimum 13
Commandant/ Indian Army, 75 Asst of Indian Army, 52 Years of Service
Captain/ MO Commandant of Assam Rifles Assistant Commandant of as Other Rank
and 03 Capt of AMC) Assam Rifles Cadre, 27
(Medical Officer) of
Assam Rifles Medical
Cadre and 03 on
deputation with NSG)
Other ranks 01* *01 x Civil VO

7
Rank Feeder (Authorized Strength) Posted Strength Length of Service
Subedar Major By promotion 200 30-35
and equivalent
Subedar and By promotion 1180 25-30
equivalent
Naib Subedar By direct recruitment/ 2821 18-25
and equivalent Promotion/Deputation
Warrant Officer and By Direct recruitment/ 3539 15-25
equivalent Promotion
Havildar and By direct recruitment/ 15312 -
equivalent By promotion 8-19
Rifleman and By direct recruitment 39640 -
equivalent
2.4.4 The Ministry also submitted the rank-wise details of stagnation at various ranks as follows.
Sl. No. Rank Residential Service Remarks
(i) Rifleman to Havildar 17-18 years Average residual service
(ii) Havildar to Warrant Officer 6 - 8 years based on various trade/
(iii) W arrant Officer to Naib Subedar 8 - 10 years
category.
(iv) Naib Subedar to Subedar 4 - 5 years
2.4.5 The Committee was also informed that personnel belonging to the Other Ranks (ORs) can avail
of promotion upto the rank of Subedar Major as per the hierarchy of the particular trade/category.
However, some isolated trades also exist in the Force, where there are no promotional avenues beyond
Rifleman. Promotional avenues to become Group-A Officer (Assistant Commandant) is also available for
ORs after completion of 13 years of service and fulfillment of eligibility criteria.
2.4.6 The Ministry also informed the Committee that the personnel, who do not get promoted due to
the pyramidal structure of the force, are entitled to 1st, 2nd and 3rd Modified Assured Career Progression
at intervals of 10, 20 and 30 years of service which came into effect from 1st September, 2008. These
are granted to personnel of the AR as and when they fulfill the qualitative requirement.
2.4.7 The DGAR, in his oral submissions before the Committee, explained that every constable gets his
first promotion as Havildar after 18 years of service. After that there is a provision of 1/3 vacancies,
which means out of 100 Havildars, 33 will get the promotion of warrant officers and of that 33 per cent
will get the promotion of Naib Subedar, and again 33 per cent thereof will get the promotion of Subedar
and 1/5 of that i.e. 20 per cent will become Subedar Major. This leads to a situation where 66 per cent
of the constables retire as Havildars.

8
2.4.8 The Committee notes that the AR holds direct recruitment for inducting personnel at four different
ranks viz. Naib Subedar, Warrant Officer, Havildar, and Rifleman. When the Committee enquired about
the reasons for this the MHA informed that the recruitment is done as per the Recruitment Rules (RR)
duly approved by the Department of Personnel and Training. The RR are in consonance with the
government policies and related equivalence of rank amongst various CAPFs and the AR. Based on the
charter of responsibility and further mandatory qualifications, the recruitment is carried out at various
entry levels. The Ministry further stated that status quo be maintained, as of now, in view of the
fact that the Force Cadre review is under consideration and any changes will be initiated subsequent
thereto.
2.4.9 The Committee takes note of the stagnation at the ranks of Rifleman, Havildar and
Warrant Officer and feels that requisite measures need be taken to increase the number of posts
in the ranks of Warrant Officers, Subedar and Subedar Major to enhance the promotional
avenues and reduce the time period for getting first promotion to the rank of Havildar.
2.4.10  The Committee is of the view that the reply furnished by the Ministry is not sufficient
justification for not reducing the levels of direct recruitment. The Committee feels that conducting
direct recruitment at four levels viz. Naib Subedar, Warrant Officer, Havildar, and Rifleman can
justifiably be reduced to two levels to increase the promotional avenues. The Committee is aware
that direct recruitment for General Duty posts in most of the other CAPFs takes place at three
ranks viz. Constable, Sub-Inspector and Assistant Commandant. The Committee is also aware
that there is at least one intermediate rank in between two levels of direct recruitment. The
Committee thus feels that the scheme of direct recruitment at all four of the lowermost ranks
in the AR is not justified. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable structural
changes must be brought about in the recruitment mechanism of the AR to conduct direct
recruitment only at three stages viz. Rifleman, Warrant Officer, and Subedar. The Committee
strongly recommends that conducting direct recruitment at any two ranks that are consecutive
in the hierarchy may be avoided as this gives rise to stagnation and depressed promotional
avenues for its personnel.
2.4.11 The Committee also observes an anomalous situation at the rank of Subedar-Major, where
there are only 200 posts as compared to the 370 posts in the rank of Captain/Assistant Commandant
above it and 1180 posts in the rank of Subedar below it. This defies the pyramidical structure
of the force. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for this anomaly and feels that such
an anomaly would restrict the promotional avenues of the lower ranks substantially. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the number of posts in the rank of Subedar-Major
should be enhanced adequately.
2.4.12  The number of officers belonging to the AR cadre or other CAPFs is 316 as against 791 officers
belonging to the Indian Army. The Committee also sought to know whether this ratio is optimal or
skewed. The Ministry, in its reply, submitted that the ratio of Army & AR Cadre Officers is 80:20 as
per the MHA letter No I.45028/11/95-Pers. II dated 8th Feb. 1996. The present state is as under:

9
Sl. No. Category Authorized Strength Posted
(a) Army Officers 812 754
(b) AR Cadre Officers 219 192
(c) AMC, ARMC, ARD & RVC etc. 235 177
2.4.13  The Ministry also informed that a restructuring has been proposed in the cadre review proposal
of the Force which, if approved, will result in the change of ratio to 65.74: 33.76.
2.4.14  The Committee feels that at 80:20, the ratio of officers belonging to the Indian Army and
the officers belonging to the Assam Rifles cadre is heavily skewed against AR Cadre officers. The
Committee takes note of the proposal to rationalise this ratio by bringing it down to 65.74: 33.76.
The Committee is of the view that the proposed measure of rationalizing the ratio is necessary
to maintain a balance in the composition of the Force at the officer ranks. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that this proposal to enhance the strength AR Cadre officers
should be considered at the earliest to strike a balance between the officers of the Indian Army
and the Assam Rifles Cadre.
2.4.15  The Committee also takes note of the submission of the MHA that the Cadre review for
the Assam Rifles is presently under consideration. The Committee recommends that the
recommendations made by this Committee in this regard may be bought to the notice of the
Cadre Review Committee so that it may be considered while finalizing its recommendation.
2.5 Working Hours
2.5.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that due to the deployment in a counter-insurgency
environment, fixed working hours are not feasible in the AR. However, there is a schedule of working
hours and a mechanism that is undertaken by the Force to ensure adequate rest and recoupment for the
personnel. At the Sector/IG/DG headquarters, the working hours are fixed as per MHA Guidelines. HQ
DGAR works for five days a week from 0900 hr to 1730 hr. The routine of working at IG and Sector
HQ is six days a week from 0800 hr to 1330 hr. However, being operationally active (24x7), the working
hours vary depending on existing operational situation. In the battalions/Minor Units, normally a set unit
routine (with minor variations) is followed as under:
(a) 0600 hr- 0645 hr : Morning Physical Training.
(b) 0800hr - 1330 hr : Training/Maintenance and Office Work.
(c) 1330 hr - 1600 hr : Lunch and Rest.
(d) 1600 hr - 1700 hr : Evening Parade/Games.
(e) 1900 hr - 2000 hr : Evening Roll Call.
(f) Night Training Parade once a week.
2.5.2 However, the units deployed in operations might not be able to adhere to the set timings depending
on the situation on ground. Long Range Patrols (LRPs) of 5-6 days and Border Pillar (BP) verification

10
patrols of 2-3 days are also periodically sent by units. Personnel involved in such operations are
compensated by being giving adequate time off for rest and recoupment on the termination of operations.
2.5.3 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs regarding
the stern working hours of the Assam Rifles personnel and feels that the jawans may require
adequate rest after long range patrols and Border Pillar (BP) verification patrols that are usually
conducted in tough geographical and climatic conditions. The Committee, while taking note of
the Ministry's submission that such operations are compensated for by giving adequate time off,
is of the view that the time-off given after such patrols must be sufficient and without any
exception. The Committee recommends that the MHA may constantly review the actual situation
on the ground and that the stipulated rest time is available to all personnel without exception.
2.6 Basic amenities - Food
2.6.1 The Committee was informed that the Force has the concept of providing nutritious meal to every
personnel deployed even in the most remote locations. Nutritious and good quality dry and fresh ration
is requisitioned and provided with complete user satisfaction. To ensure adequate stocking and proper
storage of food items during the long monsoon period in the North-Eastern region, contracts for delivery
of fresh ration at unit location are given on a yearly basis. Fresh ration is issued to the units directly
by the contractors based on the requirement and demand of the user units. Twenty four days of tinned
rations (vegetable tinned, fruit tinned, meat tinned and fish tinned) are also held with units for consumption
in case of break in supply of fresh ration. Additionally, dry ration for 105 days is stocked with the units
before the start of the monsoon season every year.
2.6.2 The Committee was informed in the meeting held on 18th January, 2018 that the quality checks
are being conducted on a daily basis and officers eat with jawans every day and there had never been
a complaint regarding food in the AR. The only time that the Force has had a problem is during the six-
month monsoon period. Though it is tried that all stocking be done at the post, during the monsoon lock-
in period the jawans might have to rely on tinned ration.
2.6.3 The Committee is apprehensive that consuming the tinned food for extremely long monsoon
period of upto six months may have adverse impact on the health of the personnel. The Committee
feels that to alleviate the problem of shortage of fresh food, the option of constructing cold
storage facilities must be explored. These facilities could be of optimal size taking note of the
number of personnel deployed in the area. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs may devise a plan to make available optimal sized cold storage facilities
at the posts that remain cutoff during the monsoon and are unable to stock enough ration to
meet the requirements. The Committee hopes that such an arrangement would prove beneficial
for providing nutritious food.
2.7 Basic amenities-Drinking Water
2.7.1 The Committee was informed in the meeting that since the AR are posted in the North-Eastern
region they do not have a problem of water, as it is found in abundance. However, clean drinking water
is a continuous challenge in the region. The Force has ensured provision of clean drinking water by way

11
of providing RO water purifier. Water supply schemes for Company Operating Bases (COBs) are also
being augmented.
2.7.2 The Committee was also informed that the Force was also trying to buy bottles with some kind
of purification-capability so that the soldiers have the access to clean drinking water, when they are
operating on foot and patrolling.
2.7.3 The Committee takes note of the Ministry's submission that providing clean drinking
water to all the personnel in the entire North-East is a challenge. The Committee is of the
considered view that providing clean and purified drinking water to every single personnel must
be the top priority of the Assam Rifles Establishment. Moreover , ensuring a continuous supply
of water at all the company-operating bases that presently is sourced from natural sources is also
a challenge that needs to be addressed at the earliest. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that every effort must be made to ensure provision of purified drinking water to all the personnel
and establishing a functional water supply system at all the Company Operating Bases (COBs).
The Committee also recommends that the COBs may be asked to tap the abundant rainfall by
harvesting the rainwater and storing it in sufficient quantities for its utilization at the time of
need.
2.8 Medical facilities
2.8.1 The Committee was apprised that the present medical set up in the force comprises of a 30-bedded
hospital at the battalion level with adequate medical staff. The military hospital facility is authorized to
Force personnel as they are operationally under the Army. Speedy air evacuation is resorted to on need
basis. Adequate specialist medical care for the Assam Rifles personnel and their dependents is available
in the Area of Responsibility of the Force. Apart from this, at present there are seven Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS) empanelled hospitals available in the entire North East Region.
2.8.2 The Committee observes that all the CGHS-empanelled hospitals in the North-East are
located only at Guwahati. The Committee feels that this restricted coverage of medical care for
the Assam Rifles personnel may have adverse consequences on their health. The Committee
recommends that the Government should increase its efforts to expand the coverage of medical
facilities by empanelling more hospitals in the capital city of North-East States. The Committee
further recommends that the Assam Rifles should further strengthen the existing medical division
so as to provide immediate medical attention to the injured personnel at the site itself as the
area being covered mostly with dense forest and inaccessible by road.
2.9 Housing and Accommodation
2.9.1 The Ministry in its background note informed the Committee that as the Assam Rifles is a North-
East centric Force, which is forever in operations, adequate infrastructure has been catered down till the
Company Operating Bases to include pre-fabricated shelters at far flung locations of deployment. With
limited opportunities for deputation, a majority of Assam Rifles personnel maintain their families at their
home town or at battalion/Sector/IGAR Headquarters locations, most of which are in the remote localities,
however, adequate family accommodation has been created and is being fully subscribed.

12
2.9.2 The Committee was informed that the Assam Rifles has a peculiar problem regarding housing due
to the fact that the entire Force is based in the North East. The housing earlier used to be based on the
posts where the soldiers were serving. This was causing a vulnerability problem because keeping the
families at the posts made them vulnerable to the insurgent attacks. So, now the housing has been shifted
to certain secure areas. Five to six places have been earmarked where the Assam Rifles is planning to
build houses for the soldiers. These housing complexes will also have schools, security, hospitals etc.
All these places are on important communication centers where the force has pre-existing land. Over the
next five years, the housing situation in the Assam Rifles will improve.
2.9.3 The Ministry also informed the Committee that there are four stages of accommodation in the
Assam Rifles:
(i) The first point of accommodation is the company-operating base on the India-Myanmar
border. There are no roads on the India-Myanmar border. So, this is the first stage. Earlier,
this accommodation used to be self-help. That self-help has been changed now to pre-
fabricated structures and, in some places, concrete buildings. So, accommodation for
unmarried soldiers is 100 per cent, whether it is self-help, pre-fabricated or concrete.
(ii) The next stage is where the unit headquarters is situated. Here, the Force had tried to
provide family accommodation in the past. But, since the units operate in places where
counter insurgency is going on, 90 per cent of families do not go there. Families do not
go there also due to a constant danger of Improvised Explosive Device (IEDs) and the
absence of schools. Here, the men have 100 per cent accommodation but the family
accommodation has been removed and the Force has identified six or seven places where
they intend to have buildings so that these families can be accommodated there.
(iii) The third stage of accommodation is at the sector headquarters. Every sector has a concrete
building and efforts are being made to build a hospital. In the Army it is called 'Key Location
Plan' where the army has been able to construct sector head quarter. However, at some of
the places, like Jwalamukhi, which is on the national highway between Kohima and Imphal,
almost 250 houses lie vacant as the families that stayed there no longer trust the security
situation because of the abrogation of ceasefire by the NSCN-K group. Other than this, all
the sector headquarters are connected by road and have concrete buildings/pre-fabricated
structure. The condition of the accommodation is fairly satisfactory.
(iv) The next stage of accommodation is at the force headquarters level. IGR (South) in Imphal
and IGR (North) in Kohima have an excellent accommodation. Accommodation is being
built at IGR (East) at Shrikona in Silchar because this is a new Force and was created only
five years ago. Shillong has a well set cantonment and there are almost 650 houses.
2.9.4 The Chairman of the Committee pointed out that the Assam Rifles have an advantage to built
rapidly which other Forces do not have, as the entire force is in the North-East only whereas the other
Forces such as BSF, CRPF keep moving. The force headquarters, sector headquarters and the (KLPs)
the DG, Assam Rifles while agreeing to the suggestion stated that as and when the insurgency moves

13
from one place to the second place, the second point becomes vulnerable as well. When it makes the
second place vulnerable, whatever accommodation may have been built at that place, which was earlier
secure, becomes insecure.
2.9.5 The Committee also sought the data regarding the housing satisfaction level in the Assam Rifles.
The Ministry submitted the following details:
Sanctioned T otal Total Shortfall % of No. of Satisfaction % of % of
strength of No. of no. of of dwelling satisfaction dwelling level after satisfaction satisfaction
the force dwelling dwelling units against units under completion of dwelling level after
units units authorized construction of current units completion
authorized available dwelling of current construction available of current
units  projects projecs against construction
sanctioned projects
strength    against
sanctioned
strength
66412 25480 12790 12690 50.19 1908 57.68 19.25 22.13
2.9.6 The Committee was also informed that in 2013, the Government had approved construction of
1467 houses for Assam Rifles out of which 970 have been constructed while 497 are under construction.
Further, a proposal for construction of 384 houses till 2020 is under consideration of the Ministry.
2.9.7 The Committee takes note of the fact that the construction of 497 houses out of the
approved 1467 is still pending even after five years. The Committee also understands the constraints
in the North Eastern region that can delay the construction process. Nonetheless, the Committee
feels that the period of five years is more than sufficient for completing the construction of all
the approved houses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction of the
remaining houses must be expedited and completed within a year.
2.9.8 The Committee also takes note of the proposal of construction of 384 additional houses by
2020 that is still under the consideration of the Ministry of Home Affai ````` The Committee feels
that the project needs to be expedited if it has to be completed by its stipulated deadline. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that an early decision may be taken to grant approval to this
proposal within the next three months and the construction may be started at the earliest during
this calendar year itself.
2.9.9 The Committee also exhorts the AR to explore the possibility of monetizing its existing
land so that their dependence on Home Ministry for funds to build houses may be reduced.
2.10 Grievance Redressal
2.10.1 The Committee was informed that grievances are received in writing from the pensioners or
through VVIP/VIP, MHA, Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System and RTI. The
Ministry assured that the action on redressal of grievances is ensured on a priority basis. A tab has been
added on Assam Rifles web site to provide a Grievance Portal to the personnel for uploading their
grievances. Development of an Assam Rifles Grievance Application is presently under way.

14
2.10.2  The Committee feels that being in the Armed Forces, its personnel desist from expressing
their grievances. The Committee feels that an option to submit their grievances anonymously
via application or website must be provided to encourage them to express their grievances of
general nature. This would enable the commanding officers to get an honest feedback and allow
the personnel to raise their grievances without any fear of punitive action.
2.10.3 The Committee also feels that in order to ensure only genuine grievances are raised and
addressed adequately, a system must be evolved so that the identity of personnel are not known
to their commanding officers. To ensure this, the Committee recommends that for every battalion,
a welfare officer may be designated, from amongst the officers of the rank of 2IC or Commandant,
belonging to any other battalion in the same sector, to receive the grievances of personnel of that
battalion. The Committee also recommends that every Welfare Officer may be instructed to
forward a report on grievances directly to the Sector Headquarters, on a weekly basis, to ensure
that the grievances are addressed expeditiously at the Sector Headquarters level.
2.11 Training Issues
2.11.1  The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that all battalions
of the AR are trained for both border guarding as well as counter-insurgency operations and are rotated
every 3-5 years.
2.11.2  The Ministry informed the Committee that following specialized trainings are provided to the
personnel:
(i) Engineers: Engineers being a specialized trade, adequate emphasis is given on Combat
Engineer Training on Improvised Explosive Devices(IED's)'booby traps'. Training
infrastructure like IED trails, IED nursery and IED museum have been created at Assam
Rifles Training Centre and School (ARTC&S) to train the troops IED. Also, refresher
training capsule is conducted twice in a year for Army JEs posted to Assam Rifles and
Assam Rifles JEs posted to higher headquarter and formations to acquaint them with the
various procedures involved in projects to include planning, building siting, design and
drawing, store management, power supply, demolition, maintenance, documentation, funds
and accounting etc.
(ii) Signals: Assam Rifles has witnessed a quantum leap in the field of Communications and
IT over the past two years with the installation and deployment of various advanced
technological signal equipment in the Force.
(iii) Electronic and Mechanical Engineering: The Force has been provided with a plethora of
'state of the art' equipment to enhance operational, training and administrative efficiency.
Training is organized with a view to update knowledge and acquaintance with the latest
technology in vehicles and equipment that are being introduced in to the Force.
(iv) Medical: Since the Assam Rifles is deployed in remote areas, most of the locations are
without major medical facilities. It is thus important to have well trained medical staff
deployed along with these units. The training is imparted to the medical staff to keep them

15
abreast with all the relevant contemporary medical aspects and developments in medical
sciences. Limited availability of trained medical staff merits training general duty soldiers on
medical issues for making them capable of administering first aid and management of
causalities in operation.
(v) Legal: Training in law is conducted by the Law Branch for Subordinate Officers / Under
Officer Clerks to ensure their smooth functioning under the Assam Rifles Act, 2006,as legal
issues are not only sensitive in nature but also have serious implications if not handled
promptly and skillfully.
(vi) Sports: Assam Rifles teams and individuals excel in all the sports events they participate in,
including at national and international levels. Behind this success are dedicated efforts in
imparting modern, focused and systematic training to the sports teams.
(vii) Adventure Activities: The Assam Rifles promotes adventure activities and encourages troops
to participate in the same. In pursuit of excellence in adventure activities, the Assam Rifles
has established Aero Node and Aqua Node to provide State of the Art training to the teams
& individuals that are now competing in various adventure competitions.
2.11.3  The Committee is of the considered view that with the fast-paced advancements in
technology, the induction of advanced weapons, equipment and vehicles, has become inevitable.
Specialized training of personnel in various streams has a force multiplier effect. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the AR besides imparting training continuously should also conduct
a periodic review of the training modules and redesign them to suit the changed circumstances
to ensure that its force is kept abreast with the advanced technologies and equipment.
2.11.4  DG, AR in his oral submissions before the Committee on 18th June, 2018 stated that AR has three
excellent training centers in North East. AR has the ability to train upto 10,000 soldiers. Soldiers from
other CAPFs and State police are trained there. Every fourth year, every company goes though a full
training cycle and upto 69 companies are trained in a year. As a result of these training number of
casualty during combat has reduced considerably. Capability of the force has enhanced to deal with
IEDs, ambushes and other situations.
2.12 Attrition
2.12.1  The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note on the subject, gave the details of personnel
who have taken voluntary retirement during the last three years. These details are given below:
Group 2015 2016 2017
Senior Officers 09 11 34
Other Ranks 85 146 591
2.12.2  The Ministry informed the Committee that the high rate of attrition in the Force is due to a
number of reasons such as high level of stress and strain due to continuous deployment in counter-
insurgency environment, separation from family, associated issues/problems linked to increased number

16
of nuclear family structure, maintaining higher living standards, managing multiple households, children
education, and related lifestyle diseases, etc.
2.12.3  The Committee observes the excessively high number of voluntary retirements in Assam
Rifles during the past two years. Although the implementation of the Seventh Central Pay
Commission could have been a reason for this unusually high number of voluntary retirements,
the other factors that result in a high level of stress and strain may also cause the high level
of attrition. The Committee feels that such a high level of attrition may indicate dissatisfaction
with the working conditions in the Assam Rifles. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
urgent measures may be taken to improve the working conditions significantly to motivate the
personnel to stay, even when they are eligible for taking voluntary retirement, and thus stem
this trend of attrition.
2.13 Deputation Opportunities
2.13.1  Assam Rifles is North East Centric Force and personnel are posted to North East region during
their entire service. Thus, there is a necessity of providing adequate opportunity to Force personnel to
serve on deputation outside North East to ensure that the individuals can cater to challenges like medical,
education of children and personnel exigencies. The Committee was informed that at present only 1.36
per cent of eligible Assam Rifles personnel are on deputation. However, deputation vacancies are utilized
as and when extended by other forces/organisations.
2.13.2  The Committee is concerned to observe the lack of sufficient opportunities for the Assam
Rifles personnel to go on deputation and feels that this may have adversely affected the ability
to address issues relating to their personal lives. The Committee feels that the dual control
regime is one of the reasons due to which the Assam Rifles personnel have very few deputation
opportunities as they are unable to go on deputation either to the Armed Forces or to the Central
Armed Police Forces. The Committee is of the view that the MHA should engage the Ministry
of Defence to increase the deputation opportunities for AR personnel and also explore the
opportunities to increase deputation of AR personnel to the CAPFs.
2.14 Road connectivity and Mobility
2.14.1  Movement of troops are being carried out in light and heavy vehicles, wherever roads are
available, but only after a Road Opening Party has been laid. However, in the remote and forest areas,
the movement is on foot. In areas where there is threat of IEDs, movement is in Mine Protected Vehicles-
Light Armoured Troop Carriers (MPV/LATC). On an average, a soldier along with his battle loads and
weapon travels around 8-10 kms on foot every day to carry out various operational and administrative
tasks like patrolling, area domination patrols, ambush, etc.
2.14.2  The Committee was informed that to provide connectivity to the remote Company Operating
Bases (COBs) a proposal to construct 4310.44 kms of roads. Consolidated cost estimates amounting to
` 9490.20 crore received from Assam Rifles was under examination in the Ministry.
2.14.3  The Committee is aware that several Company Operating Bases (COBs) are located in
remote areas due to which the Assam Rifles personnel have to suffer various hardships. Thus,

17
it is essential to connect every single COB with all-weather roads to improve the working
conditions of the personnel. The Committee takes note of the plan to provide connectivity by
constructing 4310.44 kms of roads at an estimated cost of ````` 9490.20 crore. The Committee
recommends that this plan should be examined expeditiously and a decision on its implementation
may be taken at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the roads that are planned
to be constructed must be all-weather roads that are able to withstand the harsh geographical
and climatic conditions of the North Eastern region.
2.15 Casualties in Assam Rifles
2.15.1 The Committee sought to know the total rank-wise number of on-duty casualties suffered by the
Assam Rifles. The Ministry provided the details as under:
Sl. Year of No. of Age wise details Reason for Cardiac deaths.
No. Death Deaths
(a) 2015 36 20 to 30 yrs - Nil Personnel serve in Assam Rifles upto the
31 to 40 yrs - 12 age of 60 years. The majority of deaths
41 to 50 yrs - 20 have occurred of personnel above age of
50 to 60 yrs - 04 40 years which is in line with the trend
(b) 2016 08 20 to 30 yrs - Nil
31 to 40 yrs - 02
41 to 50 yrs - 05
50 to 60 yrs - 01
(c) 2017 12 20 to 30 yrs - 01
31 to 40 yrs - Nil
41 to 50 yrs - 05
50 to 60 yrs - 06
2.15.2  The Committee was informed that 164 soldiers in the Assam Rifles died of unnatural causes.
Approximately 50 per cent of these died due to heart, liver and HIV related issues. There were approximately
24 HIV cases this year mainly because of its prevalence in the North-East. It was also informed that
there were no deaths due to water-borne diseases.
2.15.3  The Committee is worried at the high rate of casualties due to heart, liver and HIV
related problems. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry needs to identify the major
factors that have caused these health issues. The Committee recommends that regular health
checkups must be conducted for all the personnel and preventive measures like yoga/regular
counseling etc., may be proactively implemented to keep their health issues in check.
2.15.4 The Committee also takes a serious view of the issue of high incidence of HIV in the
Assam Rifles and recommends that the Ministry should conduct an intensive awareness campaign
among the personnel of the Assam Rifles to inform them about the preventive measures that
can be adopted/taken to obliterate HIV infection.
in the general population. Moreover, there
has been a decline in the number of death
due to cardiac causes, post 2015.

18
2.16 Welfare Schemes and Issues
2.16.1  Assam Rifles is a designated paramilitary force and is under the operational control of the Indian
Army. However, administrative control is vested with the Ministry of Home Affairs. Hence, all policies
on pension are applicable as promulgated by Government of India. Since New Pension Scheme has been
introduced w.e.f 2004, Assam Rifles personnel are eligible for NPS only. Any change to the implementation
on pension is reviewed at the level of the Government.
2.16.2  As per the Assam Rifles website, duties of the Assam Rifles are as under:
(i) to conduct counter-insurgency operations, in the Northeast and other areas, where deemed
necessary under control of the Indian Army;
(ii) to ensure the security of India-China and India-Myanmar borders, during peace and 'Proxy
War';
(iii) rear area security in the T actical Battle Area (TBA) during the war; and
(iv) to act as a penultimate interventionist force of the Central Government in the internal
security situation, under the control of Army, when the situation goes beyond the control
of Central Paramilitary operations.
2.16.3  The Assam Rifles Ex-Servicemen W elfare Association (All India), in its representation to the
Committee, requested for amendment of the Government of India Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 to
end the dual control mechanism of Assam Rifles, because of which a lot of hardship is faced by the
jawans of AR.
2.16.4  The Association, in its representation, stated that the Assam Rifles is categorised as 'Police' under
the Department of Internal Security in the Ministry of Home Affairs as per the Government of India
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. The Association is of the view that existing system is inconsistent
with the stated 'Role and Task of the Force'.
2.16.5 The representation also drew parallels with the case of 'Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry',
erstwhile 'J&K militia', which was also a paramilitary force under the dual control of MHA and MoD.
In 1972, the J&K militia was converted into a full Army regiment under MoD. In 1976, the Regiment
was renamed as the Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry (JAKLI). Another such instance is of the General
Reserve Engineer Force. With effect from 1st April 2015, all matters relating to Border Roads Development
Board and Border Roads Organization, also known as General Reserve Engineer Force (GREF), were
transferred from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to MoD. This organization was also
under the dual control of two Ministries.
2.16.6 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the administrative issues due to the dual control
regime and the progress on the proposal to end the dual control mechanism of Assam Rifles. The
Ministry of Home Affairs replied that all powers in respect of Assam Rifles are vested in DG, Assam
Rifles. Only the operational aspect is coordinated at the highest level with Headquarters 3 Corps
&Headquarters Eastern Command to ensure the conduct of synergized operations since IMB is a live

19
border. Assam Rifles has performed exceptionally in operations as a result of the officer cadre from the
Army which has provided excellent leadership to the Force.
2.16.7  The Committee sought to know, from the Ministry of Home Affairs, the status of the proposal
for a dedicated India-Myanmar Border Force on the lines of other border guarding forces. The Committee
was informed that the proposal for streamlining and strengthening of border guarding arrangements on
India-Myanmar Border seeking the creation of India-Myanmar Border Force is under consideration of the
Government.
2.16.8  The Committee notes that historically the Assam Rifles Force has performed the two
primary roles of conducting counter-insurgency operations in the Northeast and guarding the
India-Myanmar border. The Committee accepts the fact that the Assam Rifles is entirely different
from the other border guarding Forces such as BSF, SSB, and ITBP in as much as that these
Forces are situated right on the border as per the border-outpost based model, the Assam Rifles
on the other has continued to follow the Company-operating-base model, wherein the companies
of the force are located near but not at the border. The Committee is of the view that the dual
role of the Assam Rifles must be performed by two separate forces specially trained for the
purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Assam Rifles should be assigned a
single specialized role of performing counter-insurgency operations in the North-East. The
Committee also recommends that possibility of a separate Indo-Myanmar Border Force, under
the control of the Ministry of Home Affairs, may be explored for the purpose of guarding the
India-Myanmar border.
2.16.9  The Committee, in this connection, wishes to draw the attention of the Ministry towards
the recommendation made in para 2.14.3 of its 203rd report on 'Border Security: Capacity
Building and Institutions' and reiterate the said recommendation that an early decision should
be taken by the Government on deployment of a dedicated border guarding force for guarding
the India-Myanmar Border.
2.16.10 The Committee takes note of the representation that all the Assam Rifles battalions are deployed
continuously, under the operational control of the Army, in the insurgency-infested areas of the NE
Region. However, they do not get, proper peace stations, as are authorised for the Army battalions.
Moreover, Assam Rifles works under Army as a frontline force but their pay and allowances are not as
per the Army.
2.16.11 The issue has been raised in the said representation that AR jawans do not get post-retirement
facilities, such as Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), which are availed by the defenceEx-
servicemen, in spite of working like the Army throughout their service. They have been granted CSD
canteen facility but only till the time their own Central Police Canteen (CPC) facility is established. They
are unable to enjoy a 'family life' and are unable to look after their children as they are deployed in
operational areas throughout their service. These factors cause a lot of hardship for the jawans of AR
and they have the tendency to get frustrated and demotivated. This is one of the reasons that a majority
of AR jawans take voluntary premature retirement before reaching superannuation age.

20
2.16.12 The Assam Rifles Ex-Servicemen Welfare Association (All India), in its representation sent to the
Committee, stated that in accordance with the principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal work', 3rd Central Pay
Commission recommended pay structure of Assam Rifles personnel analogous to that of the Army, with
nominal difference. This recommendation was subsequently accepted by the Government. Consequently
during the period of 3rd CPC i.e. from 01.01.1973 to 31.12.1985, Assam Rifles personnel had no
grievance whatsoever.
2.16.13 However, the representation stated that the present anomaly was created in consequence of
improper and irrational recommendation by 4th CPC w.e.f 1st January, 1986 under which the Assam
Rifles was placed at par with the Central Police Organizations. Implementation of the recommendation
without carrying out spadework to bring about required structural changes in the Force made the whole
exercise complicated. Serving personnel took legal recourse and got trade-based (Clerical/Signal ORL/
RM/Pharmacists, etc.) recommendations implemented through court orders only after years of legal
battle.
2.16.14 The representation also contended that the Special Frontier Force (SFF), a CAPF, like the Assam
Rifles, under the dual control of the Cabinet Secretariat and Ministry of Defence, enjoy 'Equal Pay for
Equal Work' with the Indian Army. Vide Cabinet Secretariat Order dated 16.10.2009, pension & pensionary
benefits to SFF personnel "at par with Indian Army Group 'Y' 'Personnel Below Officer Rank' PBORs"
had been sanctioned w.e.f 1.1.2009. In W.P.(C)1335/2012, the Delhi High Court asked the Central
Government to restore service pension to SFF veterans who had retired before January 2009. The
representation stated that the same yardstick should be applicable to Assam Rifles personnel as well.
2.16.15 The Special Frontier Force (SFF), a para-military force led by a Major General of Indian Army
as its Inspector General, headquartered in New Delhi, was created in November 1962 in the backdrop
of Chinese aggression by the then Prime Minister Shri Jawaharlal Nehru. SFF has been modeled on the
lines of the Indian Army and the Assam Rifles. There are several similarities between SFF and Assam
Rifles in terms of their service conditions, training, leadership by the Army, rank structure of the
'Personnel Below Officer Rank' (PBOR), etc.
2.16.16 The representation also stated that the PBOR of SFF have already been accorded parity with
Group 'Y' Indian Army PBOR for the purpose of pay & allowance. This provision has also been ratified
by the fifth and sixth Central Pay Commission. Pension to PBOR of SFF (benefits already extended to
Force Officer) as applicable to corresponding ranks of Indian Army Group 'Y' PBOR was granted with
effect from 1st January, 2009 through a decision of Committee of Secretaries. Medical (ECHS) and
canteen facilities have also been granted to SFF Pensioners since then.
2.16.17 The Committee takes note of the fact that the personnel of the Special Frontier Force,
which is a paramilitary force like the Assam Rifles, have already been accorded parity with Group
'Y' 'Personnel Below Officer Rank' of the Indian Army for the purpose of pay, allowance and
pension. The Committee wonders as to why the Assam Rifles personnel have been deprived of
such benefits. The Committee feels that this has caused undue discrimination towards the
personnel of the Assam Rifles, who have been deprived of the benefits accorded to other

21
paramilitary forces. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Assam Rifles may be
immediately given parity with Group 'Y' 'Personnel Below Officer Rank' of the Indian Army for
the purpose of pay, allowance and pension on the lines of the Special Frontier Force.
2.17 Welfare Schemes and Issues-Benevolent Fund
2.17.1  The Committee was informed that an immediate financial assistance of ` 1 lakh is provided to
the next of kin of the Assam Rifles personnel on death. Similarly, a one-time grant of ` 25,000/- is also
paid to all personnel being discharged as invalid on medical grounds.
2.17.2  The amount was last revised in August 2013 from ` 50,000 to ` 1 lakh. The Ministry asserted
that the amount of ` 1 lakh that is provided from the Assam Rifle Benevolent Fund (ARBF) is sufficient
as other financial benefits are provided based on the prevalent policies. Average financial benefits to battle
casualty is approximately Rs 80-90 lakh and physical casualty is ` 50-60 lakh.
2.17.3  The Committee feels that the amount of ````` 1 lakh being provided as an immediate
financial assistance to the next of kin of the Assam Rifles personnel from Assam Rifle Benevolent
Fund (ARBF) on their death is paltry and not in keeping with the needs of the family. The
Committee also notes that this amount was last revised in 2013, almost five years ago. The
Committee feels that this amount is too little even for the purpose of providing immediate
financial assistance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this amount of ````` 1 lakh should
be immediately revised to at least ````` 2.5 lakh w.e.f the beginning of the year 2018. The Committee
also recommends that this amount should be periodically revised every three years.
2.17.4 The Committee also notes that a one-time grant of ````` 25,000/- is paid to all the personnel
being discharged as invalidment on medical grounds. The Committee feels that this amount is
in dire need of revision as it is too little to provide any form of immediate assistance. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the one-time grant being paid to the personnel being
discharged as invalidment on medical grounds be revised to ````` 1 lakh w.e.f the beginning of the
year 2018. The Committee further recommends that this amount should be periodically revised
every three years.
2.18 Welfare Schemes and Issues-Ex-CAPF/Ex-servicemen status
2.18.1 The Ministry informed that it has provided ex-CAPF status to retired CAPFs personnel vide office
memorandum dated 23rd November 2012, however, the Assam Rifles was not included in the list because
of the military component of Assam Rifles.
2.18.2 The Assam Rifles Ex-Servicemen Welfare Association (All India), in its representation sent to the
Committee, stated that MHA had issued OM dated 23rd November, 2012,which was duly approved by
the Cabinet Committee on Security, designating the retired Central Armed Police force Personnel as 'Ex-
CAPF personnel'. Based on such designation, the State/UT Governments concerned may extend suitable
benefits to them on the lines of the benefits extended by the State/UT Governments to the Ex-servicemen
of Defence Forces. Union Home Secretary vide D.O. letter dated 19th February, 2013, sent to all the
Chief Secretaries, requested the States to extend the suitable benefits to ex-CAPF personnel on the lines

22
of the benefits extended to the ex-servicemen of Defence Forces. The representation also stated that the
Ministry of Home Affairs, in response to an RTI, intimated vide letter dated 9th January, 2013 intimated
that there was no proposal under consideration in the Ministry about designating retired personnel of
Assam Rifles as ex-Central Para-Military force (CPMF) personnel. The Assam Rifles, thus, are neither
designated as ex-Servicemen nor as ex-CAPF and are bereft of the benefits that come with either of these
statuses.
2.18.3 The representation also included a copy of the communication U.O. No. A/Pers/11-27/VIP Ref/
2015/Pers-II dated 8th March, 2017 from the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposal of Assam
Rifles for declaring retired AR personnel as ex-CAPF personnel has been examined by this Ministry in
consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice and while examining the proposal the Ministry of Law
& Justice observed as under:
"Assam Rifles could not be included in the list of CAPFs due to its unique configuration and
deployment in the North East as a specialized Counter Insurgency and Border Guarding force. The
operational control vests with the Indian Army under Ministry of Defence and at the same time
administrative control rests with Ministry of Home Affairs".
2.18.4 The Committee notes the reluctance to designate the retired personnel of Assam Rifles as
either ex-CAPF or ex-Servicemen and also takes note of the observation of the Ministry of Law
& Justice on this issue. The Committee believes that this issue can be resolved through imaginative
measures. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may designate the
retired personnel of the Assam Rifles as 'Ex-Central Armed Police Force' and consider granting
them post-retirement benefits available to the ex-CAPF personnel.
2.19 Women Representation in AR
2.19.1 The Committee also desired to know the measures being taken to enhance the percentage of
women employees in the Assam Rifles and to provide adequate facilities to them in the places where they
are posted.
2.19.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that the Force is committed towards gender equality. In an
effort to ensure adequate representation of women, which as per the guidelines is 5 per cent of total
strength of 'General Duty' personnel in Assam Rifles i.e. approximately 2400 women. Presently, 125
women in 'General Duty' have been recruited in the first batch and posted to the battalions. In addition,
235 women are undergoing Basic Military Training.
2.19.3 The Committee also enquired from the Ministry about the current status of the proposal to form
Mahila Rifleman Companies led by lady officers. The Ministry submitted that once adequate strength of
Mahila soldiers is available, then the proposal for Mahila Riflemen Company with lady officers as
Company Commanders will be implemented. However, the lady officers are posted and are responsible
for all aspects of Mahila soldiers.
2.19.4 The Committee takes cognizance of the efforts being made to increase the representation
of women in Assam Rifles. The Committee observes that at present only 360 women personnel

23
have been recruited and this number is very low as compared to the percentage of women
employees stipulated as per the guidelines i.e. 5 per cent of total strength of 'General Duty'
personnel or around 2400 women. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Assam Rifles
should conduct a special recruitment drive to induct more women in the Force.
2.19.5 The Committee was also apprised about the facilities being provided to women employees as
under:
(a) Maternity leave as per the Government rules.
(b) Spouse posting is being taken care of, wherever possible.
(c) Separate women cells are functioning at various levels to monitor any sexual harassment
cases.
(d) Separate living accommodation with adequate security facilities.
(e) Separate toilet/bathing facility protected from public view wherever women employees are
working.
(f) Creche facilities to the women having small children.
(g) A separate women training company at Assam Rifles Training Centre and School has been
established.
(h) Women recruits are being supervised and trained by the women officers, who are on
deputation from the Army.
(j) Adequate medical facilities are ensured with women medical attendants. (k) It is ensured
that every women employee avails full leave as per their requirement. (l) It is being ensured
that undue pressure is not being exerted on the women employees by their superiors.
2.19.6 The Committee notes the measures being taken to provide adequate facilities to the
women personnel for improving their working conditions and encouraging more women to join
the Force. The Committee, however, feels that women should be motivated to join the security
forces as they not only provide a different perspective but also allow the forces to utilize the huge
untapped pool of human resources in the country. For this, it is essential to allay any fears and
apprehensions that women may have relating to the working conditions in the Force. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that any grievances of women personnel should be considered
with utmost sincerity and seriousness by the Commanding Officers. The Committee also
recommends that the Commanding Officers should be regularly instructed to submit a report on
the challenges faced by women personnel in their respective battalions and the measures taken
to address them.

24
CHAPTER-III
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL (SSB)
3.1 Historical Background
3.1.1 The Special Service Bureau which is presently known as the Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) was
conceived after the conflict with China in 1962 and eventually created in March 1963 with the objective
of achieving 'Total security preparedness' in the remote border areas for performing a 'stay-behind' role
in the event of a war. The SSB was started in northern Assam, northern Bengal, hill districts of Uttar
Pradesh (now Uttarakhand), Himachal Pradesh, part of Punjab and Ladakh area of J&K. Later, the
jurisdiction of SSB was extended to Manipur, Tripura and Jammu (1965), Meghalaya (1975), Sikkim
(1976), Rajasthan (1985), southern Bengal, Nagaland and Mizoram (1989). Its area of coverage included
15 states. The SSB in the erstwhile role, was covering a population of more than 5.73 crores living in
about 80,000 villages and about 9917 kms of India's international borders.
3.1.2 Since 1963, the main thrust of the SSB was on generating a sense of national belonging, security
and vigilance. It started several training programmes for the people. Village Level Training Programmes
and Refresher Training Courses in civil defence were started to train villagers to defend their own villages
and if the situation demanded, to play a 'stay behind role'. Villagers were trained for use of small arms
and the art of self defence to develop a spirit of resistance. In early 1970s National Integration Programs
were also started in a big way. However, the rifle training was a big draw and brought lakhs of people
under the influence of SSB. The volunteers trained by the SSB became eyes and ears of the organization
and helped actively on the border. They could also be called upon whenever required. As a result the
number of Chinese intelligence agents prodding India's border reduced considerably.
3.1.3 Pursuant to the Kargil intrusion and on the recommendations given by a Group of Ministers on
19t June 2001, the Special Service Bureau was mandated to guard 1751 kms long India-Nepal border.
The Special Service Bureau was re-christened as the Sashastra Seema Bal and designated as a border
guarding force. Later, in March 2004, SSB was further mandated to guard 699 kms long India-Bhutan
border. SSB has also been declared as the Lead Intelligence Agency (LIA) on India-Nepal and India-
Bhutan borders. Currently it has a sanctioned strength of 97,014 personnel and 73 battalions.
3.2 Operational Role and Responsibility
3.2.1 The SSB is spread along the International border across Uttarakhand, U.P., Bihar, West Bengal,
Sikkim, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. The role and charter of the duties of SSB as per the SSB Act,
2007 and SSB Rules, 2009 are: "to safeguard the security of assigned borders of India and promote sense
of security among the people living in border areas; prevent trans-border crimes, smuggling and any
other illegal activity; prevent unauthorized entry into or exit from the territory of India; carry out civic
action programme in the area of responsibility; and to perform any other duty assigned by the Central
Government". The SSB is also being deployed for law & order, counter insurgency operations and
election duties.
24

25
3.3 Organization Structure
3.3.1 The Force Headquarters of SSB is headed by the Director General (DG). An Additional DG and
seven Directorates headed by an officer of the rank of Inspector General (IG)function under the DG.
Each Frontier HQ is headed by an Inspector General, Sector HQ is headed by a Deputy Inspector General
(DIG) and each battalion is headed by a Commandant.
3.3.2 SSB has six Frontier Headquarters (FHQ), 18 Sector Headquarters (SHQ) and 73 battalions (55
Operational including 02 NDRF battalions & 18 Reserve battalions). The FHQs are located at Ranikhet,
Lucknow, Patna, Siliguri, Tezpur and Guwahati. Each Frontier comprises two or three Sectors and each
Sector comprises three or four battalions.
3.4 Recruitment and Vacancies
3.4.1 The Committee was informed that in SSB, the recruitment for the posts of Constable (GD) and
Sub-Inspector (GD) is done by Staff Selection Commission (SSC), and for the post of Assistant
Commandant (GD) is done by Union Public Service Commission(UPSC). SSC and UPSC conduct
combined examinations for all the CAPFs. For filling up the vacant posts, vacancies are notified to SSC/
UPSC from time to time. For this purpose, one of the CAPFs is appointed the 'Nodal Force' for collating
the vacancies in all the CAPFs and reporting the same to the recruitment agency concerned. Recruitment
of tradesmen and all posts other than GD, viz., communication, ministerial, stenographer, para-veterinary,
para-medical and compassionate appointment is done departmentally. To fill-up the vacancies against
promotion quota, meetings of the Departmental Promotion Committee (DPCs) are conducted every year
as per Recruitment Rules (RRs).
3.4.2 The Committee sought to know the details of existing vacancies as on 11th April, 2018 in different
cadres/posts. The Ministry submitted the details of vacancies and the status of various recruitment exams
as under:


26
Posts/Exam V acancies in respect of SSB Status
Constable(GD) Vacancies yet to be received MoU along with latest scheme has been
Exam, 2017 from Nodal Force i.e CRPF. sent to SSC & Commission is in the
process of publishing the notification for
Constable(GD) exam, shortly. The draft
notification is yet to be received from
SSC.
SI(GD) in CAPF 209 vacancies in respect of Detailed Medical Examination in
Exam, 2017 SSB has been reported to SSC respect of candidates was conducted from
05.04.2018 to 25.04.2018.
SI(GD) in CAPF 206 vacancies in respect of The advertisement had been published
Exam, 2018 SSB has been reported to SSC on 3rd March,2018 and the last date of
receiving application was on 2nd
April,2018.
CAPFs (Assistant 63 vacancies in respect of Review Medical Examination in respect
Commandant) SSB has been reported to of unfit candidates (who appealed for
Exam, 2017 UPSC RME) has been conducted from
06.02.2018 to 10.02.2018 and its report
has been sent to UPSC by Nodal Force
i.e. CRPF for interview/personality test
to be conducted by UPSC.
CAPFs (Assistant 29 vacancies in respect of Notified on 25th April,2018.
Commandant) SSB has been reported to
Exam, 2018 UPSC
3.4.3 In a questionnaire sent to the Ministry, the Committee sought to know the reasons for not filling
up these posts and the timeline by when these were likely to be filled up. The Ministry, in its reply,
informed the Committee that the recruitment agencies i.e. SSC and UPSC would take approx. 2 years
for completing the recruitment process. The expansion of the Force and recruitment of personnel is
conducted in a phased manner, which also creates some delay in filling up the vacancies. Non-availability
of eligible candidates in the feeder posts for promotion as per the conditions of RRs was another reason
for various vacancies.
3.4.4 The Committee takes note of the reasons stated by the Ministry of Home Affairs for
existence of several vacancies in various posts and cadres in SSB. The Committee understands
that recruitment of the personnel is a time consuming process. However, the Committee feels
that there is a lack of foresight, proper planning and proactive estimation of future vacancies
while reporting the vacancies to the recruitment agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry may explore the possibility of proactively identifying the vacancies and reporting
the same to the recruitment agencies, instead of reporting the vacancies that exist on the date

27
of notification of the recruitment examination. The Committee also recommends that the
respective CAPFs may alternatively notify the updated status of vacancies before the start of the
recruitment process by the recruitment agency concerned so as to eliminate any delay in filling
up the vacancies.
3.4.5 The Committee also observes that the recruitment agencies take around two years for
completing the recruitment process. The Committee is of the view that this time period can be
reduced to around one year by streamlining the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may request the recruitment agencies to undertake
necessary measures to reduce the timeframe within which various recruitment exams are to be
completed for the CAPFs.
3.5 Promotional Avenues and Stagnation
3.5.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that
the promotion of personnel in the Force generally depends on their eligibility and availability of vacancies
in the next higher ranks. The SSB is presently in expansion mode and sufficient numbers of vacancies
are available in almost all the ranks. Therefore, most of the SSB personnel get their promotion in due
course. The Ministry also informed the Committee that in order to address the issue of stagnation, if
any, the Cadre review of all the cadres in SSB is under process.
3.5.2 The promotional avenues available in SSB as submitted by the Ministry are as under:
Sl. No. Promotional avenue available Residency period Actual time taken
1. CT (GD) to HC(GD) 08 years 11-12 years
2. HC (GD) to ASI (GD) 05 years 08-10 years
3. ASI (GD) to SI(GD) 06 years 06 years
4. SI (GD) to Inspector (GD) 05 years 05-06 years
5. Inspector (GD) to AC (GD) 05 years 05-06 years
6. AC (GD) to DC 06 years 06 years
7. DC to 2 I/C 05 years 05 years
8. 2 I/C to Commandant 05 years 05 years
9. Commandant to DIG 03 years 03-04 years
10. DIG to IG 04 years 06-07 years
Acronyms:
CT: Constable, HC: Head Constable, ASI: Assistant Sub-Inspector, SI- Sub-Inspector
AC: Assistant Commandant, DC: Deputy Commandant, 2 I/C: Second-in-Command
DIG: Deputy Inspector General, IG: Inspector General
3.5.3 The Committee takes note of the fact that SSB is presently in expansion mode and
sufficient numbers of vacancies are available in almost all the ranks. The Committee, however,

28
observes that there is still some stagnation at the ranks of Constable and Head Constable. A
Constable gets promoted to the post of Head-Constable in 11-12 years as against the required
residency period of 8 years. It takes another 8-10 years for a Head-Constable to become an
Assistant Sub-Inspector as against the required residency period of 5 years. The Committee has
not received a satisfactory explanation why this stagnation exists despite the force being in
expansion mode. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issue of stagnation be addressed
so that promotions take place as soon as residency periods are completed.
General Duty cadre
3.5.4 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the General Duty cadre
of SSB:
3.5.5 The Ministry also furnished the career growth chart of all the combatised and non-combatised
cadres. The ratio mentioned in the arrows connecting two consecutive cadres represent the ratio between
the number of posts in a rank and the number of posts in the immediate lower rank. This ratio is an
indicator of the promotional avenues available to the employees in a particular rank and excludes the
number of posts that are filled either by direct recruitment or deputation. Career growth charts for
various cadres are as shown above.
3.5.6 This cadre comprises of posts from the lowest rank of Constable to the rank of Inspector-General.
Direct recruitment in this cadre is held for three ranks: Constable, Sub-Inspector (33 per cent) and
Assistant Commandant (50 per cent). In the top ranks of DIG and IG, officers belonging to the Indian
Police Service come on deputation.
3.5.7 The Committee takes note of the career growth chart of the General Duty cadre and finds
that the present ratio of posts at the levels of Assistant Commandant and Deputy Commandant
which is at 2:9, does not seem optimal for providing desirable promotional avenues. The Committee
feels that, at present, stagnation does not seem to be there apparently due to the ongoing
expansion of the Force. However, in future, this sub-optimal ratio can prove to be a bottleneck
for career growth of the officers serving at the level of Assistant Commandant. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review the number of posts at the level of Deputy
Commandant in the General Duty cadre of SSB and consider improving the ratio of the posts
at the levels of Assistant Commandant and Deputy Commandant to at least 1:4 and gradually
to 1:3 so as to ensure availability of sufficient promotional avenues. The Committee also

29
recommends that this should be brought to the notice of Cadre Review authorities if that process
has not been completed yet.
Communication cadre
3.5.8 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Communication
cadre of SSB:
3.5.9 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Head-Constable to the rank of Deputy Inspector-
General. Direct recruitment in this cadre is held for four ranks: Head-Constable, Assistant Sub-Inspector
(25 per cent), Sub-Inspector (25 per cent) and Assistant Commandant (25 per cent).
3.5.10 The Committee takes note of the career growth chart of the Communication cadre and
finds that direct recruitment to this cadre is conducted at four levels viz. Head-Constable,
Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI), Sub-Inspector (SI) and Assistant Commandant. Conducting direct
recruitment at so many levels, particularly in the successive levels of Head-Constable, ASI, and
SI, needs to be revisited. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review
the recruitment policy of conducting the direct recruitment at three successive levels of posts
in the communication cadre of SSB and explore the possibility of conducting direct recruitment
only at the levels of Head-Constable and Sub-Inspector for a majority of the posts at those levels.
3.5.11 The Committee also observes certain anomalies in the organizational chart that may lead
to stagnation at levels such as Assistant Sub-Inspector and Deputy Commandant as the ratio of
the posts of SI and ASI at 1:6 and Dy. Commandant to Commandant at 1:5 are on the lower
side compared to the ratio of other successive posts. The Committee also feels that the situation
worsened further due to 25 per cent of the vacant posts getting filled up through direct recruitment.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may undertake measures to improve
the ratio of the posts of SI and ASI and Dy. Commandant to Commandant to at least 1:4 to
reduce the stagnation at these levels.
Engineering cadre
3.5.12 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Engineering cadre
of SSB:

30
3.5.13 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Sub-Inspector (Pioneer) to the rank of Inspector-
General (Works). Direct recruitment in this cadre is conducted for two ranks: Sub-Inspector and
Assistant Commandant (60 per cent). Two out of three posts at the rank of DIG are filled by the officers
coming on deputation from other services.
3.5.14 The Committee finds it quite anomalous that there are only two posts in the rank of
Commandant as compared to three posts in the rank of DIG. The Committee feels that there
is a scope of increasing the number of posts in this rank as it does not make any sense to have
only two Commandants under the control of three DIGs. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry may consider increasing the number of posts at the Commandant level from
two to at least four.
Ministerial cadre
3.5.15 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Ministerial cadre
of SSB:
3.5.16 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Head-Constable to the rank of Deputy Commandant.
3.5.17 The Committee, while observing the career growth chart of the Ministerial cadre in SSB,
finds that the promotional avenues at the top of the cadre are relatively sparse as only 4 posts
of Deputy Commandant are available as against the 32 posts of Assistant Commandant.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider enhancing the number
of the posts at the Deputy Commandant level, to avoid stagnation at the rank of Assistant
Commandant.


31
Stenographer cadre
3.5.18 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Stenographer cadre
of SSB:
3.5.19 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of ASI to the rank of Assistant Commandant.
3.5.20 The Committee takes note of the fact that there is no post at the rank of Deputy
Commandant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider creating
a few posts at the Deputy Commandant level, to obviate stagnation at the rank of Assistant
Commandant in stenographer cadre.
Veterinary Officers cadre
3.5.21 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Veterinary Officers
cadre of SSB:
3.5.22 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Assistant Commandant upto the rank of DIG.
Para-Veterinary cadre
3.5.23 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Veterinary Officers
cadre of SSB:
3.5.24 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Constable upto the rank of Inspector. Apart from
the rank of Constable, direct recruitment is also conducted to recruit Head-Constables for 40 per cent
of the posts at that rank.
Tech (Armament) Group-A cadre (Recruitment Rules yet to be finalized)
3.5.25 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Tech Armament
Group A cadre of SSB:


32
3.5.26 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Assistant Commandant upto the rank of Commandant.
Tech (Armament) Group - B cadre
3.5.27 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Tech Armament
Group B cadre of SSB:
3.5.28 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Constable upto the rank of Inspector.
Motor Transport and Mechanics cadre
3.5.29 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the twin cadre of
Motor Transport and Mechanics:
3.5.30 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Constable upto the rank of Sub-Inspector. In
addition to the recruitment of Constables, direct recruitment is also held for the Mechanics to fill 67 per
cent posts at the rank of Head Constable.
3.5.31 The Committee finds the career growth chart of the Tech (Armament) cadre in SSB to be
unusual and feels that it needs to be reviewed considering the fact that there are just two posts
at the level of Assistant Commandant as compared to eight posts at the level of Deputy
Commandant in this cadre. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may
review the structure of the Tech (Armament) cadre which seems to be anomalous as the number
of commanding officers at the level of Deputy Commandant is four times higher than the
number of junior officers at the level of Assistant Commandant.
Medical Officers cadre (Dynamic Assured Career Program (DACP) scheme is applicable)
3.5.32 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Medical Officers
cadre of SSB:
3.5.33 This cadre comprises of posts from the rank of Assistant Commandant upto the rank of Inspector-
General.

33
Para-Medical cadre
3.5.34 The following chart shows the career growth of the personnel belonging to the Para-Medical cadre
of SSB:
3.5.35 This cadre comprises of various para-medical professionals such as pharmacist, nurses, radiographers
and laboratory assistants.
3.5.36 The Committee takes note of the career growth of personnel in different posts in the para-
medical cadre of SSB and finds that promotional avenues in these posts are almost non-existent.
The ratio for successive levels in various posts viz. Staff Nurse, Pharmacist and Radiographer are
2:15, 1:9 and 1:21 respectively. There is evidently a lack of any promotional avenue for the staff
in this cadre. The Committee wonders why the Ministry is apathetic to the staff in this cadre.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must urgently conduct a
review of all the posts in the para-medical cadre of SSB and take appropriate and adequate
measures at the earliest to resolve the stagnation in this cadre.
3.6 Cadre Restructuring
3.6.1 The Committee sought to know from the Ministry about the existence of any institutional mechanism
for regular cadre restructuring to address the issue concerning human resources management in the SSB.
The Ministry, in its reply, submitted that no comprehensive cadre review has been done for the SSB since
the inception of the Force. In the year 2011, restructuring of the Force was done but that was limited
to only combatised component of the force. Review of cadres as per the DoP&T guidelines has to be
carried out in every 5 years and an endeavor, in this regard, was carried out in the year 2015. The review
of Group 'A' General Duty cadre and 24 non-combatised cadres has been finalized and the review of
Group 'B'&'C' General Duty cadre and Group 'C' Tradesmen cadre has been initiated and is under
process. The review of rest of the combatised cadres is being prepared by the SSB.
3.6.2 The Committee is of the view that cadre restructuring, in accordance with the timeline and
procedure prescribed by the DoPT, is essential to obviate stagnation and to provide reasonable
career growth to all the personnel serving in various cadres. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that not only the pending cadre review of all the remaining cadres be completed at


34
the earliest, but also the cadre review of all the posts in the force should be undertaken every
five years.
3.7 Attrition
3.7.1 The Committee sought to know the extent of attrition, in terms of Voluntary Retirements and
resignations, in the SSB. The Ministry furnished the details pertaining thereto for the period from year
2010 to 2017 as under:
Y ear     V oluntary Retirement
Gazetted Officers Subordinate Officers Other Ranks T otal
(GOs) (SOs) (Ors)
Male Female Male Female Male Female
2010 7 0 49 0 391 0 447
2011 01 0 35 01 276 0 313
2012 04 0 62 0 381 0 447
2013 13 0 56 01 269 2 341
2014 02 0 42 0 202 0 246
2015 1 0 13 0 47 0 61
2016 5 0 121 0 150 1 277
2017 8 0 232 0 248 2 490
Y ear             Resignation
Gazetted Officers Subordinate Officers Other Posts T otal
(GOs) (SOs) (Ors)
Male Female Male Female Male Female
2010 5 1 18 0 159 1 184
2011 6 0 7 0 93 6 112
2012 6 1 13 0 98 3 121
2013 12 0 32 0 85 0 129
2014 19 0 16 0 82 1 118
2015 17 2 18 0 84 1 122
2016 9 0 7 0 62 1 79
2017 10 0 5 1 41 1 58

35
3.7.2 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that the main reasons for voluntary retirement and
resignation by SSB personnel include residing away from family, illness of self and family members,
education of children, inability to keep family at Border Out Posts (BOP), non-availability of family
accommodation in some battalion Headquarters where infrastructure is yet to develop, social and family
obligations/ commitments, and better job opportunities.
3.7.3 During the meeting held on the subject, the Ministry was asked to explain the reasons for a huge
spike in the number of voluntary retirements to 490 during 2017. The Ministry explained that many
personnel wait for the next Pay Commission to come before applying for voluntary retirement and the
moment the pay commission is awarded there is a surge in the number of voluntary retirements.
3.7.4 The Ministry was also asked to furnish an explanation for the high number of resignations every
year. The Ministry explained that most of the resignations occur as the young officers at the Assistant
Commandant level keep on appearing for other examinations and are sometimes able to get into other
services, including Civil Services.
3.7.5 The Committee sought to know the measures that have been taken to improve the working
conditions to curb attrition in the SSB. The Ministry informed the Committee that the following measures
are being taken:
(i) Grant of leave to the Force personnel to attend to their urgent domestic problems/issues/
needs by implementing a transparent and fair leave policy.
(ii) Regular interaction among Officers and Jawans to find out and address their problems,
especially while proceeding and returning from leave.
(iii) Improvement in living conditions through provision of basic amenities/facilities for troops
and their families.
(iv) Providing better medical facilities for troops and their families.
(v) Providing Recreational and sports facilities and provision of team games and sports.
(vi) Providing welfare measure like Central Police Canteens facility to the troops and their
families, scholarship to their wards.
(vii) Institute grievances redressal mechanism right from the BOP level so that every Force
personnel can project their grievances for redressal.
(viii) Implementation of Buddy system.
(ix) Briefing and debriefing of Jawans while going on leave and coming back from leave.
(x) Supervisory officers to involve themselves with Jawans in knowing their personal/ official
problems through informal interactions, especially with those returning from leave.
(xi) Not to frequently change personnel working in small cohesive group (Section level).
(xii) To ease the stress the Force personnel, Yoga has been practiced in all units of the SSB and
also topics on stress management in Training syllabus have been included.

36
3.7.6 The Committee finds some merit in the explanation furnished by the Ministry that there
was a surge in the number of voluntary retirements in 2017 immediately after the Pay Commission
was awarded. However, the Committee feels that voluntary retirements are also indicative of
disenchantment with the working conditions as it is unusual for government employees to seek
retirements when they have more than ten years of service left. Moreover, the Committee
observes that even during 2012 and 2013, the years that did not follow any pay commission, there
were unusually high number of voluntary retirements at 447 and 341. The Committee, therefore,
feels that there are reasons other than Pay Commission award which are leading to such high
number of early retirements. The Committee is of the view that though the Ministry of Home
Affairs cited fulfilling domestic obligation as major reason for large numbers of personnel
preferring to take VRS in SSB, other reasons like career stagnation, tough working conditions
and lack of pay parity with the armed forces may also be equally important for this undesirable
trend. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should conduct a survey among
the personnel to assess the factors leading to such large number of personnel taking VRS and
undertake appropriate measures to address the concerns of the personnel so that this trend can
be curbed.
3.8 Training issues
3.8.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that all the officers, subordinate officers
and other ranks of the SSB are put through basic training of approximately one year duration before their
operational deployment. Prior to their promotion, all gazetted officers, subordinate officers and personnel
belonging to other ranks must successfully complete pre-promotional and promotional courses meant for
the particular rank. Other training programmes for the SSB personnel include basic & refresher
telecommunication training, basic & refresher medical training and training of dog handlers.
3.8.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that adequate training is provided to battalions before their
induction for duties other than border guarding. Before induction of troops for LWE/IS duty, pre-
induction training and familiarization is arranged through concerned State Police authorities and Counter
Insurgency and Jungle Warfare training is arranged by SSB training institutions.
3.8.3 The Ministry also furnished details of specialized training programs being organized for various
ranks of personnel as under:
Sl. No. Name of the Course Level Duration
1. Counter Insurgency & Jungle W arfare All ranks/Pre Induction 36 Days
2. Rock Climbing All ranks 18 Days
3. Medium Altitude Training All ranks 21 Days
4. High Altitude Training All ranks 36 Days
5. Snow Survival All ranks 36 Days
6. Disaster Management Course SOs/ Ranks 10 Weeks

37
Sl. No. Name of the Course Level Duration
7. Identification and Handling of Explosives Ct. to HC(GD) 02 Weeks
8. Trainers of Trainee on Counter Personnel with AX and 02 Weeks
Insurgency and Jungle Warfare I grading
(CIJW)
9. Workshop on Juvenile Justice & HC (GD) to SI (GD) 02 Days
Human Trafficking
10. Interrogation GO/ Insp(GD) 05 Days
11. Psychological Operations GO/ Insp(GD) 06 Days
12. Intelligence Initial& Refresher GOs/ Insp(GD) 06 to 21 Days
13. Perception Management GOs/Insp(GD) 03 Days
14. Source Raising & Management GOs/Insp(GD) 03 Days
15. Riot Control Drill 01 Platoon of Each 02 Weeks
Coy of a BN
3.8.4 The Committee notes the duration of the specialized training being provided by SSB
training institutions and feels that duration of some of the training programs such as Counter
Insurgency and Jungle Warfare does not seem enough to develop adequate capabilities for the
required purpose. The Committee also wonders how SSB training institutions provide training for
countering the LWE and North-East insurgency, for which some of its battalions have been
posted. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs needs to
strengthen and rationalise the training regimes for CAPFs to handle new internal security
challenges.
3.9 Housing and Accommodation
3.9.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that presently, 29,331 houses are authorized for SSB
personnel, out of which, 9,871 houses have been sanctioned. Out of these sanctioned 9,871 houses
5,155 houses have been completed and 4,716 houses are under construction. A proposal for construction
of 2,679 houses till 2020 is in pipeline. In SSB, the housing satisfaction level is 33.65 per cent vis-a-
vis authorized number of houses and 9.97 per cent vis-a-vis sanctioned strength of 98,793. The details
of housing situation in SSB are as under:
Status Number
Authorized 29331
Constructed 5155
Under Construction 4716
Deficiency 19460

38
3.9.2 During the meeting held to discuss the subject, one of the members of the Committee highlighted
the discrepancy that the satisfaction level of 33.65 per cent claimed by the MHA included under-
construction houses as well and if only those houses that have been fully constructed were taken into
consideration then the actual satisfaction level would have been quite low at around 17 per cent. The
DG , SSB then explained that most of the construction projects were at an advanced stage and would
be completed soon. The Home Secretary added that SSB went for a very large expansion over a small
number of years. Thus, the Force went for a large-scale construction of housing projects, many of
which were nearing completion during 2018.
3.9.3 The Ministry explained that the main reason for low housing satisfaction in the Force is delay in
acquisition of land and hence presently 5,155 houses have been completed and 4,716 houses are under
construction. Other bottlenecks in delay in completion are paucity of funds in 'Residential Buildings' head
and actual delay by the construction agencies viz. CPWD/NBCC/HSCL.
3.9.4 The Committee was also informed that attempts are being made to provide adequate accommodation
to the force personnel at their place of working i.e. at Frontiers, Sector Headquarters, battalions and
BOPs.
3.9.5 The Ministry also furnished the timeline and status of construction works as follows:
Sl. State Location Executing No. of Progress Target
No. Agency Quarters (in %)
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Uttrakhand Ranikhet CPWD 11 78 30.09.2018
2. Pithoragarh CPWD 240 55 31.12.2018
3. Champawat CPWD 168 89 30.06.2018
4. Sitarganj CPWD 154 100 31.03.2018
5. Uttar Pradesh Maharajganj NBCC 106 74 30.09.2018
6. Lakhimpur Kheri CPWD 272 90 30.06.2018
7. Bihar Bathnaha CPWD 252 80 30.06.2018
8. Sitamarhi HSCL 213 65 W ork rescind &
retendering in
progress.
9. Birpur NBCC 213 88 30.06.2018
10. Supaul NBCC 81 95 30.06.2018
11. Ramgarwa CPWD 213 2 31.08.2019
12. West Bengal Ranidanga CPWD 153 91 30.06.2018

39
12 3 4 5 6 7
13. Falakata CPWD 28 70 30.09.2018
14. Malbazar CPWD 316 30 31.12.2018
15. Barasat CPWD 124 8 31.03.2019
16. Assam Geyzing NBCC 146 17 31.05.2019
17. Sonapur CPWD 287 62 25.1 1.2018
18. Rangia CPWD 104 60 31.12.2018
19. Kajalgaon CPWD 65 86 30.06.2018
20. Kokrajhar CPWD 81 80 30.06.2018
21. Howly NBCC 138 92 30.06.2018
22. Bijni NBCC 138 88 30.06.2018
23. Mangaldoi NBCC 138 53 31.12.2018
24. Bhairabkunda CPWD 192 70 30.09.2018
25. Maharashtra Hingoli NBCC 160 97 30.06.2018
26. Arunachal Pradesh Dirang CPWD 122 65 30.09.2018
27. Tawang CPWD 92 74 30.09.2018
28. Himachal Pradesh Sapri CPWD 57 0 Revised sanction
is needed.
29. Gujarat Jamnagar CPWD 36 80 18.06.2018
30. Madhya Pradesh Bhopal NBCC 189 99 30.06.2018
31. Rajasthan Maujpur (Alwar) NBCC 204 91 30.06.2018
32. Rajasthan Dera (Alwar) NBCC 23 99 30.06.2018
TOTAL 4716
3.9.6 The Committee is concerned that the delay in land acquisition, paucity of funds for
construction, and delay by the construction agencies have affected the completion of housing
projects and feels that the housing project monitoring mechanism needs to be strengthened. The
housing satisfaction level in the SSB at around 17 per cent is among the lowest in all the CAPFs
and even after the completion of various projects, some of which are likely to spillover to the
next year, the satisfaction level will still remain low at around 33 per cent of the authorized
housing level. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take necessary
measures to streamline the factors that have delayed the construction of projects and provide

40
adequate funds to the Force under appropriate budgetary head to achieve the completion of all
the projects as per the stated timeline. The Committee observes that such poor housing satisfaction
level could be one major reason behind high attrition/VRS, etc.
3.9.7 The Committee understands that SSB is a young Force and is in an expansion mode. The
Committee, however, feels that it is the responsibility of the Ministry to ensure that the relevant
infrastructure projects are implemented at a pace comparable to that of the expansion of the
Force to ensure satisfactory working conditions in SSB. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should regularly assess the housing requirement of SSB, proactively plan
housing projects, and closely monitor the implementation of construction projects to achieve a
good housing satisfaction level.
3.10 Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Food
3.10.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the diet intake of the Jawans
is decided by Unit Medical Officer on the basis of general guidelines issued by IG (Medical), considering
the local availability of the food grains/fresh vegetables and other food items considering the calories
intake required by a Jawan. Mess committees are formed in every Unit right upto the BOP level every
month. These committees comprise of dining members on rotation basis.
3.10.2 The procurement of food items from local market is done by these committee members after
ascertaining the market rate and quality. For cooking purpose, there are cooks and water carriers in each
mess. To ensure quality of food, Duty SO and Duty Officer of the Unit check the mess and taste the
food on regular basis before serving. The Unit Medical Officer also checks food, hygiene and sanitation
of the mess at regular intervals. The Coy/BOP Commander as well as all the Platoon and Section
Commanders posted in Coy/BOP also take food in the mess along with the Jawans and are regular dining
members.
3.10.3 The mess expenditures are worked out by the mess committee every month and the expenditure
is shared equally amongst the dining members. Monthly mess meetings are also conducted in which the
details of expenditure and ration balance are explained to all the dining members. The mess expenditure
is audited monthly by a Board of officers which is detailed by the Unit Commandant. The admissible
Ration Money Allowance, which is decided by the Ministry of Defence and duly adopted by the SSB,
at present is ` 97.85 per head per day. It is credited directly to the Bank Accounts of Force personnel
every month.
3.10.4 When enquired whether the ration money given to the personnel at present at the rate of ` 97.85
per head per day is adequate, the Ministry informed the Committee that no feedback regarding ration
money being inadequate has been received from the personnel. However, the present rate of the Ration
Money Allowance (RMA) was fixed at ` 97.85w.e.f. 1st April, 2015 for both GOs & NGOs upto
31.03.2016 and the revision of Ration Money Allowance is due w.e.f. 1st April, 2016.
3.10.5 During the meeting of the Committee held to discuss this subject, the representatives of MHA and
SSB were pointedly asked about whether ` 97.85 per day is enough to buy nutritious food and three
meals for a jawan. DG , SSB asserted that this amount is same for all CAPFs and is sufficient to provide

41
three meals as the purchases of dry ration are made in bulk and purchased locally. In the forward
locations, the ration is purchased from the nearest villages and for distant places, it is supplied from the
battalion headquarters.
3.10.6 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the
present rate of the Ration Money Allowance was fixed at ````` 97.85 with effect from 1st April, 2015
upto 31st March, 2016 and the revision of Ration Money Allowance is due with effect from 1st
April, 2016. The Committee is unable to understand the reasons for the delay in the revision of
the Ration Money Allowance. The Committee is not satisfied with the submission of the
representatives of SSB that the present rate of Ration Money Allowance is sufficient to provide
three nutritious meals for a jawan simply because no feedback regarding ration money being
inadequate has been received. The Committee feels that this allowance should be revised
periodically after taking into account the prevailing inflation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the amount of Ration Money Allowance should be linked to the food inflation
component of the Consumer Price Index and must be revised accordingly.
3.10.7 The Committee was also informed that presently 2,071 Constables (Cook) are available against the
authorization of 2,634 posts. The available Cooks are cooking food for Jawans up to BOP level.
Additionally, 823 Constables (Water Carrier) are also available and posted in field units, who are assisting
Cooks and cooking food in absence of regular Cooks.
3.10.8 The Committee observes that only 2,071 posts of Cooks are available as against the
authorization strength of 2,634 posts leading to more than 21 per cent vacancy in this cadre. The
Committee is of the considered view that filling up the vacancies in this cadre is vital for
providing good food for the personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a special
drive may be conducted by SSB to fill up the vacant posts of Cooks in the Force.
3.11 Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Drinking water
3.11.1 The representatives of the SSB were asked to explain the situation of drinking water availability
at various BoPs as most of the sources from where water was supplied to the BoPs did not seem to
have potable water. The DG , SSB submitted that the SSB has Reverse Osmosis (RO) water filters
available at all the BoPs as the groundwater is contaminated with iron and arsenic. Providing a detailed
break-up, DG, SSB informed the Committee that 72 BoPs are getting water from the natural sources,
45 are getting water through temporary connections from local villages and panchayats, 238 BoPs have
hand-pumps available nearby and the remaining BoPs are supplied water by tankers.
3.11.2 The Committee asked the Ministry to furnish number of the BoPs that have water filters and/or
RO filters for providing clean drinking water to the personnel. The Ministry, in its reply, submitted that
509 out of 643 BOPs have ROs/Water Purifiers of various types like Iron Removal Plant, Arsenic
Removal Plant, Gravity Filters, and RO systems.
3.11.3 When the Committee sought to know the incidence of water borne diseases among the SSB
personnel, the Ministry furnished the following information:

42
Sl. No.   W ater borne diseases 2016 2017
1. Enteric Fever 536 558
2. Diarrhea/Dysentery 2672 2416
3. Viral Hepatitis 147 261
T
OTAL 3355 3235
3.11.4 The Committee finds the submission of DG , SSB made in his oral evidence before the
Committee that all BoPs have RO water filter systems and the data furnished by the Ministry
that around 134 BoPs do not have any type of water  filter system are contradictory. Moreover,
even among the 509 BoPs claimed by the Ministry to have ROs water purifiers, it is not known,
how many of these are in working condition. The Committee observes that around 134 out of
643 Border out Posts of SSB do not have any type of water filtration system and seem to rely
on whatever quality of water is available to them. The Committee is anguished to note that clean
drinking water is not available to the SSB personnel posted at more than 20 per cent of the BoPs
and considers this as a failure of the Ministry of Home Affairs to provide adequate basic amenities
to CAPF personnel. The high incidence of water-borne diseases, with more than 3,000 cases every
year, is evidence of this failure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should
ensure RO or other effective water purifying mechanism to all the BoPs are made available
expeditiously.
3.12 Basic Amenities and Infrastructure-Electricity supply
3.12.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note on the subject, submitted that most of the
units in the SSB are do not have adequate supply of electricity. Solar power/generators are used as a
source of electricity but they do not serve the purpose in totality. The Ministry also furnished the number
of BoPs having electricity facility available as under:
Total no. of BOPs Electricity facility available Electricity facility not available
636 308 328
3.12.2 To operate and manage border outposts in absence of electricity all BOPs have diesel generator
sets, in addition some have solar lights and solar power plants also.
3.12.3 During the meeting of the Committee, the Home Secretary explained that availability of electricity
essentially depends on the state of infrastructure in the States where these outposts are located. The
Ministry was constantly trying to work with the State Governments to improve the state of infrastructure
in these areas. However, a lot still needs to be done. The DG, SSB further explained that some of the
areas are in the forests and are quite away from habitation. However, 545 BoPs have got the solar lights
and 530 BoPs are equipped with 25 KV A generators and, in addition, 2.5 KV A and 1.5 KV A mini
generators are also available at most of these BoPs.
3.12.4 The Committee is worried to note that 328 BoPs do not have electricity available and feels
that this lack of infrastructure can adversely affect the operational ability of SSB, especially

43
during times of crisis. The Committee understands that the geographical constraints and variation
in the state of infrastructure in the States are the reasons for this lack of energy at BoPs.
However, the Ministry needs to adopt a progressive and futuristic outlook to ensure energy
security at the border outposts. The Committee is of the view that after ensuring 100 per cent
electrification of all the villages, the Government should focus on electrifying remote and off-
the-grid locations particularly the border outposts and military installations. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should form a working group to study
the issue of energy security for the border outposts in India by focusing on innovative solutions
such as micro-grids. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should consider initiating
a pilot project by installing micro-grids in certain remote border locations particularly at Indo-
Bhutan border and subsequently undertake a viability assessment of micro-grids for powering
the border outposts.
3.13 Medical facilities
3.13.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that the SSB Medical Directorate supervises health care
delivery system to the Force personnel upto BoP level. SSB has established well-equipped 10 bedded Unit
Hospitals at the battalion level for providing better medical services to SSB personnel. Medical Officers
and trained para-medical staff are posted in the unit hospitals. Basic medical equipment for diagnostic
and treatment propose are also provided to the unit hospitals.
3.13.2 Apart from above, the SSB has empanelled the Central Government Health Scheme(CGHS) recognized
super specialty private hospitals in all the Frontier Headquarters as well as in Delhi/NCR for providing
Specialty/Super Specialist medical treatment facilities to SSB personnel and their dependent family members
on cashless/credit basis. Besides, SSB personnel, like other CAPFs, are entitled to avail medical facilities
in any of the CAPF composite hospitals irrespective of their force affiliation.
3.13.3 During the meeting of the Committee, the Ministry was asked about the status of vacancies in the
cadre of medical officers and doctors. The DG, SSB submitted that there were some vacancies; however,
doctors were being hired on contract basis to fill up the vacant posts. The Ministry was then asked to
submit the details of vacancies in the Medical Officers and Para-Medical cadres. The Ministry, in its
written reply, furnished the details as under:
Medical Officers Cadre
Sl. No. Rank Authorized Posted V acancy
1 Inspector General (Medical) 1 1 0
2 Deputy Inspector General (Medical) 3 3 0
3 Specialist Medical Officer 21 2 19
4 Asstt. Comdt (Dentist) 3 3 0
5 MO(AC) to Comdt/MO to Cmo(SG) 189 109 80
T
OTAL 217 118 99

44
Para-Medical Cadre
Sl. No. Rank Authorized Posted V acancy
1 SM (Sister) 3 0 3
2 Insp (Sister) 6 0 6
3 SI (Comp) 0 25 -25
4 SI (Staff Nurse) 46 27 19
5 SI (Pharmacist) 9 8 1
6 SI (Radiographer) 4 1 3
7 ASI (Radiographer) 10 2 8
8 ASI (Pharmacist) 85 65 20
9 ASI (Lab Asstt.) 14 16 -2
10 ASI (Comp/Medic) 1 39 -38
11 ASI (Physiotherapist) 3 3 0
12 ASI (O.T.Tech.) 3 1 2
13 ASI (Dental Tech.) 3 1 2
14 HC (Medic.) 0 61 -61
15 HC (N Asstt.) 18 0 18
16 HC (Steward) 3 1 2
17 HC (ANM) 1 0 1
18 CT (Lab Asstt.) 85 40 45
19 CT (Nursing Orderly) 110 110 0
20 CT (Table Boy) 3 3 0
21 CT (Ayah) 9 5 4
22 CT (Masalchi) 6 6 0
23 Hospital Cook 6 0 6
24 Peon 9 0 9
T
OTAL 437 414 23
3.13.4 The Committee is anguished to note that out of 217 posts in the Medical cadre, almost 45
per cent i.e. 99 posts are vacant. Mo reover, the situation is extremely worrisome in the case of
Specialist Medical Officers as 19 out of 21 posts are vacant. The Committee recommends that

45
the Ministry must urgently take remedial measures to improve the situation and fill the vacancies
in a time bound manner and submit special report on the progress achieved within three months.
3.14 Grievance Redressal Mechanisms
3.14.1 The Committee sought to know the present mechanism of grievance redressal for the personnel.
The Committee was informed by the Ministry that Mobile App 'My SSB' was launched on 10th March
2017 to provide a one-stop solution for grievances pertaining to deputation, transfer, training, salary slip,
Annual GPF Statement, service particulars, feedback etc. and a separate module exists for Grievance
redressal.
3.14.2 The Committee also sought to know the number of personnel, who have availed the 'My SSB App'
for redressal of their grievances and the detailed procedure and timeline of grievance redressal after a
complaint/ grievance is received through the 'App'. The Ministry informed that in one year, a total of
1,310 SSB personnel have submitted their grievances through 'My SSB' App. The detailed procedure for
grievance redressal was furnished as under:
(a) The Nodal Officer downloads grievances each day and forwards same to the competent
authority for redressing grievance.
(b) Grievances are monitored fortnightly and in case of pendency, officers are asked to resolve
the issue immediately.
(c) Nodal Officer also constantly watches grievances for observing any disturbing behavior and
reports the same to the senior officers immediately.
3.14.3 Average time of addressing the complaint is 14 days. The Ministry also informed the Committee
that the following types of complaints were received through 'My SSB' App:
(a) Accounts Matter
(b) Domestic Problems
(c) Medical Related
(d) Transfer/Service related
(e) Promotion matters
(f) Uniform Matters
3.14.4 No complaint was received regarding non-sanctioning of leave and poor standard of food. However,
non-formal communication was received regarding non-sanctioning of leave and the same was redressed
immediately by the senior officers.
3.14.5 The Committee also sought details of 'E-Transfer Application System' (E-TAS) from the Ministry.
The Ministry submitted that E-TAS system is mainly functioning through Intranet (WAN) and VPN,
which is available in almost all the SSB units. The unit where no WAN/VPN is available, are using the
W AN/VPN facility of nearby units for updating data including transfer requests. Force personnel posted

46
in remote areas can also apply for transfer in E-Transfer Application System through My SSB Mobile
App or by submitting a written application, which is uploaded by the Unit concerned. In each month all
head of offices submit 'No pendency' certificates that no application is pending with them for uploading
in E-TAS.
3.14.6 The Committee also desired to know the number of transfer requests that were received through
'E-Transfer Application System' and the number of requests that were granted during the last year. The
Ministry furnished the details as under:
Y ear Total Application Total Applications Percentage Applications
Received Denied Denied
2017-18 12795 6454 50.44
3.14.7 The Committee also sought to know the total number of requests of transfers that were received
and denied during the last three years. The Ministry furnished the details of transfers denied during the
last three years as follows:
Y ear Total Application received Total denied Percentage
2016 1 1493 3400 29.58
2017 13857 6365 45.93
2018 12698 7713 61.74
3.14.8 The Committee appreciates the 'E-Transfer Application System' initiative that has made it
easier for the personnel to file applications and requests for transfers. However, the Committee
is surprised to note that a huge number of applications, i.e. 12795, were received in a single year.
This Committee notes that this number is roughly around 13 per cent of the sanctioned strength
of the Force and is worried to observe that such a large number of personnel are dissatisfied with
their postings. The Committee also observes that more than 50 per cent applications have been
denied and understands that the scope for granting transfer requests is limited. The Committee,
however, recommends that SSB should evolve a system so as to allow all the personnel to forward
their transfer requests along with proper reasons and justification so as to allow the senior
officers to understand the reasons behind the transfer applications and prioritise the requests
that are genuine and of urgent nature.
3.14.9 The Committee also observes that during the last three years the percentage of applications
that were rejected has remarkably increased from 29.58 in 2016 to 61.74 in 2018. The Committee
recommends that the cause of this increment needs to be looked into and remedial measures
be taken. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should monitor the number of
transfer requests received, accepted and denied and should strive to devise a mechanism wherein
as far as possible personnel are granted transfer as per their choice and transfer policy.

47
CHAPTER-IV
INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE (ITBP)
4.1 Historical Background
4.1.1 The Indo-Tibetan Border Police was raised on 24th October, 1962, in the wake of Chinese
aggression for reorganizing the frontier intelligence and security set up along the Indo-Tibetan border as
a "guerrilla-cum-fighting Force". In the beginning, only four battalions were sanctioned to the ITBP.
4.1.2 The Force was initially raised under the CRPF Act, 1949. In 1965 and 1971 the Force participated
in the wars against Pakistan. It was originally conceptualized as an integrated 'guerrilla-cum-fighting
Force', self-contained in supplies, communication and intelligence collection, it evolved with passage of
time into a conventional border guarding force. In 1978, the original role of the Force changed from
guerrilla to a more conventional role and subsequent, reorganisations of the Force resulted in formation
of 9service battalions and 4 special battalions. In 1992, the Parliament enacted the Indo Tibetan Border
Police Force Act (ITBPF Act) and the rules there under were framed in 1994.
4.1.3 W ith additional tasks entrusted to ITBP from time to time on border guarding, counter insurgency
and internal security roles, the number of ITBP battalions increased gradually and ITBP presently has 56
service battalions, 4 specialist battalions, 17 Training Centres and 7 logistics establishments with a total
strength of 89,433 personnel.
4.1.4 In the year 2004, in pursuance of EGoM recommendations on "One Border One Force", the entire
stretch of India-China Border comprising 3,488 kms was assigned to the ITBP which replaced Assam
Rifles in Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh for border guarding duties.
4.2 Organizational Structure
47


48
4.3 Operational Role and Responsibility
4.3.1 The Role of the Force as defined in the ITBPF Act, 1992 is to safeguard the security of the
borders of India and promote a sense of security among the people living in the border areas and prevent
trans-border crimes, smuggling, unauthorized entry into or exit from the territory of India. The ITBP is
entrusted with the role of security of the India-China border, anti-naxal operations, VIP protection,
security to diplomatic missions in Afghanistan, United Nations peace keeping operations, disaster
management, Border Area Development Programmes (BADPs) and Civic Action Programmes (CAPs),
nodal agency for UN police missions, and medical, security & communication cover during Kailash
Mansarovar and Sri Amarnath ji yatra.
4.4 Deployment
4.4.1 Out of total 56 battalions in ITBP, 32 are deployed in border guarding, 11 in internal security, 8
in anti-Naxal Operations (ANO) and 5 are reserved for rest and recuperation.
4.4.2 The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that 176 Border Out
Posts (BOPs) have been established by ITBP. The border areas are being patrolled regularly. All ingress/
egress routes along the border are being kept under watch by conducting frequent patrols. Observation
Posts are manned round the clock to keep close vigil. ITBP also provides security to sensitive installations,
banks, persons of security risk and restore & preserve order in any area in the event of disturbance
therein including election duties. In addition to this, ITBP is also deployed in anti-Naxal operations.
4.4.3 When enquired about the reasons for deploying battalions of CAPFs for VIP security when a
Special Security Group (SSG) of CISF has already been created for VIP security, the MHA replied that
presently Special Security Group (SSG)/CISF, CRPF, ITBP and NSG are deployed for VIP Security
Duties. The matter of deployment of CAPFs has been reviewed in the Ministry and it has been decided
that CRPF and ITBP shall be progressively relieved from personal protection work. The task shall be
progressively assigned only to Special Security Group (SSG) of CISF, which has been specially created
for it. NSG will continue to provide security to the high risk protectees, as decided from time to time.
CISF's proposal for augmentation of strength of SSG of CISF to provide security to the increased
number of protectees is in process. SSG's strength would need to be augmented further to progressively
take over the protectees from CRPF and ITBP.NSG is deployed for providing security to a limited
number of highly threatened protectees. NSG is providing security to 14 protectees. NSG provides
mobile security only, i.e., escort and ring round security and the rest of the component of security, i.e.,
house guards and security officers are provided by State Police/Other CAPFs.
4.4.4 The Committee observes that the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force was raised for the
purpose of border guarding, especially, the India-China Border, however, some battalions of ITBP
are deployed for ANO and internal security as a result of which the jawans suffer in terms of
training, rest and recuperation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ITBP should be
relieved from the task of internal security duties and personal protection and CISF's proposal
to augment the strength of SSG of CISF should be expedited.

49
4.5 Recruitment
4.5.1 The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that the recruitment
of Assistant Commandant (General Duty) is conducted by the UPSC and that of Sub-Inspector (GD) and
Constable (GD) by the SSC. The recruitment of Medical Officers is conducted on rotational basis and
a Limited Departmental Competitive (LDC) Examination for the post of Assistant Commandant (GD) is
also conducted rotationally by all CAPFs. Recruitments of the following posts are conducted by the ITBP
itself:
Group 'A'
1. Dy. JAG (Deputy Commandant, Judge Advocate General)
2. Asstt. Commandant (Engineer)
3. Assistant Commandant (Veterinary Assistant Surgeon)
Group 'B'
1. Inspector (Hindi Translator, Editor, Librarian)
2. Sub-Inspector (Hindi Translator, Telecommunication, Overseer, General Duty, Limited
Departmental Competitive Exam)
3. Sub-Inspector
Group 'C'
1. ASI (Stenographer, Pharmacist, Radiographer, Lab Technician)
2. Head Constable (Combatant Ministerial, Education & Stress Counsellor, Telecommunication,
Dresser Veterinary, Motor Mechanic, Midwife, Master, Workshop, Engine Driver)
3. Constable (Telecommunication, Pioneer, Driver, Motor Mechanic, Animal Transport,
Tradesmen, Workshop, Crew)
4. Compassionate recruitment for various Group 'C' posts.
5. Special Recruitment Drives in Border Areas and LWE affected Districts.
4.5.2 The Committee, in its meeting held to discuss the working conditions in ITBP, sought to know
the status of the recruitment exams conducted recently and results for how many such examinations
were pending. The Ministry informed that results of two recruitments, viz., recruitment for Head
Constable (telecom) and Inspector (Hindi translation) in ITBP were pending as the recruitment was
cancelled by the ITBP. In this regard, presently two cases are pending before the Hon'ble High Court
of Delhi. The Ministry also furnished the details of the ongoing court cases. The Committee went
through the details of the cases and found that the recruitment was cancelled after completion of the
process of recruitment and declaration of the final list of the selected candidates on the basis of suspicion
on a few candidates.

50
4.5.3 The Committee takes note of the pending recruitment examinations for the posts of Head
Constable (telecom) and Inspector (Hindi translation), which were cancelled by ITBP after completion
of the process of recruitment and declaration of the final list of the selected candidates on the
basis of suspicion on a few candidates. The Committee observes that the hasty manner in which
these recruitments have been processed has led to an unnecessary loss of time, effort and
monetary losses on the part of the Force. The Committee fails to understand why the entire
recruitment was cancelled when the appropriate course of action would have been to investigate
the authenticity of the results of those candidates, whose selection was under suspicion, instead
of cancelling the recruitment of all the candidates. The Committee is of the view that this was
against the established principles of law as even candidates who were not under suspicion were
punished as a consequence of cancellation of the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Ministry should direct the ITBP to settle the disputes by following
the established principles of law. The Committee also recommends that ITBP should complete the
recruitment process by declaring the results of the candidates whose candidature was found to
be fair and genuine.
4.5.4 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should ensure that all the
examinations conducted by the Forces themselves should be conducted with utmost care and
vigilance, within a stipulated timeframe so as to have timely availability of the selected candidates
to fill up the vacancies. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should keep a vigil
on the discretionary tendencies that may arise in such recruitment process and any final decision
pertaining to final selection or cancellation of recruitment should be made subject to the approval
of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4.6 Attrition
4.6.1 About the attrition in ITBP, the Ministry furnished the following details:
In Case of Gazetted Officers
Y ear V oluntary Retirement Resigned
2016 03 15
2017 06 26
2018* 01 01
In Case of Non-Gazetted Officers
Y ear V oluntary Retirement Resigned
2016 62 22
2017 123 15
2018* 16 05
* as on 30.04.2018.

51
4.6.2 The Committee was informed by the Ministry during a meeting on the subject that despite having
one of the lowest attrition rate amongst all the CAPFs, there was a sudden spike in attrition rate in ITBP
during the year 2017 because some personnel were waiting for the Seventh Central Pay Commission to
get its benefits before taking voluntary retirement.
4.6.3 The Committee understands that due to the implementation of the Seventh Central Pay
Commission there is a high rate of attrition in the year 2017. However, the Committee is of the
view that if better working conditions are created in ITBP that may reverse this trend of
attrition.
4.7 Personnel Management
4.7.1 In a reply to a question, the Ministry informed the Committee that all service matters of 1637 GOs
such as promotions, transfers, appointments, premature retirement, Modified Assured Career Progression
(MACP), senior time-scale, confirmation, etc., are dealt by the Personnel Branch, ITBP; and all service
matters of 81,404 NGOs personnel are dealt by the Establishment Branch, ITBP.
4.7.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that instructions have been issued vide Standing Order No.
02/2016, to ensure fair and transparent transfers. The annual transfers in case of GOs is being done on
the recommendations of Senior Establishment Board (SEB) and in case of NGOs, on the recommendations
of Junior Establishment Board (JEB). The last cadre review of ITBP was held in 2001 and its
recommendations have been fully implemented. Another Cadre Review proposal of the ITBP is under
consideration of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The posting tenures prescribed are as under:
(i) Extreme Hard Area (EHA) (except Leh based formations) - 03 years
(ii) Hard Area and Soft Area (HA and SA) and ANO areas - 03 years.
(iii) Leh based formations whose battalion Headquarters is located at Leh - 02 years.
4.7.3 After completion of their tenure in EHA/HA their choices/requests for preferred places are considered,
as per the availability of vacancies at the locations for which choices have been given, keeping in view
the Operational/Administrative requirements of the Force. Certain cases are given priority for posting, at
the same station. Requests for posting on compassionate grounds are considered and all efforts were
made to post them at the location of their choice. Personnel due for superannuation within two years,
are considered for terminal postings.
4.8 Promotional avenues and Stagnation
4.8.1 During the meeting of the Committee held to discuss the subject, the Ministry was asked to submit
details of promotional avenues available to the personnel in various ranks in ITBP. the Ministry, in its
written submission, furnished the details as under:
Gazetted Officer
Sl. No Cadre Rank Actual time taken for next Remarks
rank promotion
12 3 4 5
1. GD Cadre IG to ADG No sanctioned post for cadre -
officers

52
12 3 4 5
2. DIG to IG 7 yrs to 8 yrs
3. Comdt to DIG 4y 8 m to 4y 11 m
4. 2 I/C to Comdt 3 years
5. DC to 2 I/C 3 to 3 ½ years
6. AC to DC 4y 1 m to 5 yrs
7. Insp/SM to AC 5½ to 9 years
8.
9. Medical IG to ADG - -
10. DIG to IG
11. CMO(SG) to DIG
12. CMO to CMO(SG) 04 years
13. SMO to CMO 05 years
14. Splt. Gr-II (Jr.Scale) 02 years
DC to Splt .Gr-II
(Sr.Scale) 2I/C
15. MO to SMO 04 years
16. Engineering Comdt to DIG 7 to 8 years (2 years regular -
service in Comdt and 20 years
Group'A' service).
17. DC to Comdt 5 to 6 years (However, 04 years
regular service and 15 year Group
'A' service is required)
18. AC to DC 5 to 6 years
19. Insp/Ovrs to 4 to 5 years
AC/Engr
20. Veterinary CVO(SG) to 2 to 5 years -
DIG(Vet)
21. CVO to CVO(SG) 5 to 6 years
22. SVO to CVO 5 to 6 years
23. AC(VAS) to 5 to 6 years
DC(SVO)

53
12 3 4 5
24. Insp/AT to AC/AT 3 to 4 years
25. JAG CO(AJAG) to 2 to 5 years -
DIG(JAG)
26. DC(DyJAG) to 10 to 11 years
CO(JAG)
27. ESC AC(ESC) to 5 to 8 years -
DC(ESC)
28. Insp(ESC) to 3 to 5 years
AC(ESC)
29. OL AC(OL) to DC(OL) 5 to 8 years -
30. Insp/HT to AC/OL 3 to 5 years
31. CM AC(O) to DC(O) 5 to 6 years -
32. Insp/CM to AC(O) 03 to 10 years
33. AC(SO) to DC(SO) 5 to 8 years
34. Insp/Steno to 03 to 12 years
AC(SO)
35. JAC(AO)to AC(AO) 3 to 4 years
36. Insp/Actt to JAC(AO) 3 to 5 years
37. Civil SAO to CAO 7 to 8 years
38. SO to SAO 5 to 6 year
39. Asstt. to SO 5 to 6 year
40. PA to PS 5 to 29 years.
Non-Gazetted Officers
Promotion from -To Number of years Remarks/ Actual time taken next promotion
General Duty (GD)
Cadre
CT/GD to HC/GD 05 years 12-13years
HC/GD to ASI/GD 05 years 06 years
ASI/GD to SI/GD 06 years 10 years (06 years as ASI/GD and 10 years combined
regular service as ASI/GD & HC/GD. Out of which 01
years service compulsory as ASI/GD.

54
Promotion from -To Number of years Remarks/ Actual time taken next promotion
SI/GD to Insp/GD 05 years 03 years as per Old RRs
05 years as per RRs notified on 8th Nov 2012.
Steno Cadre
ASI/Steno to SI/Steno 05 years 06 years
SI/Steno to Insp/Steno 05 years 05 years
Hindi Translator (HT)
Cadre
SI/HT to Insp/HT 05 years 05 years
Pioneer (PNR) Cadre
SI/Overseer to Insp/ 05 years 5 years
Overseer
SI/PNR to Insp/PNR 05 years 8-10 years
HC to SI/PNR 05 years 12-15 years
CT to HC 05 years 08-10 years
Tailor Cadre
SI/Tailor to Insp/Tailor 05 years 18-20 years
HC to SI 10 years 12-15 years
CT to HC 05 years 05-06 years
Armourar Cadre
SI/Armourer to 05 years 5-7 years
Insp/Armourer
HC to SI 10 years 10 years
CT to HC 05 years Presently no eligible person is available in feeder cadre.
Combatant Ministerial
(CM) Cadre
SI/CM to Insp/CM 05 years 5-6 years
HC/CM& ASI/CM to 10 years 10 years
SI/CM
HC to ASI/CM 05 years 5-6 years

55
Promotion from -To Number of years Remarks/ Actual time taken next promotion
Education & Stress
Counsellor (ESC)
Cadre
SI/ESC to Insp/ESC 05 years 5-6 years
ASI to SI/ESC 05 years Presently no eligible person is available in feeder cadre.
HC to ASI/ESC 05 years -do-
Motor Mechanic (MM)
Cadre
SI/MM to Insp/MM 05 years 8-10 years
ASI to SI 05 years 05 years
HC to ASI 05 years 05 years
CT to HC 05 years 05 years
Motor Transport (MT)
Cadre
SI/MT to Insp/MT 05 years 5-7 years
ASI to SI 05 years 05 years
HC to ASI 05 years 05 years
CT to HC 05 years 05 years
Communication Cadre
SI/Comm to Insp/Com 05 years 05 years
ASI to SI 05 years 05 years
HC to ASI 05 years 05 years
Animal Transport (AT)
Cadre
SI to Insp 05 years 05 years
HC to SI 10 years 10 years
CT to HC 05 years 05 years
Vet Cadre
SI to Insp 05 years 05 years

56
Promotion from -To Number of years Remarks/ Actual time taken next promotion
HC to SI 10 years 10 years
Cobbler Cadre
CT to HC 05 years 05 years
Gardner Cadre
CT to HC 05 years 05 years
Water Wing
SI to Inspector (Master 05 years Presently no eligible person is available in feeder cadre.
HC to SI 10 years -do-
CT to HC 05 years -do-
SI to Inspector (Engine 05 years -do-
Driver)
HC to SI 10 years -do-
CT to HC 05 years -do-
SI to Insp (Workshop) 05 years -do-
HC to SI 10 years -do-
CT to HC 05 years -do-
4.8.2 The Committee takes note of the fact that ITBP is presently in expansion mode and
sufficient numbers of vacancies are available in almost all the ranks, due to which most of the
personnel are receiving timely promotions. The Committee, however, observes that there is still
some stagnation at the rank of Constable in GD Cadre. A Constable gets promoted to the post
of Head-Constable in 12-13 years in contrast to the required residency period of 5 years. This
is a demotivating factor for the ITBP jawans more so when the Force is in expansion mode. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that appropriate measures including cadre review must be
taken to reduce the actual time for promotion at the CT(GD) level to boost the morale of the
personnel in ITBP.
4.9 Training
4.9.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry in its background note on the subject that all
Officers, Subordinate Officers and Other Ranks are put under basic training of approximately one year
before operational deployment and prior to release of promotion of all Ranks, they must successfully
complete pre-promotional courses meant for a particular rank.
Specialized Training
4.9.2 The specialized training are presently being held at three places:

57
A. ITBP Academy, Mussoorie, Uttrakhand
(i) Anti-terrorist, VIP protection & CDO Course for GOs/SOs/ ORs.
(ii) High Altitude Tactics Course for State Police/CAPFs
(iii) I.H.E. Course
(iv) I.H.E. Refresher Course
(v) FE Demo Mine laying Refresher Course for PNR Cadre
(vi) Basic Karate Course for Male
(vii) Karate Refresher Course
B. Basic Training Centre (BTC), Bhanu, Panchkula, Haryana
(i) PT Course
(ii) Judo Course
(iii) Drill Instructor Course
(iv) W eapon Instructor Course
(v) Bugler Course
C. Mountaineering and Skiing Institute (M&SI) Auli, Uttrakhand
(i) Ski Course
(ii) Rafting Couse
(iii) High Altitude warfare Course
(iv) Himalayan Ranger Course
(v) Antarctica pre-induction training
4.9.3 The Committee was further informed by the Ministry that ITBP is taking all necessary steps for
the upgradation of infrastructure in training centres to meet the present day challenges. A separate budget
has been allocated for upgradation of training infrastructure. As the ITBP personnel are deployed in high
altitude areas and extreme cold conditions, the specialized training aids/equipments viz. Rock Climbing
Equipment; Nordic Ski Simulators; Deep Search Metal Detectors (DSMD); Physical training equipment;
Multimedia Projector with Wireless internet facility; Artificial Rock Climbing Wall; Interactive Touch
Display; Eight Lane Firing Simulators have been installed or are being planned for installation in all the
training centers.
4.9.4 In response to a question, the Ministry informed the Committee that there is a well laid out SOP
in the Force being followed by troops to enhance security against IEDs. ITBP conducts training of troops
in 'Identification and handling of Explosives/IEDs' and this subject is also included in various other in-

58
service and specialized courses. Besides, ITBP personnel are sent to Bomb Disposal Courses being
conducted by the SG and the Army. Apart from these, following measures are also being adopted:
(a) Constant use of Explosive Detective(ED) dogs for effective road demining and anti-sabotage
checks during road opening and road security operations.
(b) The operation parties commence their move technically without following a set pattern.
Movement by vehicles is bare minimum and troops are highly motivated who themselves
prefer to move by foot. In extreme emergency cases, mine protected vehicles like MPVs,
LATCs, LPTA are used by ITBP Troops.
(c) On detection of IEDs the deputed BDDS team of ITBP along with the District BDDS team
concerned takes action as per the ground situation. They usually diffuse the trapped IEDs
at the spot.
4.9.5 The Committee is extremely anguished to note that the ITBP who have been deployed in
the treacherous hills of the north against extreme weather on the India-China border since the
year 2004, have not been equipped with basic training gadgets and facilities, viz., modern equipment
like 8 lane firing simulator and interactive touch display. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that all these equipment, facilities and modern techniques should be procured expeditiously and
training be imparted to the personnel of the Force. The Committee feels that the modernization
of the Force must be given utmost priority as this Force not only has to face any enemy from
across the border but also the vagaries of Nature.
4.10 Housing and accommodation
4.10.1 The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that only 8,844
quarters are available against a total of 28,568 authorized quarters in ITBP. However, 3,187 quarters are
under construction, therefore, there is a shortfall of 16537 quarters. The present housing satisfaction
level in the Force is about 13.41 per cent as against 25 per cent authorization for the CAPFs. Compensation
for housing to Personnel Belonging to Other Ranks (PBORs):
Whether the Field posting Non-field posting
PBOR has
any Staying in Barracks Not staying in Barracks
dependents
Y es Full HRA applicable at the Reduced  HRA  applicable Full HRA applicable at that
selected place of residence at  the  Selected Place of place if government
of the Dependents Residence of the Dependents accommodation not
available
No Full HRA applicable at Class Reduced HRA applicable at Full HRA applicable at that
Z city, i.e. 10 percent of the place of posting place if government
Basic Pay accommodation not
available

59
4.10.2 The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level in ITBP at 13.41 per cent is
one of the lowest among the CAPFs. The Committee notes with concern that there is shortfall
of 16,537 quarters. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction of the 3,187
houses that are under construction must be expedited and completed as per schedule without
time and cost overrun. The Committee further recommends that the Government should chalk
out 'Action Plan' to achieve the objective of constructing the remaining 16,537 quarters within
the stipulated timeframe.
4.11 Basic Amenities-Food
4.11.1 The Ministry informed the Committee in a reply to a question that quality food items are procured
for the ITBP personnel, as per Defence Food Specifications/FSSAI Standards. The ITBP maintains strict
quality control through three layered quality inspection norms where items are tested as advance sample
before purchase, as random sample from bulk supply followed by line committee comprising of all ranks,
who carry out inspection at the consignee end and at the user's end ( i.e., at battalion HQs as well as
each Post). The quality of cooked food served to the troops is regularly monitored by the concerned
Post Commander, Coy Commander, Duty Officer, Unit Commandant and various other functionaries at
the field level. Besides, Frontier IGs, Sector DIGs and other senior officers from Directorate General
during their visits, which are frequent in nature and during the annual inspections.
4.11.2 The Committee was informed by the representatives of ITBP that no complaint regarding non-
sanctioning of leave and poor standard of food has been received, through SMS or Mobile Apps. Twelve
Master canteens and 77 subsidiary canteens (CPC) are available for the ITBP personnel. The free ration
facilities for troops on Border Guarding Duties are divided into three categories, i.e., normal ration items
authorized at all border locations, high altitude ration items authorized above 9,000 feet and special ration
items authorized above 12,000 feet. Ration items are supplied by the ITBP for units deployed in Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand & Sikkim and by the Army for the units deployed in Ladakh (J&K) and Arunachal
Pradesh on cash and carry basis. Ration Money Allowance is given to the troops (NGOs) deployed in
areas other than border.
4.11.3 The Committee was apprised that the ITBP is also going in for ready-to-eat meals. The meals are
from different cuisines, like South Indian cuisine, Maratha cuisine etc. which have been tested and there
is positive response by the jawans and the ITBP is planning to induct the system of ready-to-eat meals
in the near future.
4.11.4 The Committee takes note of the innovative ideas of serving ready-to-eat meals that has
been appreciated by the jawans. The Committee, keeping in view the difficult terrain and peculiar
weather conditions faced by the ITBP Force and their line of duty, hopes that items in the ready-
to-eat meals would meet the nutritional needs of maintaining the physical fitness of ITBP jawans.
4.12 Basic Amenities-Drinking Water
4.12.1 During the evidence, the Ministry, in its submission before the Committee, stated that to remove
contamination a system of boiling of water for five minutes is in practice. A sufficient number of water
filters have been provided to cater to the need of potable drinking water, for all the personnel deployed
at all the BOPs.

60
4.12.2 The Committee was further informed in a reply to a questionnaire on the subject that to ensure
sufficient availability of clean drinking water to all the ITBP personnel, deep/low bore wells with submersible
motor have been installed at formations, wherever feasible, sufficient number of water filters/ ROs have
been installed as per the requirement and a concept of permanent integrated building has been developed
for BOPs in which provision of inbuilt borewell has been made for clean water. A proposal is also in
the process for supplying regular drinking water to BOPs. The Committee was further informed that only
18per cent of the BOPs of ITBP have the facility of obtaining potable water from pipeline/borewell and
in the rest of the 82per cent BOPs the drinking water is obtained from rivulets or springs.
4.12.3 The Committee is surprised to observe that in 82 per cent of the BoPs, drinking water is
obtained from rivulets and springs which are polluted and at some places the level of contamination
is alarming. Clean drinking water is a fundamental right of every person. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that proper provisions must be made to make clean and safe
drinking water available to the ITBP personnel in all the BOPs and wherever feasible, the
possibility of supplying piped regular drinking water to BOPs must be explored. This must be
done immediately and a special report submitted within 6 months.
4.13 Basic Amenities-Electricity supply
4.13.1 The Committee was informed that 24per cent of the BOPs in ITBP have a regular supply of
electricity and the rest 76per cent are dependent on generators for electricity. When enquired by the
Committee about the downtime of generators at the BOPs, the MHA informed that as per the safety
manual, total time a generator can run at a stretch is three hours with a gap of 45 minutes. As two
generators are available at each BOP, the time lag is nil. The generator at BOPs are required for about
3 to 4 hours per day in the evenings and 1 to 2 hours in the mornings. At the battalions Headquarters,
generally regular electricity supply is available. However, during power cuts, generators are used for
essential works for about 1 to 2 hours on requirement basis. The MHA further informed that to ensure
regular electricity supply at BOPs of CAPFs, a proposal is under consideration.
4.13.2 The Committee observes that the electricity supply at the BOPs of ITBP is neither regular
nor sufficient. The downtime of generators must be reduced to a bare minimum. The Committee
recommends that the proposal to ensure regular electricity supply at BOPs of CAPFs must be
prioritized and implemented expeditiously.
4.14 Medical facilities
4.14.1 The Committee was informed during the evidence by the representatives of the Ministry of Home
Affairs that the ITBP personnel are at risk of several high altitude health hazards. The following details
about the personnel affected by these hazards were furnished by the Ministry in a reply to a question
on the subject:
Name of disease 2016 2017 2018 (till date)
Diseases at High Altitude (High-Altitude Pulmonary Edema 209 168 141
(HAPO), Acute Cerebral Edema, Loss of Memory)
Cold Injuries (Chilblains, Snow Blindness, Immersion, 154 238 20
Trench Foot)

61
4.14.2 The Ministry further informed the Committee that the average recovery time for High-Altitude
Pulmonary Edema (HAPO), Acute Cerebral Edema, loss of memory is 6 to 12 months depending on the
condition of the patient. The average recovery time for Immersion/Trench Foot, Chilblains, snow blindness
is 7 to 15 days.
4.14.3 On being enquired about the level of fitness of the Force personnel and life style diseases accruing
to young officials who are recruited with requisite health and fitness standards set up by the force, the
Ministry in its reply, submitted that the ITBP in collaboration with Defence Institute of Physiology and
Allied Sciences (DIPAS) and Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) conducted
cross-sectional study in 2013-15 at Sector hospital, Leh. The study indicates that approximately 20 per
cent strength of the Force personnel are suffering from high altitude-induced hypertension. The DRDO
has proposed longitudinal prospective study to confirm the findings of cross sectional study, including
those personnel who have not been exposed to the high altitude. Presently, the study is being carried out
at BTC, Bhanu and RTC Karera, the two training centers of ITBP. The Ministry furnished following
details of life style diseases as under:
Personnel suffering from cardiac complications
Age profile 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 (Till date)
20 to 30 years 01 03 03 06 Nil
31 to 40 years 04 05 03 04 Nil
41 to 50 years 18 15 10 17 03
51 to 60 years 07 06 06 05 03
4.14.4 The number of personnel currently suffering/ affected from liver diseases are115. The Ministry
submitted in its written reply before the Committee that effective steps were taken to prevent lifestyle
diseases such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, stroke, etc. including regular lectures on stress
management, preventive measures, disease awareness and relaxation techniques; dietary precautions and
yoga and physical exercises.
4.14.5 The Committee was further informed that generally, Medical Response Team comprises of para-
medical staff only. Keeping in view the sanctioned/posted strength of the Medical Officers, it is not
possible to deploy a Medical Officer with every BoP. At least one medic is available at each BoP, round
the clock. In addition, medics course qualified GD personnel are also available at all the BoPs. The vacant
posts of para-medical staff are being filled through direct recruitment/promotions, as per the existing
rules. The last vacancy of para-medical cadre was notified during the year 2015.
4.14.6 The Ministry further informed the Committee that the Force personnel who are deployed in high
altitude area are provided protective clothing, i.e., snow clothing, snow shoes and snow goggles. For
proper acclimatization proper diet is given to the Force personnel (high protein and high carbohydrate
diet). Monthly medical examination, Training classes /lectures on preventive measures to be adopted are
also carried out. Special course at High Altitude Medical Training School (HAMTS) for Medical and para-

62
medical cadre personnel with special emphasis on prevention and care of diseases prevalent in high
altitude area and Cold Injuries are also undertaken.
4.14.7 On being queried about the vacancy position with regard to Medical/Para medical officers and
action taken to filling those vacancies, the Committee was informed that the details of vacancies advertised
vis-a-vis recommendations of Medical Officers Selection Board (MOSB) -2016 in respect of ITBP are
as under:
Specialist Medical Officers    Medical Officers
No. of Recommended V acancies No. of Recommended V acancies
vacancies for remained vacancies for remained
advertised appointment unfilled advertised appointment unfilled
10 02 08 137 44 93
4.14.8 The vacancy position of doctors in ITBP as on 5th July, 2018 (after taking into account the
allocation made through MOSB-2016 on 6th June, 2018) is as under:
Specialist Medical Officers Medical Officers
Authorized Posted V acancy Authorized Posted V acancy
30 17* 13 351 280# 71
# Including 02 Specialists allocated on 06.06.2018 who are yet to join
# Including 44 Medical Officers allocated on 06.06.2018 who are yet to join
4.14.9 The last recruitment drive for para-medical staff was conducted in 2015 and 14 vacancies were
filled up. The recruitment process for filling of 13 vacancies of para-medical staff is in process.
4.14.10 The Committee feels that vacancies of so many doctors and para medical staff in the
ITBP is having an adverse impact on the well being of its staff, particularly the jawans, affecting
their efficiency. At a time when the ITBP personnel suffer from various diseases, the vacancies
of 8 Specialist Medical officers and 93 Medical Officers is quite alarming. There is no reason why
there should be such a large number of vacancies at any given point of time, especially for ITBP
as it has no other medical access at all because of the area of its deployment and inaccessible
terrain. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that urgent measures must be taken
to fill all the medical vacancies in the Force in a time bound manner and efforts must be taken
to ensure that no medical posts remain vacant for more than 2 months at any point of time. The
Committee further recommends that the Force may explore the feasibility of recruiting on ad-
hoc basis till the regular appointments are made.
4.14.11 About the health care facilities given to the ITBP personnel, the Ministry further apprised the
Committee in a reply to a question as follows:-
Primary Health Care
(i) 10 Bedded hospitals are available at all battalion Headquarters. All battalions have been
authorized five posts of doctors and fifteen para-medical staff including indoor ward, well
developed laboratory, ECG facility, dispensary and other facilities, etc.

63
(ii) At BOP level, there is an MI Room with well-trained Medics for first aid and primary care
(iii) Periodical visits to BOPs by the unit Medical Officers.
(iv) Air evacuation of sick personnel from BOPs by helicopters, provided by IAF, if required.
Secondary Health Care
(i) Secondary Health Care is being provided at 3 Composite Hospitals (50 bedded) located at
Dehradun, Chandigarh and Delhi.
(ii) For better healthcare facility in NE region, a 30 bedded Hospital at Kimin has become
functional.
Tertiary Health Care
(i) The tertiary care is being provided at 200 bedded CAPFs Referral Hospital at Greater Noida.
4.14.12 The Committee is of the considered view that ITBP personnel must get adequate medical
facilities at ground level and if required medical attention at the referral hospital. Moreover,
evacuation facilities must be ready round the clock for sick personnel for better medical attention.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the strengthening of overall health care facilities for the
ITBP personnel.
4.15 Infrastructural Issues - Road connectivity
4.15.1 While replying to a query of the Committee, the Ministry stated that out of 177 ITBP BOPs, 79
BOPs are not connected by road. At present, 73 road projects along India - China Border are at various
stages of construction. The details furnished by the Ministry in this regard are as under:
(a) 25 ITBP Priority Phase-I roads (13 have been completed and 12 are under construction).
(b) 35 GS (General Staff) roads (14 have been completed and 21 are under construction).
(c) 13 CSG (China Study Group) recommended roads (05 have been completed and 08 are
under construction).
4.15.2 To further improve the connectivity, ITBP had proposed 46 roads under ITBP Priority Phase-II,
DPRs of which have been approved. Besides, ITBP has also proposed 50 more border roads in ITBP
Priority Phase-III, out of which 23 roads have been operationally endorsed by MoD. Construction of all
above proposed roads will facilitate road connectivity to all existing and 47 newly proposed BOPs.
Besides, there is
(i) Proposal for Construction of Permanent Integrated Buildings (PIB) in 97 BOPs.
(ii) Sanction of Special clothing and mountaineering equipments (SCME) for personnel deployed
in the BOPs, at an altitude of 9000 ft. and above.
(iii) Providing Tele-Medicine facilities at BOPs.
(iv) Streamlining the evacuation system during medical exigencies.

64
4.15.3 The Committee takes note of the on-going project of road connectivity consisting of 41
roads under phase-I, DPR of 46 roads under phase-II already approved, and construction of 50
roads at proposal stage under phase-III. The Committee recommends that all on-going road
construction works must be completed and proposal under phase-III must be approved within the
timeframe. The approved road construction projects must be taken up for completion within set
timeframe.
4.16 Permanent Integrated Composite Building (PICB)
4.16.1 In a reply to a question, the Ministry informed the Committee that ITBP has developed a concept
of Permanent Integrated Composite Building (PICB) with in-built provision for central heating system and
freeze-proof toilets for BOPs located at high altitude areas, where temperature dips from -20 to -45
degrees centigrade, especially during winters. The conceptual design of the building has been vetted by
an IIT. MHA sanctioned ` 17.20 Crore, for construction of permanent integrated building at Lukung
Border out Post in Leh (J&K) on 22nd July, 2016. The physical progress of the work is 48per cent and
the project is likely to be completed by October, 2018. On similar lines, Draft Project Reports for 96
BOPs of ITBP are being prepared by CPWD, for which ` 14.57 Crore has been sanctioned by the MHA
through High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC).
4.16.4 The Committee understands that since ITBP personnel are working in high altitude
mountainous region, therefore, adequate and commensurate infrastructure is required to enhance
the professional efficiency of the ITBP. In this regard, the proposal of Permanent Integrated
Composite Building (PICB) is a welcome concept and the Committee hopes that the said project
at Leh would be completed within stipulated timeframe and at the estimated cost. The Committee
further recommends that similar PICB at various BoPs of ITBP may be constructed.
4.17 Surveillance Equipments
4.17.1 The MHA informed the Committee that for ease of deployment of the ITBP, five snow scooters
have been inducted in ITBP for enhanced and efficiency surveillance at borders during winter. The
Committee was also informed that authorization of Surveillance Equipment proposed by Build, Own,
Operate (BOO) as Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS) is under process.
Moreover, 97 BOPs have been identified for upgrading to CIBMS. The Ministry also informed that the
proposal of critical infrastructure in Arunachal Pradesh was approved by MHA and construction works
has been entrusted to CPWD. A proposal for establishment of 32 night halt camps (J&K-01, Sikkim-05,
Arunachal Pradesh-26) along India China Border was sent to MHA. MHA has forwarded the proposal
to MoD and concurrence of MoD is awaited. Besides, on the basis of recommendation of Committee
for use of Cutting Edge Technologies in LWE theatre, chaired by Union Home Secretary MHA on
28.11.2017, process to procure latest weapons, personal equipment, mobility, IED detection and disposal,
communication & surveillance equipment like Mini/Micro UA Vs, Foliage Penetration Radar etc., is under
process.
4.17.2 The Committee is of the considered view that the latest and modern equipment must be
provided to the ITBP personnel at the place of their deployment for effective and efficient

65
working. The Committee, therefore, hopes that the Comprehensive Integrated Border Management
System (CIBMS) must include updated surveillance equipment that will work under the extreme
climatic conditions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
must consider all the proposals pertaining to critical infrastructure, night halt camps, Cutting
Edge Technologies and communication & surveillance equipment and take necessary action for
procuring/installing appropriate equipments for the ITBP personnel.
4.18 Mobility of troops
4.18.1 In a reply to a query, the Committee has been informed that the ITBP has provided 4x4 vehicles
with high powered engine and good ground clearance to the units/formations deployed in North-East
region and Ladakh region. All terrain vehicles have also been provided to the units deployed in North-
East and Ladakh region. The Ministry submitted that there is no shortage of vehicles in ITBP as per
authorization. As regard to special vehicles, authorized for LWE/ANO areas, procurement of 20 medium
BP vehicles is under process. Procurement of 12 MPVs from Vehicle Factory, Jabalpur is also under
process, out of which, 02 MPVs have been collected and 03 MPVs will be collected within a week.
Besides, the proposals for procurement of 15 light BP vehicles, for the units deployed in ANO/LWE and
procurement of 19 light BP vehicles, for the units of ITBP deployed in J&K are also under process.
4.18.2 The Committee is of the view that movement of the ITBP personnel in the time of need
from one place to another is of high strategic importance. However, mobility must be hassle-free
and swift. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposals for procurement of special
vehicles must be considered without delay and the actual procurement must be done in a time
bound manner .
4.19 Modernization and Technological advancements
4.19.1 In a reply to a query, the Ministry informed the Committee that there is no acute shortage of Arms
and Ammunition in the Force. Nonetheless, process to procure modern weapons to replace the existing
old weapons has been initiated. There is no delay in procurement of combat aid equipments. The Force
has adequate number of combat aid equipments such as bullet resistant jackets, bullet resistant helmets,
BP Vehicles, High Powered SUVs, Mini excavators, Extreme Cold Clothing and Equipment (ECC and E)
and Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipments (SCME). Every year, new equipments are being
added in the modernization plan and provided to the troops.
4.19.2 The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that ITBP is widely
using various surveillance equipments like NVDs, Hand Held Thermal Imager (HHTI), LORROS, etc. at
BOPs. During patrolling, satellite phones, GPS, cameras, snow scooters, and wireless sets are used.
ITBP is also using satellite imageries supplied by other agencies such as NTRO. ITBP is also well
equipped in respect of weapons, ammunitions and other equipments for effective anti naxal operations.
ITBP troops use MPVs, Drones, UAVs, Deep Search Metal Detectors (DSMD), Door Frame Metal
Detectors (DFMD), F3 mine detector, Non Linear Junction Detector (NLJD), HHTI, bomb suit, bomb
blanket, explosive detector- MO8, explosive detection kit, UVSM, LRF, etc.

66
4.19.3 In the domain of IT infrastructure and software applications, ITBP has taken major steps to enable
digitization of important processes and to make optimal use of technology for the benefit of its troops.
Some of these recent initiatives inter-alia include in-built Employee Personnel Information System(EPIS),
in-built grievance redressal application, ITBP Android application, Vehicle Information System (VIS)
module, Digital Budget Management System, Online Force Order (FO)/ Special FO repository for quick
access of force orders, Visitor's Management Software, E-Health Card system, Digital Form-16 module
and an online holiday-home system.
4.19.4 Software applications such as an automated system for transfer of personnel, refurbishing of
Android application, a suggestion portal and a digital APAR repository are under process of development.
Implementation of a Wide Area Network(Bandwidth commissioned at 35 sites) is also under process.
4.19.5 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Home Affairs is alive to the need for
procurement of modern and advanced weapons and deployment of the same to the ITBP personnel.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the recent initiatives taken in the field of IT
infrastructure and software applications must be taken to the logical conclusion to enable
digitization of the processes and optimal utilization of technology for the benefit of ITBP personnel.
4.20 Communication facilities
4.20.1 The Committee was informed in a reply on the subject that the Digital Satellite Phone T erminal
(DSPT) and Satellite Phones remain functional unless equipment is switched off or battery is discharged
or becomes faulty. The down time of satellite phone battery is 8 hours (talk time) and 150 hours in stand-
by mode. DSPT is powered by secondary batteries which has down time of 3 days. DSPTs (205) and
Satellite phones (155) are functioning satisfactorily. As DSPT and satellite phone are routed through
satellite transponder, non-connectivity issues with landlines and mobile phones at the receiver's end are
bare minimum.
4.20.2 The Committee was also informed that presently, mobile telephone connectivity has not been
provided at all BOPs of ITBP. A proposal for providing 'Optical Fiber Cable (OFC)' connectivity to all
BOPs is under consideration to connect all villages through "National Optical Fiber Network" from the
nearest Gram Panchayat, to be extended to BOPs. This will provide data, voice and mobile telephone
connectivity further to BOPs.
4.20.3 The Committee observes that there is no provision of mobile connectivity in many BOPs
of ITBP. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must explore the feasibility
of having mobile connectivity at the BOPs and if possible even by encouraging private operators.
The proposal for providing Optical Fiber Cable (OFC) connectivity to all BoPs by connecting all
villages through National Optical Fiber Network must be considered on priority.
4.21 Grievance Redressal
4.21.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee in a reply to a question that the following
officers act as the Nodal Officers (Grievance Redressal and Welfare Officer), at each level under the
grievance redressal mechanism:

67
Level  Nodal Officer
Directorate General DIG (Org. and Welfare) Designated as Grievances Redressal and
Welfare officer
Dy. Comdt./GD Designated as Assistant Welfare officer
(AWO)
Frontier HQrs DIG(Admn.)
Sector HQrs Commandant (Staff)
Training Institutes Designated Commandant/second-in-command
Units/Specialist Bns Second-in-Command
Base Hospital/C.H. CMO (Selection Grade) or senior most officer available, next to the Commandant.
CRO (central record SAO (R)
office) PAO* (pay *For grievances related to PAO: Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) CRO
and account office) will be the nodal officer.
4.21.2 Apart from above, personnel can also forward their complaints on ITBP App and MHA Grievance
App through Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRMS). Alternatively, the
Force personnel can forward their grievances through post, e-mail (welfaredte@itbp.gov.in) or SMS to
DIG(Welfare), Directorate General Mobile numbers of all senior officers are shared for quick redressal
of grievances.
4.21.3 When enquired whether there were any grievances regarding the New Pension Scheme (NPS)and
regular pension among the personnel as the army personnel still enjoy the regular pension, the Ministry
replied that only one specific request regarding restoration of old pension scheme was received through
CPGRMS Portal.
4.21.4 A total of 518 Grievances were received on ITBP Grievance Portal till date, out of which 491 have
been resolved and remaining 27 are under active consideration with various formations.
4.21.5 The MHA informed the Committee that all personnel have been made aware about E-Grievance
Redressal Mechanism available to them through Sainik Sammelans, Daily Roll Calls and through display
on Notice Boards in all the formations and especially in Training centers where recruit training is being
undertaken.
4.21.6 The Committee desires that ITBP's Grievance Cell must be robust and the mechanism
should reflect a system of speedy and fair adjudication of grievances without delay. It is worthwhile
to mention here that fair redressal of grievance of ITBP personnel would go a long way in
motivating the force to face the challenging task and discharge entrusted duties without any
worry and concern. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an effective and efficient grievance
redressal mechanism may be put in place quickly.

68
CHAPTER-V
BORDER SECURITY FORCE (BSF)
5.1 Historical background
5.1.1 The Border Security Force came into existence on 1st December, 1965 in the aftermath of the
India-Pakistan war (1965) that exposed the inadequacy of the state armed police forces to cope with
armed aggression. Till 1965, the border with Pakistan was manned by the State Armed Police Battalion
whose inadequacy to deal with the armed aggression gave rise to the need for a specialized centrally
controlled border security force, which would be armed and trained to man the International Border with
Pakistan. As a result of the recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries, the Border Security Force
came into existence.
5.1.2. The Force was raised with 25 battalions in 1965 and is presently the largest Border Guarding
Force in the world with 186 battalions (including 3 Disaster Management battalions). For the last several
decades, the BSF has been deployed all over the country and abroad for maintenance of law & order,
internal security duties, counter-insurgency operations, anti-naxal operations, election duties and disaster
relief.
5.2 Role and responsibility
5.2.1 The role and duties performed by the BSF can be broadly listed into 'peace time role', 'war time
role' and 'additional responsibilities'. Under the 'peace time role', the BSF is to promote a sense of security
among the people living in the border areas and to prevent trans-border crimes, unauthorized entry into
or exit from the territory of India, and smuggling or any other illegal activity on the border.
5.2.2 Under the 'war time role', the BSF is responsible for holding ground in less threatened sectors so
long as major assaults do not develop in particular sectors along with performing several tasks such as
protection of vital installations, provision of extensions to the flanks of main defence line, limited
aggressive action against paramilitary or irregular forces of the enemy, and performing other special tasks
that may be required during war time.
5.2.3 Under the 'additional responsibilities', the BSF carries out internal security duties, election duties,
counter-insurgency operations, anti-naxal operations and gives aid to civil authorities during natural
calamities.
5.3 Organisational structure
5.3.1 The Force Headquarters is headed by a Director General. Three Special DG/Additional DGs with
nine Directorates are functioning under the DG. Each Directorate is headed by an Officer of the rank
of Inspector General.
68

69
Dte: Directorate
HR: Human Resources
Ops: Operations
5.3.2 BSF is currently guarding 2289.66 kms of India-Pakistan Border and 4096.70 kms of India-
Bangladesh Border. Besides, BSF is also guarding 237.2 kms of Line of Control (LoC) in J&K under the
operational control of the Army.
5.4 Recruitment
5.4.1 The recruitment in BSF for the post of Assistant Commandant (GD) is conducted by the UPSC
and for the posts of SI (GD) and Constable (GD) is conducted by the SSC. The recruitment of SMO
(DC), MO (AC) and dental surgeon (AC) is conducted through the nodal force nominated by the MHA.
The recruitment for the following cadres is conducted by the BSF itself:
(i) Engineering Cadre
(ii) Air Wing Cadre
(iii) Para Medical Cadre
(iv) V eterinary Cadre
(v) Motor Transport Cadre
(vi) Water W ing Cadre
(vii) Ministerial Cadre
DIRECTOR  GENERAL

70
5.5 Attrition
Sl. No. Reason of attrition Y ear
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
1. Superannuation 986 806 813 856 1015 1206
2. V ol. retirement 3471 3495 2067 511 3132 6001
3. Resigned from service 495 525 516 398 319 414
4. Invalidation (Med) 28 34 23 37 20 19
5. Dismissed on Disc ground 146 101 99 87 59 60
6. Death in action 13 15 10 14 18 07
7. Suicide 40 38 46 27 24 38
8. Shootout 2 6 3 2 02 01
9. Accidental fire 1 2 3 0 01 02
10. Train accident 9 12 6 18 18 07
11. Vehicle Accident 58 58 43 22 20 47
12. Drowning 1 7 8 2 05 05
13. P F Malaria 3 2 4 3 03 01
14. Illness 215 266 239 270 280 257
15. Death due to Others reasons* 76 85 39 83 87 51
T
OTAL 5544 5452 3919 2330 5003 8116
* Electric shock, falling, intoxication, lightning/thundering, murder, poison cases, road accident, snake bite etc.
5.5.1 The Committee observes that a major factor for attrition in 2017 has been voluntary
retirements. This may be due to implementation of 7th Pay Commission. The Committee is
concerned that such high rate of attrition may create a large number of vacancies which the
Force may not be able to fill soon. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may
urge the recruitment agencies to fast-track the recruitment exams to be conducted during this
year as well as next year so as to address the situation arising out of vacant positions to some
extent.
5.5.2 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the reasons for BSF personnel committing
suicides in the year 2017 and the measures undertaken to control the situation. The Ministry submitted
that the general reasons for BSF personnel committing suicides are:
(i) A recent loss of close relationship

71
(ii) A change (or anticipated change) in work circumstances, e.g., demotion, punitive transfer
of work place
(iii) A change in health or serious illness
(iv) Increased misuse of alcohol or other drugs
(v) A history of suicidal behavior or history of suicide in the family
(vi) Current depression
(vii) Financial loss
(viii) Perceived extra marital affairs of spouse/betrayal
(ix) Humiliated in front of others
5.5.3 The Committee takes note of the reasons furnished by the Ministry for the personnel
committing suicide, some reasons are of a personal nature. However, the Committee finds that
some reasons such as punitive transfers, misuse of alcohol/drugs and humiliation in front of
others should have been addressed at the appropriate level of the Force. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry undertakes measures to help the Commanding Officers to improve
upon these aspects. The Committee also recommends that consumption of alcohol by the personnel
must be monitored by the Reporting Officers. The Committee further recommends that the
Force should adopt a zero-tolerance policy on the use of drugs by the personnel and stern
measures may be taken in case of any violations.
5.5.4 The Committee was also informed by the Ministry that BSF has taken various measures to address
the problem of suicide cases among BSF personnel, which are as under:
(i) Regular Yoga has been introduced in the BSF by qualified instructors for better health and
reducing stress.
(ii) Financial Literacy programmes introduced in the entire force to guide all personnel for
future financial security.
(iii) Free help lines installed at Force HQ level, accessible to all men to report problems/
grievances if not addressed for any reason.
(iv) Free guidance to wards of BSF personnel through "Prepmantra" app for all competitive
exams for Engineering, Medical, professional, Law entrance, Management entrance & UPSC
exams.
(v) Regular interaction between Commanding Officers and Jawans is being ensured to reduce
the stress level by counseling and addressing grievances/personal problem.
(vi) Grievances redressal Cells have been set up at all levels to sort out the problems of serving
personnel.
(vii) Development of infrastructure in BOPs for providing basic amenities to the troops and
improve their living conditions.

72
(viii) Installation of force multipliers, electronic gadgets; construction of roads, fence and flood
lights to reduce physical and mental fatigue and enhance operational efficiency.
(ix) Stress Management Capsule courses are being conducted regularly for the troops to make
them understand, how to handle the stress.
(x) Rest and Relief system introduced in order to ensure adequate rest & relief to the BSF
personnel.
(xi) Implementation of rational and fair leave policy.
(xii) Regimental and Community activities including Sports/Games at all levels and participation
of all including officers is ensured.
(xiii) Provision of better communication facilities at places of deployment, particularly, in remote
areas, so that personnel can speak to their families.
(xiv) Transparency in distribution of duties is ensured to prevent resentment and discontent
amongst personnel.
(xv) An S tandard Operational Procedure (SoP) was prepared on the "Holistic Health and Wellness"
of the force personnel and the same has been issued to all the HQs/Bns/establishments for
its implementation upto the BOP level.
5.5.5 The Committee observes that certain measures have been taken to address the stress
levels of the personnel in the Force. However, there is a need to have an institutional set-up both
at the MHA level and at the level of the Headquarters of every Force, including BSF, for proper
identification of factors that cause stress, development of strategies to help the personnel in
addressing these factors and monitoring the implementation of these strategies in every battalion.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must have an institutional set-up
comprising officers from the MHA, Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPRD), heads
of various forces and experts from the areas of public health, mental health, psychology, psychiatry
etc. to deal with the issue of stress in the BSF as well as in other CAPFs in a professional
manner.
5.5.6 The Committee also observes that the Ministry has not taken suitable measures to recruit
or appoint counselors, psychologists and psychiatrists to address the stress and mental health
related issues in a professional manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should consider creating posts in the medical cadre of BSF and recruit and appoint suitable
professionals. The Committee also recommends that recruitment to these posts may be done so
as to provide at least one professional counselor for every battalion and one clinical psychologist/
psychiatrist at the Frontier HQ level.
5.5.7 The Committee notes the measures taken by BSF to address the problem of suicide among
BSF personnel and hopes that those measures do not remain on paper and are implemented

73
diligently at the Company level in every battalion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry should undertake sincere efforts to monitor the implementation of the stated
measures.
5.6 Promotional Avenues
General Duty Cadre
5.6.1 The promotional avenues and actual time taken from entry grade for next promotion in the General
Duty Cadre of BSF, as furnished by the Ministry, are as under:
Promotion Grp 'A' service/ Residency Actual time taken from
from-to Service entry grade
IG to ADG 30 years with 3 years as IG More than 35 years
DIG to IG 24 years with 2 years as DIG More than 33 years
CO to DIG 20 years with 2 years as CO More than 28 years
2IC to CO 15 years with 5 years as 2IC More than 22 years
DC to 2IC 10 years with 5 years as DC More than 16 years
AC to DC 5 years as AC More than 07 years
Inspector to AC 3 years as Inspector 10 years from Inspector
SI to Insp 5 years as SI 5 years
ASI to SI 6 years as ASI or combined ASI post sanctioned in 2012, thus, it is not
10 years as HC/ASI with feasible at this stage to assess the
3 years as ASI stagnation. However, HC with 9 years of
service and ASIs with 18 years service as HC/
ASI recently promoted as ASI and SI
respectively.
HC to ASI 5 years as HC 10 years
CT to HC 8 years as CT 20 years
5.6.2 During the meeting of the Committee, held to discuss the working conditions in BSF a query was
raised about the time taken for promotions at various levels. The DG, BSF informed that for a Jawan
to become a Head Constable, it takes about 16 years. Then, for a Head Constable to become an ASI,
it takes about 8 to 10 years. To become an SI(GD), it takes about 6 to 7 years for those directly
appointed; and, about 30 years for those who were recruited as Constables.
5.6.3 The Ministry, in its reply to the query on reasons for huge divergence in the prescribed residency
period and the actual time taken for promotion in various ranks, confessed that there is acute stagnation
in promotional avenues, particularly in the promotion from Constable (GD) to Head Constable (GD). As

74
per present trend, a Constable (GD) is getting promotion to the rank of HC (GD) after a period of 19-
20 years, whereas the laid down residency service for promotion from Constable (GD) to Head Constable
(GD) is 10 years.
5.6.4 The MHA also informed the Committee that in order to overcome the problem of genuine stagnation
and hardship faced by the employees due to lack of adequate promotional avenues and with a view to
compensate them to some extent, three financial up-gradations are being granted to Force personnel at
the interval of 10, 20 & 30 years of regular service under the Modified Assured Career Progression
(MACP) Scheme at par with other civilian employees.
5.6.5 The MHA informed the Committee that the MACP Scheme is applicable/admissible upto the HAG
scale of ` 67,000-79,000/- (now pay matrix level 15) in replacement of ` 37,400-67,000/- with grade
pay ` 12,000/- i.e. upto the rank of IG.
5.6.6 The current MACP Scheme provides three financial up-gradations counted from the direct entry
grade on completion of 10,20 and 30 years of service respectively. In its reply furnished in response
to a query it was submitted that in the recent past, a proposal was moved to MHA for grant of four
financial up-gradations under MACP Scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24 and 32 years of service instead
of 03 financial up-gradation as admissible under the current MACP Scheme. However, the proposal in-
question was rejected by the MHA. This may be reconsidered, so that personnel can be compensated
to some extent.
5.6.7 The Committee finds some merit in the proposal to grant four financial up-gradations
under the Modified Assured Career Progression(MACP) scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24 and 32
years of service instead of the existing scheme that provides only three financial up-gradations
at intervals of 10, 20 and 30 years of service at par with other civilian employees. The Committee
is of the considered view that the BSF personnel, who are facing excessive stagnation in their
career growth, must be provided certain special incentives so as to keep their morale high.
Moreover, the Committee feels that it is unnecessary to equate them with civilian employees as
the nature of their duty is quite different and they require constant motivation and a high
morale to flawlessly perform the critical tasks assigned to them. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry may favorably reconsider the proposal to grant four financial up-gradations
under the MACP scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24 and 32 years of service to the BSF personnel.
The Committee is of the considered view that this proposal would stem the number of voluntary
retirements taking place immediately after completion of 20 years of service.
Ministerial & Stenography Cadres
Promotion from-to Grp 'A' service/ Actual time taken from
Residency Service entry grade
12 3
Insp (Min) to AC(Min) 3 years as Insp 8 years
SI (Min) to Insp (Min) 5 years as SI 8 years

75
12 3
ASI(Min) to SI(Min) 6 years as ASI 6 years
HC(Min) to ASI(Min) 5 years as HC 6 to 8 years (Prior to
2004, ASI was feeder
grade of Min Cadre)
Promotion from-to Grp 'A' service/ Actual time taken from
Residency Service entry grade
Insp (Steno) to AC(PS) 3 years as Insp 16 years
SI(Steno) to Insp (Steno) 5 years as SI 23 years
ASI(Steno) to SI(Steno) 6 years as ASI 08 yrs (Prior to 2004, SI
was feeder grade of Steno
Cadre)
5.6.8 When the Committee enquired about the reasons for huge divergence in the prescribed residency
period and the actual time taken for promotion in various ranks such as Constable, Sub-Inspector
(Steno), Inspector (Steno) and Inspector, the Ministry replied that the promotion of Non-Gazetted Ranks
of the Force (i.e. Head Constable, Asst. Sub-Inspector, Sub-Inspector and Inspector of GD Cadre) is
done on the basis of criteria laid down in respective Recruitment Rules based on the instructions issued
by MHA & DoPT from time to time and based on the availability of vacancies occurring during a
particular vacancy year. Due to vacancy based promotions in BSF, there is divergence in the prescribed
residency period and the actual time taken for promotion. To mitigate the stagnation, cadre review/
restructuring is under taken.
5.6.9 DG , BSF also informed the Committee that there is a provision of Limited Departmental Examination
in which Constables and Head Constables can appear directly after completing five years of service. If
a person qualifies the exam, he can directly become a Sub-Inspector.
5.6.10 The Committee is anguished to note that stagnation of personnel in some posts is so high
that it takes up to 23 years to get promotion. The Committee feels that the Ministry has not
taken suitable steps to remove such severe stagnation. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should urgently take cognizance of this issue and take appropriate measures
to shorten the long waiting period in career progression.
5.7 Cadre Review/Restructuring
5.7.1 The Committee sought to know about the progress in the cadre review of Grp. B & C posts from
the Ministry, which replied that the Cadre review/restructuring proposal of group 'B' & 'C' and various
supporting cadres was submitted to MHA on 3rd November, 2015. Replies to queries were furnished on
16th Aug 2016. Thereafter, a fresh Board of Officer was detailed for cadre review of Group - B & C
of General Duty cadre. The committee has submitted the board proceedings of cadre review/restructuring
proposal on 6thJune 2018. The same is under examination at Force HQ for submission to MHA. The

76
Ministry further apprised the Committee that cadre review procedure is a complex process in which
creation/abolition of the posts and huge financial implication are involved, which needs inter-ministry/
department, i.e., MHA, Internal Finance Division (IFD) & Ministry of Finance (MoF) consultation/
examination before approval. The cadre review process has eight stages before final approval as detailed
below:
(i) Convening of Committee (First Stage)
(ii) Examination of recommendations of committee by Personnel Directorate. Finance Wing and
financial concurrence of FA and approval of DG BSF (Second Stage)
(iii) Submission of proposal to Administrative Ministry, i.e. Ministry of Home Affairs for
consideration/examination (Third Stage)
(iv) Approval of the proposal by the Division Head (MHA). (Fourth Stage)
(v) Concurrence by the Internal Finance Division (IFD), MHA. (Fifth Stage)
(vi) Approval of the proposal by the Home Minister. (Sixth Stage)
(vii) Concurrence and approval by Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. (Seventh
Stage)
(viii) Final approval by Home Minister. (Eighth and final stage)
5.7.2 The Ministry further stated that it is difficult to give the exact time/date by when the cadre review
would be completed; however, BSF is making sincere efforts to get the cadre review approved as early
as possible.
5.7.3 The Committee expresses its concern that there is excessive stagnation in the non-gazetted
ranks of BSF especially at the level of Constable. The Committee is disappointed to observe that
a Constable is able to get his first promotion after a long duration of around 20 years. The
Committee wonders how the Force expects the personnel at the lowest rank to maintain their
morale in view of such stagnation which would provide them with only one promotion throughout
their career. The Committee also feels that it is quite understandable that thousands of Constables
opt for voluntary retirement after 20 years of service as they are left with no hope of career
progression. The Committee fails to understand that cadre review started in November, 2015 is
pending at the Force level and has not reached the MHA, even after more than three years. The
Committee feels that this issue has been languishing for a long time and the Ministry needs to
urgently find a way out for expediting the process. A time limit needs to be fixed for each
process. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should prioritize the cadre review/
restructuring for Group - B & C of General Duty cadre.
5.7.4 The Ministry also informed the Committee that the Cadre review of Stenographic Cadre has
already been forwarded to MHA which is under active consideration at MoF and Cadre restructuring
proposal of Group 'B' &'C' personnel has already been prepared, which is under examination at Force
HQ.

77
5.7.5 The status of BSF cadre reviews and details of cadre review approved by Govt. of India are as
under:
Sl. No. Cadres Authority vide which cadre review approved by Govt.
1. Cadre Review of Group-'A' MHA Letter No. 12011/11/2015-Pers dated 21 Sept
Executive Cadre 2016.
2. Cadre Review of Ministerial Cadre MHA letter No. 16/7/2013-Pers/BSF CF No. 3360003/ Pers-
III dated 20 Feb 2017.
3. Cadre review of Communication MHA letter No. 16/17/2013-Pers/BSF CF No 3378801/17/
Cadre Pers-III dated 29 Nov2017.
5.7.6 The Ministry also furnished the status of cadre review under consideration with MHA/MoF/BSF:
Sl. No. Cadres Name Remarks/Progress
1. Stenographic Cadre Returned by DoE with observation on 09.07.2018.
Accordingly, file sent to BSF on 10.07.2018 for reply.
2. Medical Cadre Group-A Under consideration with BSF.
3. GD Cadre, Group-B & C Under consideration with BSF to rectify the observation
raised by MHA/IFD
4. Supporting Cadres Group 'A',
'B' & 'C'.
5.7.7 The Committee observes that the cadre review for Stenographic, Medical Group-A, General
Duty Group-B&C and Supporting Cadres are under consideration at different stages. The
Committee recommends that review of all these cadres may be expedited and completed by the
end of the current year.
5.7.8 The Ministry also informed the Committee that the review of following cadres was not undertaken:
Sl. No. Cadres Name Remarks/Progress
1. Air Wing Cadre Strengthening has been done in 2014.
2. Veterinary Cadre Restructuring of Veterinary cadre undertaken in 2015
3. Law Cadre Under preparation by concerned Branch.
5.7.9 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Ministry that the review of Air
Wing and Veterinary cadres was not undertaken as they were strengthened or restructured
much earlier. The Committee, however, observes that the review of Law Cadre is still under
preparation by the Branch concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should instruct the officers concerned to expedite the review of the Law Cadre and ensure its
implementation at the earliest.

78
5.8 Medical Response Staff
5.8.1 The details of sanctioned and vacant posts in the Medical response staff of BSF, as furnished by
the Ministry, are as under:
(a) Medical Officers
Sl. No Designation Authorize Held V acancy Remarks
1. SDG (Med) 01 - 01
2. IG (Med) 03 03 -
3. DIG (Med) 08 08 -
4. CMO (SG) 408 146 143
5 . C M O       1 7    2 6 5
6. SMO 55
7. MO 47
8. Specialist 74 12 62
9. Dental Surgeon 10 10 -
G/T
OTAL 504 298 206
(b) Nursing and Para-Medical Staff in Medical set-up
Sl. No. Rank Authorize Posted V acancy Remarks
1. Ac (Matron) 02 02 -
2. SM (Sister-In- 10 10 -
3. Cnspr (Nursing Asstt) 24 24 -
4. SI (Staff Nurse) 144 139 05 Rectt under process.
5. Inspr (Jr Dietician) 02 02 -
6. Inspr (Pharmacist) 14 13 01
7. SI (Pharmacist) 67 63 04 Reply given in UO No.
9270 dated
8. ASI (Pharmacist) 392 343 49 Rectt under process.
9. Inspr (Radiographer) 0 0 -
10. SI (Sr Radiographer) 10 10 -
11. ASI (Sr X-Ray Asstt) 0 0 -

79
Sl. No. Rank Authorize Posted V acancy Remarks
12. HC (Jr X-Ray Asstt) 02 05 - Including 03 GD
13. SI (Physiotherapist) 02 02 -
14. ASI (Physiotherapist) 08 08 -
15. SI (Blood Bank) 02 02 -
16. HC (Lab Asstt BBT) 02 02 -
17. ASI (Lab Tech) 12 12 -
18. HC (Lab Tech) 02 03 - Including 01 GD
19. ASI (ECG Tech) 02 02 -
20. ASI (OT Tech) 10 09 01
21. ASI (CSR) 0 0 -
22. HC (Electrician) 02 02 -
23. HC (AC Plant Tech) 02 02 -
24. HC (CSR Asstt) 0 0 -
25. ASI (Dental Tech) 10 10 -
26. Dy Med Supdt/Lady Secy 02 02 -
(GOs)/AC/Min)
27. HC (Nursing Asstt) 477 461 16 Filling of post of HC
(NA) by Dept. is
28. HC (Steward) 10 10 -
29. Ct (Dresser) 02 02 -
30. Ct (Nursing Asstt) 56 46 10 Being filled-monitored by
Personnel Directorate
31. Ct (Linen keeper) 01 01 - Vacancies are mainfained
by
32. Ct (Cook) 216 182 34 Vacancies are maintained
by
33. Ct (Peon) 32 32 -
34. Ct (Masalchi) 22 22 -
35. Ward Boy/Girl/Ayah 33 31 02

80
Sl. No. Rank Authorize Posted V acancy Remarks
36. Ct (Table Boy) 10 10 -
37. Ct (Kahar) 199 183 16 Recruitment under
38. HC (Dialysis Tech) 04 0 04 pCroucleds sn.ot be filled
for want of Recruitment
Rules to be framed by
G/T
OTAL 1785 1647 142
5.8.2 The Committee sought to know about the challenges being faced in filling-up the vacant posts of
the medical staff in BSF and the measures taken to fill the vacant posts. The Ministry submitted that
open recruitment of Medical Officers, including Specialists, is conducted every year for CAPFs, through
Medical Officers Selection Board, by the Nodal Agencies to fill up the vacancy of Medical Officers in
CAPFs. However, sufficient number of Medical Officers/Specialists could not be recruited to fill up the
vacancies even after making all efforts. Thereby, the vacant posts of Medical Officers/Specialists in BSF
are lying vacant.
5.8.3 However, to overcome the deficiency of regular General Duty Medical Officers (GDMO) and
Specialist Medical Officers, BSF is appointing Contractual Medical Officers (GDMOs/Specialists) by
conducting Walk-in-Interview at all BSF Composite Hospitals every year after obtaining necessary approval
from MHA/ADG(Med), CAPFs. The existing vacancies of regular GDMOs/Specialists will be filled once
sufficient medical officers are selected through MOSB and allocated to BSF. The vacancies of Specialist
Medical Officers and GDMOs are not being filled up completely due to the probable reasons that:
(i) Hard service conditions in CAPFs especially in BSF due to posting in far flung areas/remote
areas of the country.
(ii) Overall deficiency of doctors in the country in comparison to requirement in Govt.
organizations.
(iii) Better Pay & Allowances/Perks in private hospitals in comparison to CAPFs.
5.8.4 The Committee notes that around 40 per cent posts in the Medical Officers cadre are
vacant and most of the vacancies are at the mid-level posts of Specialist Medical Officers and
General Duty Medical Officers that are critical for providing medical care to various battalions.
5.8.5 The Committee also takes note of the submission of the Ministry that adverse and difficult
service conditions due to posting in far flung areas/remote areas, overall deficiency of doctors
in the country, and better pay, allowances and perks in private hospitals, are the possible reasons
for vacancies of Specialist Medical Officers and GDMOs, not being filled up. The Committee
appreciates that not much can be done to remove the bottlenecks of hard service conditions or
deficiency of doctors in the country. However, improvement in pay, allowances and perks are
possible through appropriate modifications in the recruitment rules and terms & conditions of
the contractual appointments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must

81
undertake measures to make the terms & conditions of the recruitment/contractual appointment
more attractive and offer them remuneration and perks comparable to the private sector.
5.9 Housing and Accommodation
5.9.1 The Committee sought to know the status of housing in BSF. The Ministry furnished the details
as under:
Sl. No. Type Authorized Held Deficiency Satisfaction Eligibility
level (%) (Rank wise)
1. Type-VI 16 13 03 81.25 IG and above
2. Type-V 707 273 434 38.61 2IC, Comdt. & DIG
3. Type-IV 1980 1001 979 50.56 Asstt Comdt. & Dy.
Comdt.
4. Type-III 10559 2968 7591 28.11 Sub-Inspr & Inspr
5. Type-II 72304 25176 47128 34.82 Upto ASI
TOTAL 85566 29431 56135 34.40
5.9.2 When enquired about the reasons for a low housing satisfaction level in the Force and the efforts
that have been made regarding this issue, the MHA informed the Committee that it is making conscious
efforts to enhance the housing satisfaction level in the Forces. The present housing satisfaction level in
BSF is 34.40 per cent, i.e., against the authorization of 85,566 houses, 29,431 houses are available. In
order to address the shortage of housing in BSF, the Government had sanctioned 10,317 houses to BSF
in 2013. At present, 9,156 houses are under construction/tendering process. On completion of all housing
units, the satisfaction level will be 45.10 per cent against authorization.
5.9.3 The Committee is disappointed to note that the housing satisfaction level in BSF is very
low and despite completing pending construction of 9156 houses, the satisfaction level will only
become approximately 45 per cent, which is still quite low. The Committee finds it even more
worrying that a bulk of the shortage of houses is in Type-II and Type-III that cater to the non-
gazetted ranks of the Force. The Committee feels that a shortage of nearly 47128 houses in the
Type-II category is especially worrisome as even the pending construction projects may not be
able to reduce it by any significant margin. The Committee feels that the efforts of the Ministry
to improve the housing satisfaction level are not sufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should urgently draw a plan to reduce the housing shortage, particularly of the
non-gazetted personnel of BSF, by sanctioning sufficient number of houses in Type-II and Type-
III categories to achieve a satisfaction level of at least 50 per cent in both the categories.
5.10 Shortage of Budget Provisions for Housing
5.10.1 Although the BSF battalions were sanctioned in one go, their raising was phased over the subsequent
years with provision of meeting the expenditure out of the sanctioned budget grant of the respective

82
financial year. The infrastructure was supposed to be developed as per the authorized norms, as and
when the Battalions were being raised. This could not happen mainly due to shortfall in budget allocation.
In most of the cases, the budget allocated in a financial year fell short of the requirement for construction
of these infrastructure schemes. The data for allocation of budget under 'Residential Building' in the last
4 years is given below as an example that the budget allocation always fell short for the demand
projected.
(` in crore)
Y ear Projection Allocation Shortfall
2015-16 359.52 101.54 257.98
2016-17 373.17 208.38 164.79
2017-18 405.00 289.00 116.00
2018-19 440.00 303.45 136.55
T
OTAL 1577.69 902.37 675.32
5.10.2 Apart from the budget constraints, delay in acquisition of land through State Governments and
limited capacity of executing agencies, especially in remote areas are also attributable to the slow
progress of construction in BSF.
5.10.3 The Committee takes note of the shortage of budgetary allocation vis-a-vis  projected
demand of funds for construction of housing projects and is disappointed to note that the lack
of funds has delayed the construction of housing projects that were supposed to be implemented
as and when more battalions were raised. The Committee feels that this expansion of Force
without creation of commensurate number of houses has led to a situation where providing
housing accommodation has become extremely challenging for the Force. The Committee,
therefore, takes a strong exception to this trend of allocating lower budgetary grants and
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should make all efforts to convince the Ministry
of Finance to provide higher amount of funds to make up for the past shortfalls for constructing
the housing projects.
5.10.4 The Committee also takes note of the other reasons viz. delay in acquisition of land
through State Governments and limited capacity of executing agencies, especially in remote
areas, that have hampered the pace of construction of housing accommodation. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry must constantly impress upon the State Governments
and the executing agencies the importance of constructing houses for the BSF personnel. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must try to find innovative
solutions to overcome the problem of land acquisition and consider adopting the model of high-
rise buildings even in the remote areas so as to minimize the requirement of land and maximize
the number of houses that can be constructed. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry
may consider utilizing the land available to the Force under the 'Right of Way' and adopting a

83
linear housing model based on the linear Border out Post (BoP) model to overcome the problem
of land acquisition.
5.11 Basic Amenities- Food
5.11.1 The Committee was informed that the ration items for BSF troops are procured/purchased by
respective battalions from local market by detailing a Board of Officers (One Representative each from
Officers/SOs/ORs/Tradesmen). The detailed Board of Officers carries out Market Survey and obtains a
quotation along with samples of each ration item. After having collected samples and rates from different
suppliers from the market, the Board of Officers carries out a comparison of quality and rates and then
prepares a comparative statement of the ration items to be procured for the troops. The comparative
statement is approved by the senior most Officers available in the station, i.e. by the Battalion Commandant
in unit, Sector DIG in Sector HQ and Frontier IG/DIG in Frontier HQ.
5.11.2 After approval of the Board Proceedings by the CA, the Supply Order is placed to the supplier
and the board collects the ration items as per the approved samples once in a month, which is then
further surveyed by another Survey Committee detailed for the above purpose. This exercise is carried
out each month for procurement of ration items. The composition of Board of Officers is changed every
month to ensure transparency and fairness in procurement system. Senior Officers ensure that troops
are being provided proper and healthy food within the authorized ration money allowance paid to the BSF
personnel. Senior Officers visiting the HQ/Unit/BOPs also check the messes for the food quality and
endorse their remarks in food checking register. All BSF troops are free to report any issue regarding
quality of food during evening roll call being conducted in BOP's/FDL's/Coys/Unit/HQRs. Ration Money
Allowance to BSF personnel is being paid for 3850 Calories in equivalence to the standard authorized
calories for Army personnel. Ration Money Allowance (RMA) in this regard is yearly revised by MHA
based on the rates revised by Ministry of Defence for the Army personnel.
5.11.3 A weekly menu is also prepared in mess meeting and displayed on board. The same is followed
strictly. Food is cooked centrally at BOP for all including Officer Commanding BOP. A system exists to
check daily quality of food in breakfast, lunch, dinner and proper record of the same is also kept. A
complaint register is placed for mess members and visitor from outside, i.e., Bn HQ/SHQ/Ftr HQ/FHQ
to record their observations.
5.11.4 At present the RMA is `2976 per month up to the rank of Commandant. The best quality of ration
items available in the local market is purchased for all the units and HQs of BSF, except the unit and
HQs deployed under the Army Ops control in J&K which are being provided ration by the Army.
5.11.5 When the Committee enquired about the number of grievances received regarding quality of food
in BSF, the MHA informed the Committee that no grievance regarding poor standard of food is received
on "BSF my App" and IPP Portal. However, one video of BSF personnel complaining about quality of
food got viral on social media (Facebook) in January, 2017. After this grievance which was made public,
a third party study was conducted through Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Science (DIPAS),
DRDO, MoD.

84
5.11.6 DIPAS conducted study by following stratified random sampling technique from all ranks and job
profile from different Bn/BOPs of 08 Frontiers (4 each of Western and Eastern Command). Data from
6526 personnel was collected and focused group discussion was made at 37 different Bn Mess/Cook
houses.
5.11.7 As per the report submitted by DIPAS in early 2018, the intake of energy and nutrients of sample
data is commensurate with the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) of 2010 by India Council of
Medical Research (ICMR). The report summarized that data of satisfaction level of food in different
terrain and geographical area indicated that 97 per cent personnel are satisfied with respect to quality and
quantity of food. The report has recorded that average energy expenditure to be 3400-3500 K Cal/day,
while energy intake was 3450 + 335 K Cal/day. The report registered that the food was able to provide
all macro and micronutrients as per RDA of ICMR.
5.11.8 The Committee takes note of the explanation provided by the BSF on the controversy of
providing poor quality food to its personnel by commissioning a study conducted by Defence
Institute of Physiology and Allied Science (DIPAS). The Committee also notes that DIPAS has
found that 97 per cent personnel are satisfied with the quality and quantity of food being
provided. The Committee, however, observes that the sample size of the study was less than 3
per cent of the total strength of the Force and may be subject to error and, therefore, may not
accurately reflect the situation on the ground.
5.11.9 The Committee also takes note of the sampling technique used in the study and feels that
Stratified Random Sampling Technique may not be the best technique to identify potential issues.
The Committee is aware that food quality and quantity may not be an issue in the geographically
accessible areas but the problems exist in remote, inaccessible areas of deployment and where
there are harsh climatic conditions. The Committee feels that the study conducted by DIPAS,
instead of adopting a sampling technique based on random method should have adopted a more
focused technique such as selective sampling or modal instance sampling focused on the areas
that are more likely to have a compromised quality and quantity of food. In the Committee's
view, conducting such a focused study would have brought out the real concerns, which were
probably lost among the favorable outcomes obtained from a wider sample. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should commission another study based on selective or
modal instance sampling technique that focuses on particular locations that are remote, inaccessible
and suffer from the constraints of harsh climatic conditions.
5.12 Training Issues
5.12.1 The Committee was informed that the Training Directorate functions at the apex level, at Force
Headquarters. It has directional and monitoring role, besides being repository of training data bank.
Training is being imparted through three Major Training Institutes, Central School of Motor Transport
(CSMT) Tekanpur, National Training Centre for Dogs (NTCD) Tekanpur, eleven Subsidiary Training
Centres and two Recruit Training Centres, 7 Specialised Training Centres and at Battalion levels.

85
Basic Training
5.12.2 Any personnel enrolled as the member of the Force has to undergo Basic Training as per below
mentioned period:-
(i) Assistant Commandant (Direct Entry) - 53 Weeks
(ii) Assistant Commandant (LDCE) - 28 Weeks
(iii) Sub-Inspector (Direct Entry) - 51 Weeks
(iv) Sub-Inspector (LDCE) - 26 Weeks
(v) Constable/General Duty (including Mahila) - 44 Weeks
(vi) Ministerial Staff/Communication Cadre/ - 24 Weeks
Engineering Cadre/Constable (Mahila) (Compassionate Appointment)
(vii) Motor Transport Cadre - 44 Weeks
(viii) Medical Officers/Assistant Engineer/ - 12 Weeks
Veterinary Officer/Paramedical/Tradesman
(a) Mandatory In-Service Pre-Promotional Training - To improve the training acumen of
the force personnel, there is a system of periodic training. The mandatory courses
are conducted for various ranks (executive cadre) to make them eligible for the next
higher promotion.
(b) Coy Collective Training -There is a need for periodic soldierly training for the troops
on ground, and this is achieved by conducting mandatory six weeks Coy Collective
Training at Battalion for each Coy.
(c) On the Job Training- The aim of the training is to enhance the professional knowledge
of the soldier during their day to day work.
(d) Induction Training -The nature of duties on Indo-Pak, Indo-BD borders, anti-infiltration,
Line of Control, Counter-insurgency and anti-naxal Ops are entirely different and to
tune the battalions deployed for these roles, a pre-induction training is organised for
all battalions deployed for different roles.
(e) New Weapon and Equipment Training- As and when new weapons and equipment are
inducted in the force to meet the operational requirement, an elaborate training
mechanism adopted for its use and maintenance.
(f) Specialized Skill Development Training- BSF Officers are also imparted training in
Specialized Skill Development Course through civil institutes.
Specialized Training
5.12.3 The following specialized trainings are imparted to the Force personnel:-
(i) Assistant Inspectorate of Armament (For Asstt Comdt/Dy Comdt)

86
(ii) Ammunition Technical Officer (For Inspectors)
(iii) Fleet Management (For Asstt Comdt & Dy Comdt)
(iv) Driving and Maintenance (For Constable)
(v) Armourer (For Constable)
(vi) Signal Training (For Communication Cadre)
(vii) Intelligence Training (For Constable to DIG level officers)
5.12.4 The Committee notes that certain kinds of training such as Induction Training before
deployment for particular duties are extremely important for the personnel to perform their
duty. The Committee recommends that all such Induction Training Programs should be meticulously
designed and implemented so as to impart necessary skills to the personnel. Furthermore, all
other mandatory training viz. pre-promotional training, coy collective training and on the job-
training to enhance the professional knowledge must be imparted with updated and latest
curriculum.
5.12.5 The Committee is of the view that the training system in BSF should be such wherein
personnel and officers, who are aware about their deficiencies or are inclined to improve certain
skills, may voluntarily opt for attending relevant training programs. The Committee, therefore,
feels that BSF should also strive to develop some short-duration training programs for the
personnel who want to voluntarily acquire certain skills. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should consider evolving a gamut of specific short-duration training programs
to allow the personnel to voluntarily opt for getting trained in certain tasks.
5.13 Reserve Battalions
5.13.1 The Committee sought to know the number of battalions of BSF that are presently designated for
the purpose of providing rest and recuperation. The Ministry, in its reply, submitted that at present 27
reserve battalions (including 02 reserve battalions being raised) are designated for providing rest and
recuperation. But these battalions are deployed for various Internal Security duties as follows:
Anti-Naxal Operations - 16 battalions
Counter Insurgency - 03 battalions
ISD/ Security duties - 06 battalions
Under raising - 02 battalions
5.13.2 The Committee also sought to know the ideal ratio of battalions that should be in a state of rest
at any given point of time. The Ministry submitted that as per the report of the Emergency Committee
of Secretaries in 1965 and as acceded by the Group of Ministers in the year 2001, there should be one
reserve battalion in a state of rest for every three duty battalions.

87
5.13.3 The Committee is astonished to observe that no reserve battalion of BSF is in a state of
rest out of the total of 186 battalions of BSF whereas, as per the policy, around 46 battalions
should be in a state of rest. The Committee is further dismayed to observe that all the 27 reserve
battalions designated for the purpose of rest and recuperation have been deployed for internal
security duties. The Committee feels that this situation needs to be remedied forthwith. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Report of the Emergency Committee of Secretaries in
1965 and accepted to by Group of Ministers in the year 2001, may be implemented and mandatory
guidelines laid down for keeping an appropriate number of battalions in a state of rest and
recuperation.
5.14 Leave and Transfer Issues
5.14.1 In response to a query of the Committee, the Ministry submitted that at present all BSF personnel
serving in battalions and training institutions are authorized 15 days of casual leave and personnel serving
in static HQs are authorized 08 days of casual leave. In comparison, all Army Officers are entitled 20
days of casual leave and all Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBOR) in Army are entitled 30 days of
casual leave irrespective of the place of posting.
5.14.2 It was also informed that before the declaration of 7th Pay Commission, Army authorized free
Leave Travel Concession once a year and concession for other journeys during the year. In comparison,
BSF personnel were authorized free Leave Travel Concession to home town once a year with one
additional one side Leave Travel Concession in an emergency. As per the new guidelines issued by MHA
the provision to grant 50 per cent of rail fare in a year for to and fro journey to hometown in specified
circumstances like death, illness, marriage, etc. has been changed to grant full free railway warrant to
all CAPF personnel, in a year, without imposing conditions of death, illness, marriage, etc. during any
kind of leave, i.e., casual and earned leave.
5.14.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider reviewing the leave policy
presently in place for BSF in view of the fact that there is no rest or recuperation time for the
jawans of the BSF.
5.14.4 When enquired about the percentage of leave and transfer requests that were denied during the
last three years and the reasons for the denial, the MHA informed the Committee that generally, leave
is granted to BSF personnel three times in a year. On exigencies and requirement, leave is granted even
fourth time. Efforts are being made not to deny leave to any personnel except in cases of rare operational
exigency. However, the Ministry did not furnish any data pertaining to the leave requests that were denied
during the last three years.
5.14.5 During the last three years about 20 to 35 per cent requests cases of transfer were denied due
to ineligibility as per existing policy and non-availability of vacancy at requested places.
5.14.6 All posing/transfer are examined on the basis of up-to-date data of personnel available on Intranet
Prahari Project of BSF. All posting orders are being uploaded in Intranet Prahari Project (IPP) which is
operational since the year 2016 for the information of all concerned so as to ensure transparency.

88
5.14.7 Specialized App for posting/transfer of BSF personnel is being developed as a part of Website
development to achieve transparency. It will become functional alongwith the new website. This App will
be used to collect choices/posting-transfer related information before issuing posting orders. This application
is different from the existing grievance app that is available for the BSF personnel.
5.14.8 The Committee appreciates the difficulty in acceding to transfer requests of all the personnel.
However, there is a need to identify the factors that lead to such a huge number of transfer
requests every year. The Committee feels that if the pattern of recruitment, especially for the
Subordinate Officers and Other ranks, can be aligned to the geographical constraints faced by
the Force then it would be easier to provide posting in his State of residence or even near his
home town. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should review the
recruitment policies pertaining to BSF to align them with the geographical deployment of the
Force by recruiting more candidates from the States/Region where the Force is deployed. The
Committee is of the view that this could help in reducing not only the tendency to seek transfers
to preferred locations but also help in addressing the attrition to certain extent.
5.15 Grievance Redressal
5.15.1 The Committee enquired about the grievances that were received during the last 3 years regarding
transfers, food, promotions and other working conditions. The Ministry furnished the details of grievances
received in BSF as under:
Sl. No. Year Kind of grievance No. of No. of Yet tobe
grievances grievances redressed
received addressed
1 2 3 456
1. 2015 Transfer 2544 2544
Food - -
Promotion 182 182
Other working 3332 3332
conditions etc.
T
OTAL 6058 6058
2. 2016 Transfer 2531 2531
Food - -
Promotion 181 181
Other working 3315 3315
conditions  etc.
T
OTAL 6027 6027

89
12 3 4 5 6
3. 2017 Transfer 2763 2763
Food 1 1
Promotion 197 197
Other working 3621 3621
conditions etc.
TOTAL 6582 6582
4. 2018 (Upto Transfer 1147 1025 122
June 2018)
Food - - -
Promotion 82 53 29
Other working 1503 1309 194
conditions etc.
T
OTAL 2732 2387 345
5.15.2 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that an effective and efficient Grievance Redressal
System has been established in BSF in the form of e-suggestion through IPP.
E-suggestion on Intranet Prahari Project (IPP) portal
5.15.3 The Ministry informed the Committee that many Force personnel come up with very good
suggestions regarding systemic improvement in the Force and therefore, a system for lodging e-suggestion
in IPP module has been developed so that Force personnel may register their valuable suggestions for
betterment of the Force through IPP based computerized system, called E-Suggestion Portal.
E-grievances on Intranet Prahari Project (IPP) portal
5.15.4 An e-grievance portal has also been created in IPP system so that any personnel, who is having
any grievance, may post his grievance for redressal. These grievances are then addressed to the concerned
authorities for early redressal. The serving employees can also track the status of their e-grievances on
IPP .
BSF Mobile App -'BSFMyApp'
5.15.5 BSF Mobile Application, named 'BSFMyApp'provides a system of Grievance Redressal as well as
various other service and welfare related issues of the Force personnel. It provides mechanism to address
issues related to Pay, GPF, Leave, Deputation, etc.
Pension Adalats
5.15.6 To redress the grievances of ex-BSF personnel and their NOKs, pension adalats at various locations
are periodically organized. Since 17th April 2013 till date, 15 Pension Adalats have been successfully
organized in various parts of the country.

90
5.15.7 The Committee appreciates various components of Grievance Redressal System of BSF.
The Committee desires that the Grievance Redresssal mechanism must be easily accessible,
user-friendly, transparent and fair in dealing with the grievances of BSF personnel.
5.16 Infrastructural Issues- Road Connectivity
5.16.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that to provide connectivity, most of the BOPs are
linked with nearest road head either by Pucca road or Kutcha Track. The remaining BOPs use border
road running along border fence for their connectivity. However, to ensure round-the-year connectivity
to BOPs, BSF approaches the department concerned for repair and maintenance. However, the project
on link roads, to ensure connectivity to every BOP, has been forwarded to MHA by BSF through a
communication dated 02n May 2017, which is being considered by a working group committee. Details
are as under:
State Requirement of road (in kms.)
Jammu 76.300
Punjab 126.580
Rajasthan 1 104.260
Gujarat 59.400
West Bengal 193.350
Assam 82.150
Meghalaya 106.020
Mizoram 96.470
Tripura 188.160
T
OTAL 2032.690
5.16.2 Apart from the above-mentioned project, another project for constructing lateral and axial roads
in the State of Punjab and Rajasthan is under consideration at MHA as per following details:
State Lateral Road Axial Road
Punjab 481.584 kms 219.450 kms
Rajasthan 945.193 kms 533.035 kms
T
OTAL 1426.777 kms 752.485 kms
5.16.3 The Committee is concerned to observe that there is a requirement of construction of
around 2032 kms link roads on the India-Pakistan and India-Bangladesh borders to provide
connectivity to every Border Outpost. The Committee also notes that apart from the project to
construct the link roads, there is another project under consideration of MHA to construct more
than 1426 kms of lateral roads and almost 752 kms of axial roads. The Committee feels that

91
there is a need to construct a huge length of more than 4210 kms of roads in the border areas
where BSF is deployed. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that border roads
is one of the most essential infrastructure requirements and the absence of connectivity affects
not only the operational efficiency but also the working conditions of the personnel. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that all these projects must be considered in a time-bound
manner and an early decision be taken to approve them so that construction work on ground
level is started without delay.
Overcoming the Geographical Constraints
5.16.4  BSF has deployment at varied topographical terrain and hostile climatic conditions from snow
clad mountains of Kashmir valley to the scorching deserts of Rajasthan, salty marsh land of Rann of
Kutch in Gujarat to Sunderban areas of West Bengal and thickly vegetated and Malaria prone areas of
North-East region.
5.16.5  Following efforts have been taken to improve the living conditions of troops in BoPs and Battalion
HQs:
(a) Upgrading the existing BOPs at par with Composite BOPs: Construction of deficient basic
elements like Cook House cum Dining Hall, Toilet Block, Barrack, Administration block, etc.
in old BOPs at par with Composite BOPs.
(b) Piped water supply to BOPs: BSF is deployed in border areas where the potable water is
supplied through Water Tankers. Piped water supply is being provided to all such BOPs
(where feasible).
(c) Advanced Fibre Reinforced Plastic (FRPs) at Forward Defense Location (FDLs): BSF is
also deployed on the Line of Control in J&K. To improve the living conditions at FDLs,
construction of 398 Advanced FRPs for 199 FDLs is in progress.
(d) Solarization of BOPs & Key Location Positions (KLPs): The Solar Power Plants (SPP) of
varying capacity from 10 KWp to 25 KWp have been installed or in process of installation
in BOPs where electricity is not available.
(e) Availability of entertainment equipment: All the BOPs have been provided with Televisions
with Direct-to-Home (DTH) facility for the entertainment of troops during their leisure time.
(f) Construction of RCC Helipads: Five RCC Helipads on Indo-Pakistan Border and seven RCC
Helipads on India-Bangladesh Border have been sanctioned for construction to assist in
performance of operational duties and easy evacuation during contingency.
(g) Construction of Pucca Naka Machan/Ambush cum Patrol (ACP) Shelter: Sanction has been
accorded for construction of 833 Pucca Naka Machans/ACP Shelters in the first phase out
of a total requirement of 5907 Nos. These ACP Shelters have provisions of toilet for women
personnel.

92
(h) Authorization of 49 Room SOs Mess at Battalion HQs: Sanction has been accorded for
authorization of 49 Room Sub-Ordinate Officers Mess (Plinth area 2317.65 Sqm) at battalion
HQs.
(i) Providing Guest Houses in all BSF locations: Guest Houses have been established at battalion
HQs to facilitate visits of family members and guests of jawans for a short duration.
5.16.6  The Committee notes the measures taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to overcome
the infrastructural challenges caused due to the geographical constraints of the area of deployment.
The Committee feels that certain measures such as Construction of Pucca Naka Machan/Ambush
cum Patrol (ACP) Shelters, providing solar power to Border Outposts (BOPs) and Key Location
Positions, upgrading the existing conventional BOPs to Composite BOPs, construction of advanced
fibre reinforced plastic BOPs at forward defense locations etc., are critical for improving the
working conditions of the personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
must accord due priority for implementation of all these measures to upgrade the infrastructure
available for the BSF personnel at the earliest.
5.17 Security of Personnel
5.17.1  BSF is deployed on the India-Pakistan border, which is the most challenging border and which
experiences regular instances of infiltration, cross-border firing and shelling. Several BSF personnel have
lost their lives while valiantly guarding the border and during conflicts with infiltrators. The Committee,
therefore, sought to know from the Ministry about the measures being taken to enhance the security of
BSF personnel against Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs), cross border firing and shelling.
5.17.2  The Ministry, in its reply on the query, submitted that the following measures were being taken
to enhance the security of BSF personnel against Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs), cross border
firing and shelling:
Improvised Explosive Devices
(i) MHA has issued a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for precautions against IED attacks
by Left Wing Extremists.
(ii) IED checking drills are being followed religiously during ROP/RSO.
(iii) Special trained canine squads are being employed during ROP/RSO regularly.
(iv) Special Equipment for mine/IED detection, like M-3/DSMD, is available in all units which
are being used extensively during RSO/demining.
(v) Use of Jammers against RCIEDs.
(vi) Specialized training to BSF personnel in detection/ destruction of IEDs in situ is being
provided by TC&S Hazaribag.
(vii) Every sector has specially trained BD teams which also impart training to under command
units.

93
(viii) IED detection is the major part of the training during pre-induction training.
(ix) Area vulnerability mapping.
(x) Constant surveillance over new constructions sites like roads, bridges and culverts.
(xi) Maximum cross-country movement.
(xii) Restriction on vehicular movement.
5.17.3  The Committee notes the measures being taken to provide security against Improvised
Explosive Devices and land mines. The Committee feels that reducing casualties of personnel of
BSF should be a top priority for the Ministry. The Committee is aware that land mines have
consumed lives of several personnel and there is a need to employ technologically advanced
equipment that allow remote detection and detonation of land mines. The Committee, in this
regard, would like to point out that that some Unmanned Aerial Systems/Drones have been
developed that can autonomously map, detect and detonate land mines. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should explore the availability of such technological equipment
and procure them for protecting the personnel against the threat of land mines. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must give direction to BSF to employ state of
the art equipments to ensure remote detection and detonation of underground IEDs or landmines.
Cross Border Firing
5.17.4  The Ministry submitted before the Committee that following safety measures are being taken
during cross-border firing and shelling:
(i) Restriction on vehicle and public movement along IB;
(ii) Ensuring that every Jawan wears bullet proof Jackets/helmets during duty time;
(iii) Placement of concrete blocks ahead of mounds occupied by BSF personnel to dominate the
area;
(iv) Use of Border Patrolling vehicles in sensitive areas; and
(v) Fresh dug morchas have been covered with concrete slabs and loopholes of vulnerable
morchas are being covered with bullet proof glass.
Shelling
(i) Bunkers/Morchas have been strengthened by the way of laying the iron girder and concrete
slab on roofs of Bunkers/Morchas;
(ii) Overhead protections are being provided; and
(iii) Trenches are being dug.
5.17.5  The Ministry also submitted that Bundhs along the International Border part of the IPB are being
constructed to provide further protection from cross border firing and shelling.

94
5.17.6  The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that Bundhs
are being constructed along the International Border on the India-Pakistan Border to provide
adequate protection from cross border firing and shelling to the personnel. The Committee
recommends that the Bundhs may be constructed at all the Border Outposts that are affected
by cross-border firing and shelling. The Committee also recommends that the construction of
Bundhs may be expedited and completed in a time-bound manner.
5.18 Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach (GJSPKK) Scheme
5.18.1  The "Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach" scheme is being run by Administrative
Directorate of Border Security Force with effect from 1st Sept, 2014 with the contribution of
` 250/- per month from each subscriber under which the following financial benefits were applicable to
personnel proceeding on retirement and NOK's of deceased and disabled personnel:-
(a) Retirement benefits - Refund of 100 per cent amount with 4 per cent interest.
(b) Operational death cases - ` 20,00,000/-
(c) Accidental death cases - ` 15,00,000/-
(d) Death due to other reasons - ` 10,00,000/- (Including suicide & Missing)
(e) Disability claim cases:
(i) 1 per cent upto 50 per cent - ` 5,00,000/-
(ii) 26 per cent to 70 per cent - ` 7,00,000/-
(iii) Beyond 71 per cent - ` 10,00,000/-
5.18.2 The representatives of BSF were questioned about the details pertaining to the 'Golden Jubilee
Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach' Scheme during the meeting held to discuss the working conditions in
BSF. The Committee was informed by BSF that this was an insurance scheme started by the BSF for
the welfare of the personnel. The personnel pay a premium and are refunded the entire premium paid
by them at the time of retirement. The implementation of this Scheme was entirely with BSF and no
insurance company was involved. The representatives of BSF were asked whether the financial implications
of this Scheme were examined and approved by the Financial Advisor, to which they replied in affirmative.
They were also asked if professionals having actuarial sciences background were involved and whether
the scheme was based on actuarial data to assess an optimum amount of premium to be paid by the
personnel. The representatives of BSF were unable to satisfactorily answer this query.
5.18.3  However, the Ministry, in its written reply, furnished the copy of recommendations of the Board
of Officers, which examined the existing scheme of Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach, to
reduce the benefits to retiree personnel from 100 per cent to 41 per cent without interest and copy of
revised SOP for enhancement of financial benefits under all categories with enhancement of monthly
amount.

95
5.18.4  The Ministry submitted that after successful completion of one year of the subject scheme, the
fund position was analyzed. A summary of the fund position was as under:
(a) Total Subscription received from BSF personnel `74.85 Crore
(b) Interest to be received from Bank `05.90 Crore
(c) Death Claim released/To be released for death occurred from ` 49.65 Crore
1st Sept. 2014 to 31st Aug. 2015
(d) Subscription refunded to retirees `28.94 Lakh
(e) Net Balance Amount in Fund with Bank Interest `30.74 Crore
(f) Due to BSF Pers on a/c refund of subscription `77.46 Crore
(g) Net liabilities to the Fund `46.73 Crore
5.18.5  On the scrutiny of balance sheet given above, it was noted that after settlement of all death claims
and interest to be received, out of a total collection of subscription ( ` 74.85 Crore), only 41 per cent
amount ( ` 30.74 Crore) was left in the fund. Besides, after meeting total liabilities in the shape of
payments to be made to the BSF personnel along with 4 per cent interest, there was a shortfall/loss of
` 46.73 Crore in the fund up to 31st August, 2015.
5.18.6  The Committee is dismayed to observe that an insurance scheme with a huge financial
corpus was devised and implemented without consulting professionals having relevant experience
in the insurance sector. The Committee is also disappointed with the Ministry as it allowed
implementation of the Scheme in such a nonchalant manner without proper assessment of the
financial implications of the Scheme. The Committee takes strong exception to the discretionary
manner and financial imprudence with which this Scheme was drafted and allowed to be
implemented. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should engage professionals having
experience in insurance sector and background in actuarial sciences to comprehensively review
this Scheme and arrive at an optimum premium to be paid by the personnel and the maximum
benefits that can be granted to the personnel under this Scheme. The question of shortfall in
the promised refund of the premium must also be addressed and a solution found so that the
personnel who contributed to the scheme are not deprived of their legitimate dues.
5.18.7  The scheme of "Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach" was further re-examined at FHQ
on the basis of funds position and interest earned to the fund in the month of Aug 2017. The Director
General, Border Security Force had approved the enhanced financial benefits with premium amount from
Rs 250/- to Rs 500/- per month with effect from 1st Sept 2017, the details of revised benefits applicable
from the scheme are as under:
(a) Operational death - ` 40,00,000/-
(b) All types of death - ` 30,00,000/- (including accidental/suicide/missing)
(c) Refund to retiree - 100 per cent without interest.

96
(d) Disability claim cases:
(i) 1 per cent to 25 per cent - ` 5,00,000/-
(ii) 26 per cent to 50 per cent - ` 10,00,000/-
(iii) 51 per cent to 75 per cent - ` 15,00,000/-
(iv) 75 per cent to 100 per cent - ` 20,00,000/-
5.18.8 The Ministry, in the documents furnished, also submitted that in order to review the scheme, a
Board of Officers headed by the ADG (HR) was appointed. The Board examined the method being
followed by CGEGIS where a 70/30 per cent ratio for insurance and saving is adopted for making
payment under the scheme. Taking into account the whole gamut of issues the Board made
recommendations which were approved/accepted by the DG, BSF for implementation. The same are as
under:
(i) No change in subscription and financial assistance admissible to the deceased/disabled
personnel under the scheme.
(ii) The refund payment to the retirees, dismissed, discharges, etc. may be calculated by the
following methods: -
Refund Percentage was to be calculated by dividing the balance in fund including interest
as on 31st August of every year (After meeting all the liabilities) with the total subscription
received up to 31st August of every year.
(iii) As such, refund of subscription to the retirees, dismissed, discharged, etc. for the period
from 01/09/2014 to 31/08/2015 will be 41 per cent of the total subscription deposited by
an individual. Also, no previous claim of refund of subscription under which payment has
been made will be re-opened.
5.18.9  The Committee also takes note of the revisions made in the 'Golden Jubilee Seema
Prahari Kalyan Kawach' Scheme to make it financially viable. The Committee observes that the
problems occurred due to an improper financial analysis before the implementation of the
Scheme and in view of the reduced fund position it was arbitrarily decided to provide refund of
subscription fee to the retiree personnel at the rate of 41 per cent instead of 100 per cent with
interest. Moreover, when the Scheme was revised the refund of 100 per cent of the subscription
amount paid was stipulated for the retiree personnel with effect from 1st September 2017. The
Committee feels that this may have created an anomalous situation where a personnel retiring
during the period from 1st September, 2014 to 31st August, 2015would get refund of only 41 per
cent of his subscription amount while a personnel retiring after this date would get refund of 100
per cent of the subscription amount paid by him. The Committee, therefore, deplores the arbitrary
and discretionary measure in which this issue has been handled by BSF. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry may institute an enquiry into the matter and fix the accountability
of the officer(s) concerned. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may resolve
such anomalies that may have occurred due to the review of the scheme and undertake measures
to refund the promised amount to all the retiree personnel so that they are not deprived of their
legitimate dues.

97
CHAPTER-VI
ISSUES COMMON TO THE BORDER GUARDING FORCES
6.1 Food
6.1.1 The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and Border Guarding Forces (BGFs)
informed the Committee that adequate stock of good quality food items is maintained and no complaints
were received from the personnel regarding the quality of food.
6.1.2 The DG , Assam Rifles, in the meeting held on 18thJanuary, 2018, informed the Committee that
as far as the Assam Rifles was concerned, the food in the Assam Rifles is better than that of the Army.
It has been ensured that the quality of food and nutrition in the Assam Rifles is of the highest standard.
Quality checks are done on a daily basis and the officers eat with the jawans every day. Moreover, there
has been no complaint about the food. Food is prepared as per the menu prescribed by nutritionists.
However, some problem is faced during the six-months of the monsoon period when the personnel have
to sometimes consume tinned ration.
6.1.3 The DG, SSB, in the meeting held on 18thJanuary, 2018, informed the Committee that there is one
common mess for all the jawans and officers, and they eat the same food. At every BoP, the personnel
purchase their own ration and run their own mess. The personnel themselves decide the menu and what
is to be cooked. The SSB has a cadre of cooks at every post. He assured the Committee that there was
no issue food-wise.
6.1.4 The DG, ITBP, in the meeting held on 21st May, 2018, informed the Committee that in the ITBP
pre-cooked food is supplied in packets at many places. On being queried about the mechanism for quality
checks, he informed the Committee that there are 84 pre-cooked items, which are taken only after they
have been tested and certified. Items such as dates, chocolates and almonds are supplied at high altitudes
and they are of good quality. A Committee is formed every month for purchasing fresh rations, wherever
possible, to ensure that there are no vested interests in purchasing. A senior officer , who is also known
as Mess Orderly Officer, goes every week to check the taste and quality of the food.
6.1.5 When the Committee enquired from the MHA about the measures that are being taken to ensure
the availability of quality food to the jawans of BSF, the Ministry, in its reply, submitted that the ration
items for BSF troops are procured/purchased by respective battalions from local market by a Board of
Officers comprising of one representative each from Officers, Subordinate Officers, Other Ranks and
Tradesmen. The Board of Officers carries out market survey and obtains quotation along with the
samples of each ration item. After collecting samples and rates from different suppliers, the Board of
Officers carries out a comparison of quality and rates, and then prepares a comparative statement of the
ration items to be procured for the troops. The Board of Officers is changed every month to ensure
transparency and fairness in procurement system. Senior Officers ensure that troops are being provided
proper and healthy food within the authorized ration money allowance paid to the BSF personnel. They
also visit the HQ/Unit/BOPs to check the messes for the food quality and endorse their remarks in food
97

98
checking register. All BSF troops are free to report any issue regarding quality of food during evening
roll call being conducted in BOP's/FDL's/Coys/Unit/HQs. A weekly menu is also prepared in mess
meeting and displayed on board. The same is followed strictly. Food is cooked centrally at BOP for all
personnel including the Officer Commanding of the BOP. A system exists to check daily quality of food
in breakfast, lunch, and dinner and proper record of the same is also kept. A complaint register is also
placed for mess members and visitors from outside, i.e. Battalion HQ/SHQ/Ftr HQ/FHQ to record their
observations.
6.1.6 The Committee finds it hard to believe that everything is fine and there are no issues with
the quality of food and an effective system of checks and balances exists in all the forces. The
Committee feels that there should be location and geography specific systems of purchase,
procurement and provision of food items to be followed by all the Forces. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, after interacting with all the Forces,
should devise a comprehensive system of purchase, preparation and provision of food items.
6.1.7 The Committee also takes note of the regular quality checks being done by the various
Forces and feels that the internal checks mechanism is more or less routine in nature. The
Committee feels that elements of externality and surprise are missing from the system of food
quality checks prevalent in various Forces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs should evolve an inspection mechanism comprising of dieticians,
experienced food inspectors and officials not belonging to the Force for surprise checks of the
quality and quantity served in various Forces, especially at the remote and inaccessible locations.
6.2 Ration Money Allowance
6.2.1 The Committee was informed that the admissible Ration Money Allowance, which is decided by
the Ministry of Defence and duly adopted by the various Forces, at present is ` 97.85 per head per day.
It is credited directly to the Bank Accounts of Force personnel every month.
6.2.2 When queried on whether the ration money given to the personnel at present at the rate of ` 97.85
per head per day is adequate, the Ministry informed the Committee that no feedback regarding ration
money being inadequate has been received from the personnel. However, the present rate of the Ration
Money Allowance (RMA) was fixed at ` 97.85 w.e.f. 1st April, 2015 for both GOs & NGOs upto
31.03.2016 and the revision of Ration Money Allowance is due w.e.f. 1st April, 2016.
6.2.3 The representatives of the MHA were asked whether ` 97.85 per day is enough to buy nutritious
food and three meals for a jawan. The Committee was informed that this amount is same for all CAPFs
and is sufficient to provide three meals as the purchases of dry ration are made in bulk and purchased
locally. In the forward locations, the ration is purchased from the nearest village market and for distant
places, it is supplied from the battalion headquarters.
6.2.4 The Committee notes the uniform rate of Ration Money Allowance prescribed by the
Ministry of Defence and adopted by all the forces. The Committee feels that the Forces are
deployed in different circumstances and varied geographical terrains. The geographical and climatic
conditions and the supply chain system vary from State to State and sometimes even within a

99
State. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the system of Ration Money Allowance to all
CAPFs irrespective of their topography of place of deployment needs to be revisited. The Committee
also recommends that the Ministry should adopt a bottom-up approach to calculate varying rates
of Ration Money Allowance for every battalion, by acquiring inputs from every single unit/
company of all the Forces, taking into consideration the supply chain constraints, geographical
limitations, vagaries of climate specific to every battalion.
6.2.5 The Committee does not find any merit in the existing system of adopting the rate
prescribed by the Ministry of Defence as they may not be aware about the requirements of the
CAPFs as much as the Ministry of Home Affairs or the CAPFs themselves. The Committee
further recommends that every Battalion/Sector HQ should be instructed to come out with an
assessment of monthly food requirement, along with the market price of various food items
prevailing in the area from where they purchase the ration, and this information should be
compiled at the Frontier Headquarters level and sent to the Ministry for approval to arrive at
appropriate rates of Ration Money Allowance for different battalions. The Committee also
recommends that the rates prescribed by the Frontier Headquarters for various battalions should
be approved by the Force Headquarters and any variance between the rates for different Battalions
should be examined and approved by the Ministry of Home Affai ````` The Committee further
recommends that once this exercise is done comprehensively, the rates arrived at may be revised
annually by linking them with the food inflation component of the Consumer Price Index and
may be reviewed after every 5 years.
6.3 Deployment of BGFs for activities other than Border Guarding
6.3.1 During the meeting of the Committee held on 21stMay, 2018, one of the Members raised the issue
of multiple forces, like ITBP, CISF, NSG, etc., being assigned the task of providing security to VIPs.
The Committee also discussed about the possibility of creating a special force for attending to the task
of VIP security. In this regards, the Ministry informed the Committee that a Special Security Group
(SSG) has already been created in CISF for the purpose. The Ministry of Home Affairs was then asked
about the reasons for deploying battalions of other CAPFs for VIP security when a Special Security
Group (SSG) of CISF has already been created for VIP security. The Ministry, in its written reply,
submitted that presently Special Security Group (SSG)/CISF, CRPF, ITBP, and NSG are deployed for
VIP Security Duties. The matter of deployment of CAPFs has been reviewed in this Ministry. It has been
decided as under:
(i) CRPF and ITBP shall be progressively relieved from Personal Protection work.
(ii) The task shall be progressively assigned only to Special Security Group (SSG) of CISF,
which has been specially created for it.
(iii) NSG will continue to provide security to the high risk protectees, as decided from time to
time.
6.3.2 The Committee also enquired about the measures being taken to strengthen the SSG/CISF for
making it an exclusive force for providing VIP security. The Ministry replied that CISF's proposal for

100
augmentation of strength of SSG/CISF to provide security to the increased number of protectees is in
process. SSG's strength would need to be augmented further to progressively take over the protectees
from CRPF and ITBP.
6.3.3 The Committee takes note of the Ministry's plan to progressively assign security of all VIP
protectees, apart from high risk protectees, to the Special Security Group (SSG) of CISF. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should implement this plan at the earliest and put an
end to the issue of multiple forces being assigned the task of VIP security. The Committee also
recommends that appropriate measures may be taken in a timely manner to augment the
strength of SSG to enable it to cope with the enhanced responsibility.
6.4 Cadre Review
6.4.1 The Committee when enquired about the status of cadre review of various cadres in each Force
it was informed that cadre review for some forces such as Assam Rifles and ITBP is pending while in
some Forces such as SSB and BSF, cadre review has been done for Group A cadres while review of
Group B and C cadres is still pending.
6.4.2 The Committee feels that regular cadre review of the Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) is
essential to maintain their organizational structure as per their requirements. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake measures to expedite the pending
cadre reviews of Assam Rifles and ITBP.
6.4.3 The Committee is disappointed to observe that restructuring of Group 'A' cadre is prioritized
in the Forces at the cost of Group 'B' and 'C' cadres. The Committee feels that stagnation is
more in the lowermost ranks and cadre reviews of lower ranks should be taken up before the
higher ranks. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should urgently expedite
the cadre reviews of Group 'B' and 'C' cadres. The Committee also recommends that the
Ministry, in future, should adopt a system to take up the cadre review of Group 'C' and 'B' first,
in that order, and then conduct the cadre review of Group 'A'.
6.5 Nomenclature of CAPFs
6.5.1 The Committee had received representation from National Coordination Committee (NCC) of Ex-
Central Para-military Forces Welfare Associations. According to the representation CPMFs e.g. CRPF,
BSF and ITBP, etc. are facing numerous challenges in performance of very sensitive duties for the
country and the discrimination being meted out to them at various levels, is resulting into a deep concern
amongst members of these Forces that their services and sacrifices are not being duly recognized in the
country. Thus, factors like de-motivation, disgruntlement and frustration are creeping-in amongst the
jawans and officers which need to be attended immediately. The issues concerning CAPFs, raised by the
NCC and comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs have been discussed in the following paras along
with the observations and recommendations of the Committee.
6.5.2 The Committee was given to understand by the NCC that the genesis of the CPMFs is the same
as that of Indian Defence Forces i.e. entry 2 of the Union list, Seventh Schedule, Article 246 of

101
Constitution of India, and various Acts passed by the Parliament under which CPMFs have been raised.
Therefore, legally these Forces also fall under the category of Armed Forces of the Union. MHA vide
their F. No.24021/74/2004-PC dated 6th August 2004 have affirmed that CRPF, BSF, ITBP, CISF and
NSG have been declared as Armed Forces of the Union. However, this nomenclature was modified to
be read as Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) vide MHA Memo No.45020/2/2011-Pers-II dated 18th
March 2011.
6.5.3 It was pointed out that as per the Constitution of India, 'Police' and 'Public order' are state subjects
and therefore, using the word Police for the Armed Forces of the Union diminishes the value of these
Forces. It was brought to the notice of the Committee vide Para 9 of MHA Letter No.27011/12/2014-
R&W (Part-I) dated 27th April, 2015 addressed to General Secretary, All India Central Paramilitary forces
Ex-servicemen Welfare Association that based on an Article authored by Lt. Genl. Vijay Oberoi, the
nomenclature 'CPMFs' was changed to 'CAPFs' for all the Forces except Assam Rifles. The Committee
was informed that Genl. Oberoi had written that
"the term like CPOs, CPMFs, PMFs, etc. are used casually and interchangeable. The emphasis
on the work "Military" while referring to Central Police Forces was not only wrong but creates
a negative impression about the real Military Forces. There is nothing common between Army and
the so called Paramilitary Forces. Paramilitary Forces are those forces which are organized and
equipped on military lines subscribe to a military ethos, and which have military officers as its
leaders. This is not true for any CPMFs and hence, it is appropriate as a starting point to refer
to all Central Police Forces as CPF."
6.5.4 NCC stated that instead of correcting General Oberoi on his stand, MHA went on to devalue the
CPMFs whose combined strength is almost equal to Indian Army. It was also stated in the said
representation that the correct position is that the CRPF was raised in 1939, and the CRPF Act passed
in 1919. ITBP and BSF were also initially raised during 1962 and 1965 respectively under the same Act
and subsequently had their own Act enacted during the year 1968 and 1992. Rule 3 of CRPF Rules 1955
reads as under:
"3. Interpretation: In these rules unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:-
(a) The expressions "Battalion" and "Company" have the meaning assigned to them as
in the Army"
6.5.5 Similarly, as per explanation below Rule 2(d) of Ex-Servicemen (Reemployment in Central Civil
Services and Posts) Rules, 1979 it is mentioned:
"(d) "Para-military forces" means the Border Security Force, Central Reserve Police Force,
Indo-Tibetan Border Police, Central Industrial Security Force, Secretariat Security Force,
Assam Rifles and Railway Protection Force".
6.5.6 The representation further stated that from the reading of rules position above, it becomes abundantly
clear that these Forces are the Armed Forces of the Union and Central Para Military forces. It may be
further mentioned that as per the above position of rules, in case these Forces are to be called as CAPFs,

102
then ex-servicemen cannot have any reservations in these Forces, since the reservation is entitled only
in the para military forces. The representation further stated that it is interesting to note that Army Postal
Service or personnel on deputation to Army Postal Service including ex-recruits boarded or relived on
medical grounds and granting medical disability pension (that means not having served on active duty
in the Defence Forces) are also entitled to Ex-servicemen benefits. This makes a very genuine stand for
CPMFs personnel to be treated as ex-servicemen and entitled for appropriate benefits.
6.5.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its comments on the issue raised in the said representation,
impressed upon the Committee that the change of nomenclature to the Central Armed Police Forces
(CAPFs) was basically to use uniform nomenclature as terms, like Central Police Organizations (CPOs),
Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs), Central Police Forces (CPFs), etc., were used earlier interchangeably.
Moreover, these forces are the 'Armed Force of the Union' as per their respective Acts. Further, it is
mentioned here that there is reservation of ex-servicemen in these forces as per the extant guidelines of
Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT). As such, there are no material changes due to adoption
of the uniform nomenclature as CAPFs.
6.5.8 The Committee notes the contention of the NCC and the comments of the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the issue of change of nomenclature of the CPMFs to CAPFs.
6.6 Status and Benefits to Ex-CAPF Personnel
6.6.1 The representation of NCC stated that the CPMFs should be given the status and benefits flowing
from 'ex-servicemen', 'martyr' and 'war-widows', etc., and entitlement for such benefits should also be
duly notified. Traditionally such honors are reserved for the defence personnel killed on war fronts that
signify that the entitlements mainly relate to deaths attributable to fighting of enemy. Whether the enemy
is 'within' or 'without', the enemy bullets do not recognize whether the victim is from defence forces
or CPMFs, nor the sacrifice of life of CPMFs personnel can be valued inferior to that of Defence Forces
personnel.
6.6.2 Commenting on the issue of ex-servicemen status, the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that
with the approval of the CCS, an administrative order dated 23/11/2012 was issued by MHA to declare
the retired Central Armed Police Force Personnel from CRPF, BSF, CISF, ITBP and SSB as 'Ex-CAPF
personnel'. It has been inter-alia mentioned in this order that State/UT Governments concerned may
extend suitable benefits to Ex-CAPFs personnel on the line of Defence Forces.
6.6.3 Further, commenting on Martyr / War Widow Status, the Ministry of Home Affairs pointed out
that in 2011, the matter regarding declaration of select category CAPF personnel who sacrifice their lives
for the Nation as 'Shaheed/Martyr' was taken up with Cabinet/ Committee of Secretaries (COS). Ministry
of Defence (MOD) informed that Shaheeds/Martyrs is not defined anywhere and they are not issuing
any order/notification of Shaheeds/Martyrs. The Unit Commander certifies the circumstances under
which the Armed Force personnel died and next of kin get the full family pension based on his last pay
drawn.

103
6.6.4 Further, the term status of 'War Widow' has also not been defined in the Rules. However, on the
basis of the aforesaid certificate issued by the Unit Commander, Next of Kin (NOK) is given the full
family pension under the Liberalized Pensionary Awards (LPA) Rules i.e. the last pay drawn and ex-gratia
compensation as per rules in addition to the other benefits admissible.
6.6.5 The Committee is of the view that the issue of granting of Ex-Servicemen status and
Martyr/War Widow status for the CAPFs for their supreme sacrifices made for the nation needs
to be properly recognized by the Government and hence needs detailed examination to motivate
and encourage them. Therefore, the Committee recommends that there should be no difference
in the benefits being granted to CAPFs personnel and Defence personnel. The advisory issued
to State/UT Governments for extending suitable benefits to Ex. CAPFs personnel on the lines of
Defence personnel may be monitored and any difference therein may be brought to the notice
of State/UT Governments.
6.6.6 The Committee feels that leaving the decision to the State Governments to extend suitable
benefits to Ex-CAPF personnel on the line of Ex-Servicemen may not have the desired efforts.
It is therefore necessary that the benefits that are extended to Ex-Servicemen of the Ex-CAPF
personnel are monitored and if there is any variation that may be attended to.
6.7 Central Police Canteen (CPC) and the Welfare and Rehabilitation Board (WARB)
6.7.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that W ARB was established in 2007
to provide an institutionalized mechanism to look into the welfare and rehabilitation requirements of
CAPFs' personnel. Over the period of time, WARB have been expanded to have pan-India presence. At
present, 06 Central Welfare Officers (CWO), 30 State Welfare Officers (SWO) and 139 District Welfare
Officers (DWO) are functioning throughout the country for the welfare of CAPFs personnel. A proposal
is also under consideration with this Ministry to form WARB as 'Society'.
6.7.2 The Committee was further informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that CPC was launched in
2006 and have been expanded to have pan-India presence. As on date, 119 Master Canteens and 1390
Subsidiary Canteens are functioning to provide a wide range of consumer goods to the personnel of the
CAPFs and Police Forces, including ex-personnel and their families, at convenient locations at reasonable
rates without compromising on quality.
6.7.3 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs both the above organizations are serving well the
purpose for which they were created.
6.7.4 The Committee feels that both the organizations, i.e., CPC and WARB, though meant for
welfare of CAPF personnel, both serving and retired, need to be backed up by institutional
mechanisms like expediting the registration of WARB as a society so that it is able to serve its
intended purpose. The Committee recommends that working of both organizations may be
thoroughly reviewed and robust measures may be undertaken for carrying out the entrusted
functions effectively and efficiently. The Committee also recommends that to strengthen the

104
Central Police Canteens system, the Ministry of Home Affairs may explore the possibility of
exempting the goods provided to the personnel through Central Police Canteens from the State
component of GST by all the State Governments.
6.8 Old Pension System
6.8.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that the matter of regular pension (old
pension) to CAPFs employees enrolled from the year 2004 onwards had been examined in detail during
2007 to 2010 through Cabinet & Group of Ministers. As such, it was not found feasible to revert back
to old pension scheme. However, as on date also, the old pension scheme is applicable to CAPF personnel
who die in harness or become disabled while on duty and are boarded out.
6.8.2 The Committee notes that the Cabinet and the Group of Ministers (GoM) have examined
the issue of regular (old) pension to CAPFs personnel employed from the year 2004 onwards and
could not find merit to revert to the old pension scheme.
6.9 Para-military Service Pay (PMSP)
6.9.1 According to the NCC the Military Service Pay is granted to the Defence Forces personnel on the
basis of their service conditions which entail risk to life, social and family isolation. The CAPFs personnel
too suffer all time risk to life, social and family isolation even worse than Defence forces, In the Defence
Forces, system of separate family accommodation system is existing, no such system is prevalent in
CPMFs, and in fact, the satisfaction level of entitled accommodation has only reached around 13-14 per
cent against the sanctioned 25 per cent, and that also for single and entitled static location accommodations,
which exclude separated family accommodation. Further, the MSP is entitled even to Territorial Army
officers who serve on part time basis. There is no reason that the CPMFs personnel should be denied
of this entitlement.
6.9.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs maintained that the proposal regarding sanction of Para Military
Service Pay to CAPFs personnel was referred to 7th CPC for consideration.
6.9.3 The Committee notes the fact that Military Service Pay (MSP) is paid to the defence forces
personnel, in view of their service conditions viz. risk to life and social and family isolation. The
Committee feels that the CAPFs personnel also have the risk to life and undergo the similar
social and family isolation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Para Military Service
Pay (PMSP) may be granted to CAPF personnel and if it is difficult to grant PMSP to CAPFs then
some other incentive for their risk to life and social and family isolation, particularly for CAPFs
personnel deployed in hard areas, may be considered.
6.10 Removal of Deputation Quota at Senior Officers level in CAPFs
6.10.1 According to the NCC, deputation is normally resorted to when the receiving department is either
short of number of experience. The CAPFs have come up of-age, therefore, neither short of experience
nor of number. Presently, certain quota has been fixed for IPS officers cadre in CAPFs, which has
created skewed career graph against CAPFs personnel. The IPS officers are joining CAPFs only at senior
level (few as DIG, and IG). There are already greater promotional bottleneck for cadre officers at these

105
levels, thus creating functional and operational problems in the CAPFs. The deputation quota for IPS
Officers in CAPFs is reserved from Deputy Commandant to DG, but they are joining only at the level
of DIG , IG and above.
6.10.2 However, the Ministry of Home Affairs pointed out that as provided under Article 312 of the
Constitution, the Indian Police Service is an All India Service both for the Union and the States. A certain
number of posts in different police and other Organizations / Departments of the Central Government
are filled up by IPS Officers allotted to various State Cadres. The cardinal principle is that an IPS officer
so appointed will be available to serve central deputation for a stipulated tenure and thereafter return to
his/her parent cadre. The movement of officers from the State to the Centre and back is of mutual
benefit to the State and the Government of India on the one hand and to the officers concerned on the
other.
6.10.3 The Committee was further impressed upon that Rule 6 (1) of the IPS (Cadre) Rules, 1954 that
provides for deputation of IPS officers to the Central Government. Every State Cadre of the IPS provides
for a Central Deputation quota which in turn requires additional recruitment to be made to the Service
to provide for trained and experienced members to serve on posts in Central Government. Indian Police
Service Cadre Rules 1954 states that a cadre officer may with the concurrence of the State Government
or the State Governments concerned and the Central Government be deputed for services under the
Central Government. A certain number of posts in different police and other Organizations/Departments
of the Central Government are filled up by IPS officers allotted to various State Cadres. 40 per cent of
Senior Duty Posts are authorized for Central Deputation Reserve.
6.10.4 The Committee, in its questionnaire sent to the Ministry, had sought the details of number of
Group 'A' Officers posts that are reserved for officers coming on deputation from other forces or
services in all the CAPFs. The Ministry furnished the details of Group "A" Officers posts reserved for
officers belonging the same force and for officers coming on deputation from other forces/services are
as under:
Posts Method of Recruitment
CISF BSF CRPF ITBP SSB
DG 0 % Cadre 0 % Cadre 0 % Cadre 0 % Cadre 0 % Cadre
100% IPS 100% IPS 100% IPS 100% IPS 100% IPS
ADG 25% Cadre 25% Cadre 33 1/3% Cadre 0 % Cadre 0 % Cadre
75% IPS 75% IPS 66%2/3 IPS 100% IPS 100% IPS
IG 50% Cadre 50% Cadre 50% Cadre 50% Cadre 50% Cadre
50% IPS 50% IPS 50% IPS 50% IPS 50% IPS
DIG 70% Cadre 80% Cadre 80% Cadre 80% Cadre 60% Cadre
30% IPS 15% IPS 18% IPS 20% IPS & 40% IPS
05% Army 02% Army  Army

106
6.10.5 The Committee also sought to know the reasons and rationale for a majority of the higher posts
of the top hierarchy (DIG and above) in the CAPFs being filled by Officers coming on deputation,
especially from Indian Police Service. The Ministry, in its reply submitted that IPS officers having served
in crime control, law and order duties, investigation of various types of cases including trans-border
infiltration, smuggling and other related crimes at the border and in the hinterlands, are well versed with
the policing in general and nuances of border guarding duties in particular. The exposure, training and
grooming of an IPS officer matches with the job requirements for the senior posts of CAPFs. The inter-
departmental coordination between various CAPFs and State Police becomes very smooth and seamless
with the presence of IPS Officers in every CAPF, State Police and related agencies. Therefore, IPS
officers are best suited to lead and provide supervisory directions to any CAPFs in an effective, efficient
and impartial manner at these ranks.
6.10.6 The Committee has noted Rule 6(1) of the IPS Cadre Rules 1954 that stipulates deputation
of IPS officers to the Central Government and deputation of State Cadre of IPS for central
deputation quota.
6.10.7 The Committee feels that the nature of duty of CAPFs are more similar to the Armed
Forces rather than Police Forces and it would make more sense to bring more officers from the
Armed Forces on deputation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs, in consultation with the Ministry of Defence, should explore the mechanism of lateral
induction of the Officers from the Armed Forces in the CAPFs on short-term deputation, especially
in the Battalions posted in the disturbed areas such as Kashmir and North-eastern States, where
the Armed Forces and the CAPFs work in tandem with each other.
6.10.8 The Committee also recommends that the Government may re-examine the Rule 6(1) of
the IPS Cadre Rules, 1954 for fixing a limited percentage of deputation of IPS officers in the
CAPFs keeping in view the interest of CAPFs personnel. The Committee also recommends that
not more than 25 per cent posts should be reserved for Officers coming on deputation, either
from IPS or from the Armed Forces, in any rank, and there should be no reservation for the
posts of Director General in any CAPF and the officers of the CAPF cadres should be given equal
opportunity to reach the topmost ranks. The Committee is of the view that this measure will not
only go a long way to boost the morale of the CAPFs but will also provide a bigger pool of
qualified Officers for selecting the heads of CAPFs.
6.11 Reserve Battalions
6.11.1 The Committee, in its meetings held to discuss the working conditions in various CAPFs, discussed
the issue of Reserve Battalions being posted for different law & order, internal security, election duties,
security arrangement duties, etc. Consequently, it has been observed that the battalions that are designated
for rest and recuperation are also deployed for various duties.
6.11.2 The Committee is pained to note that the reserve battalions, which are to be used judiciously
and provided rest for being in a state of preparedness, are engaged in duties such as internal
security and counter-insurgency, which are quite rigorous. The Committee takes a strong exception

107
to this overuse of the Force personnel. The Committee feels that the Ministry has to draw a line
firmly to allow much required rest and recuperation to the personnel. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should implement, without exception, the well-
defined policy regarding the number of battalions that are, at any given time in a state of rest
and recuperation. The Committee also recommends that the policy on battalion that should be
designated for training purposes at any point of time, should be rigorously followed.
6.12 Clean Drinking Water
6.12.1 The Committee was informed that providing clean drinking water to CAPF personnel has always
been a challenge especially to those who are posted in high altitude and remote areas.
6.12.2 The Assam Rifles informed the Committee that it was trying to ensure the provision of clean
drinking water by way of providing RO water purifiers and portable water-purification bottles. It was
also augmenting water supply schemes for its Company Operating Bases (COBs).
6.12.3 The Sashastra Seema Bal in the meeting held on 18th January, 2018 asserted that it has Reverse
Osmosis (RO) water filters available at all the BOPs as the groundwater is contaminated with iron and
arsenic, but in its written replies on the issue, it was submitted that 509 out of 643 BOPs have ROs/
Water Purifiers of various types like Iron Removal Plant, Arsenic Removal Plant, Gravity Filters, and RO
systems. Thus, 134 BOPs were not equipped with any type of water purification system.
6.12.4 The Indo-Tibetan Border Police submitted before the Committee that to ensure sufficient availability
of clean drinking water to all the ITBP personnel, deep/low bore wells with submersible motors have
been installed. Sufficient number of water filters/ROs, wherever feasible, have been provided. To remove
the contaminants, a system of boiling the water for five minutes is in practice.
6.12.5 The Committee feels that providing clean drinking water to all the personnel who are
posted, particularly in remote areas, should be given priority. Contaminated water not only
causes water borne diseases but also leads to deterioration of overall health of the personnel if
consumed over a long period of time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should give this issue utmost importance and take measures to ensure that
personnel of all the CAPFs are provided clean and purified drinking water. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry should evolve an inspection mechanism for conducting surprise
checks of availability of clean drinking water at the BOPs.
6.13 Electricity Supply
6.13.1 The background notes on working conditions in various Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs)
reflected the inadequate supply of electricity at the operating bases and border outposts of the Forces.
In the SSB, electricity is not available at 328 out of 636 BOPs. In ITBP, the situation is more problematic
as only 24 per cent of the Border Out Posts (BOPs) in ITBP have a regular supply of electricity. At the
battalions' Headquarters, generally regular electricity supply is available. However, even they suffer power
cuts and are dependent on generators for ensuring continuous supply of electricity.

108
6.13.2 Solar power/generators are used as a source of electricity at various places but are unable to meet
the requirement. Diesel generator sets are provided at almost all Border Out Posts (BOPs) to provide
uninterrupted power supply. The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed the Committee that to ensure
regular electricity supply at all BOPs of Central Armed Police Forces, a proposal is under consideration.
6.13.3 The Committee takes note of the lack of electricity supply at several installations of
CAPFs particularly Border Out Posts (BOPs) of the Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) and Indo-Tibetan
Border Police (ITBP). These BOPs do not have a regular supply of electricity and are primarily
dependent on generator sets. The Committee feels that this is not a healthy state of affairs and
this seriously affects the working conditions of the personnel as well as operations of the Forces.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take decision
expeditiously on the pending proposal to ensure regular electricity supply at BOPs of CAPFs. The
Committee also recommends that special measures should be undertaken for electrifying remote
and off-the-grid locations.
6.13.4 The Committee feels that the State Governments should be impressed upon to ensure that
the requisite infrastructure is in place for providing power supply to the Forces even in the
remote locations.
6.14 Housing Shortage
6.14.1 In the Committee's meeting held on 18th January, 2018 to discuss the subject, the representatives
of the Assam Rifles informed the Committee that the Assam Rifles has a peculiar problem regarding
housing due to the fact that the entire Force is based in the North East. The housing earlier used to be
based on the posts where the soldiers were serving. This was causing a vulnerability problem because
keeping the families at the posts made them vulnerable to insurgent attacks. So, now the housing has
been shifted to certain secure areas. Five to six places have been earmarked where the Assam Rifles is
planning to build houses for the soldiers. These housing complexes will also have schools, security,
hospitals etc. All these places are on important communication centers where the force has pre-existing
land. Over the next five years, the housing situation in the Assam Rifles will improve.
6.14.2 The Committee also sought the data regarding the housing satisfaction level in the Assam Rifles.
The Ministry submitted the following details:
Sanctioned T otal No. Total No. Shortfall Percentage No. of Satisfaction Percentage Percentage
strength of of dwelling of of of dwelling level after of of
the force units dwelling dwelling satisfaction units under completion satisfaction satisfaction
authorized units units against construction of current of dwelling level after
available authorized of current construction units completion
dwelling projects projects a vailable of current
units against construction
sanctioned project
strength sagainst
sanctioned
strength
66412 25480 12790 12690 50.19 1908 57.68 19.25 22.13

109
6.14.3 The Committee was also informed that in 2013, the Government had approved the construction
of 1467 houses for Assam Rifles out of which 970 have been constructed while 497 are under construction.
Further, a proposal for construction of 384 houses till 2020 is under consideration of the Ministry.
6.14.4 The Ministry, in its background note on the working conditions in SSB, informed the Committee
that presently, 29,331 houses are authorized for SSB personnel, out of which, 9,871 houses have been
sanctioned. Out of these sanctioned 9,871 houses 5,155 houses have been completed and 4,716 houses
are under construction. A proposal for construction of 2,679 houses till 2020 is in the pipeline. In the
SSB, the housing satisfaction level is 33.65 per cent vis-a-vis authorized number of houses and 9.97 per
cent vis-a-vis sanctioned strength of 98,793.
6.14.5 During the meeting held to discuss the subject, one of the members of the Committee highlighted
the discrepancy that the satisfaction level of 33.65 per cent claimed by the MHA included under-
construction houses as well and if only those houses that have been fully constructed were taken into
consideration then the actual satisfaction level would have been quite low at around 17 per cent. The
DG , SSB then explained that most of the construction projects were at an advanced stage and would
be completed soon. The Home Secretary added that the SSB went for a very large expansion over a few
years. Thus, the Force went for a large-scale construction of housing projects, many of which were
nearing completion during 2018.
6.14.6 The Ministry, in its written replies, explained that the main reason for low housing satisfaction in
the Force is due to a delay in acquisition of land and hence, presently 5,155 houses have been completed
and 4,716 houses are under construction. Other bottlenecks in delay in completion are due to a paucity
of funds in 'Residential Buildings' head and actual delay by the construction agencies viz. CPWD/NBCC/
HSCL.
6.14.7 The Ministry, in its background note on working conditions in the ITBP, informed the Committee
that only 8,844 quarters are available against a total of 28,568 authorized quarters in the ITBP. However,
3,187 quarters are under construction, therefore, there is a shortfall of 16,537 quarters. The present
housing satisfaction level in the Force is about 13.41 per cent as against 25 per cent authorization for
the CAPFs.
6.14.8 The present housing satisfaction level in BSF is 34.40 per cent, i.e., against the authorization of
85,566 houses, 29,431 houses are available. In order to address the shortage of housing in the BSF, the
Government had sanctioned 10,317 houses to the BSF in 2013. At present, 9,156 houses are under
construction/tendering process. On completion of all housing units, the satisfaction level will be 45.10
per cent against authorisation.
6.14.9 The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level vis-a-vis authorized number of
houses is quite low in all border guarding forces. The Committee also notes that the housing
problem is more acute when the satisfaction level is compared to sanctioned strength. The
Committee further notes that the construction of several housing projects is pending while
proposals of some housing projects are yet to be approved by the Ministry. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should expedite the completion of the
on going housing projects. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take an
early decision on all housing projects under consideration and expedite their completion in a time
bound manner to improve the satisfaction levels vis-a-vis authorized number of houses.

110
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
RECRUITMENT, PROMOTIONAL AVENUES AND STAGNATION
The Committee takes note of the stagnation at the ranks of Rifleman, Havildar and
Warrant Officer and feels that requisite measures need be taken to increase the number of posts
in the ranks of Warrant Officers, Subedar and Subedar Major to enhance the promotional
avenues and reduce the time period for getting first promotion to the rank of Havildar.
(Para 2.4.9)
The Committee is of the view that the reply furnished by the Ministry is not sufficient
justification for not reducing the levels of direct recruitment. The Committee feels that conducting
direct recruitment at four levels viz. Naib Subedar, Warrant Officer, Havildar, and Rifleman can
justifiably be reduced to two levels to increase the promotional avenues. The Committee is aware
that direct recruitment for General Duty posts in most of the other CAPFs takes place at three
ranks viz. Constable, Sub-Inspector and Assistant Commandant. The Committee is also aware
that there is at least one intermediate rank in between two levels of direct recruitment. The
Committee thus feels that the scheme of direct recruitment at all four of the lowermost ranks
in the AR is not justified. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable structural
changes must be brought about in the recruitment mechanism of the AR to conduct direct
recruitment only at three stages viz. Rifleman, Warrant Officer, and Subedar. The Committee
strongly recommends that conducting direct recruitment at any two ranks that are consecutive
in the hierarchy may be avoided as this gives rise to stagnation and depressed promotional
avenues for its personnel. (Para 2.4.10)
The Committee also observes an anomalous situation at the rank of Subedar-Major, where
there are only 200 posts as compared to the 370 posts in the rank of Captain/Assistant Commandant
above it and 1180 posts in the rank of Subedar below it. This defies the pyramidical structure
of the force. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for this anomaly and feels that such
an anomaly would restrict the promotional avenues of the lower ranks substantially. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the number of posts in the rank of Subedar-Major
should be enhanced adequately. (Para 2.4.11)
The Committee feels that at 80:20, the ratio of officers belonging to the Indian Army and
the officers belonging to the Assam Rifles cadre is heavily skewed against AR Cadre officers. The
Committee takes note of the proposal to rationalise this ratio by bringing it down to 65.74: 33.76.
The Committee is of the view that the proposed measure of rationalizing the ratio is necessary
to maintain a balance in the composition of the Force at the officer ranks. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that this proposal to enhance the strength AR Cadre officers
should be considered at the earliest to strike a balance between the officers of the Indian Army
and the Assam Rifles Cadre. (Para 2.4.14)
110

111
The Committee also takes note of the submission of the MHA that the Cadre review for
the Assam Rifles is presently under consideration. The Committee recommends that the
recommendations made by this Committee in this regard may be bought to the notice of the
Cadre Review Committee so that it may be considered while finalizing its recommendation.
(Para 2.4.15)
WORKING HOURS
The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs regarding
the stern working hours of the Assam Rifles personnel and feels that the jawans may require
adequate rest after long range patrols and Border Pillar (BP) verification patrols that are usually
conducted in tough geographical and climatic conditions. The Committee, while taking note of
the Ministry's submission that such operations are compensated for by giving adequate time off,
is of the view that the time-off given after such patrols must be sufficient and without any
exception. The Committee recommends that the MHA may constantly review the actual situation
on the ground and that the stipulated rest time is available to all personnel without exception.
(Para 2.5.3)
BASIC AMENITIES - FOOD
The Committee is apprehensive that consuming the tinned food for extremely long monsoon
period of upto six months may have adverse impact on the health of the personnel. The Committee
feels that to alleviate the problem of shortage of fresh food, the option of constructing cold
storage facilities must be explored. These facilities could be of optimal size taking note of the
number of personnel deployed in the area. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs may devise a plan to make available optimal sized cold storage facilities
at the posts that remain cutoff during the monsoon and are unable to stock enough ration to
meet the requirements. The Committee hopes that such an arrangement would prove beneficial
for providing nutritious food. (Para 2.6.3)
BASIC AMENITIES-DRINKING WATER
The Committee takes note of the Ministry's submission that providing clean drinking
water to all the personnel in the entire North-East is a challenge. The Committee is of the
considered view that providing clean and purified drinking water to every single personnel must
be the top priority of the Assam Rifles Establishment. Moreover , ensuring a continuous supply
of water at all the company-operating bases that presently is sourced from natural sources is also
a challenge that needs to be addressed at the earliest. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that every effort must be made to ensure provision of purified drinking water to all the personnel
and establishing a functional water supply system at all the Company Operating Bases (COBs).
The Committee also recommends that the COBs may be asked to tap the abundant rainfall by
harvesting the rainwater and storing it in sufficient quantities for its utilization at the time of
need. (Para 2.7.3)

112
MEDICAL FACILITIES
The Committee observes that all the CGHS-empanelled hospitals in the North-East are
located only at Guwahati. The Committee feels that this restricted coverage of medical care for
the Assam Rifles personnel may have adverse consequences on their health. The Committee
recommends that the Government should increase its efforts to expand the coverage of medical
facilities by empanelling more hospitals in the capital city of North-East States. The Committee
further recommends that the Assam Rifles should further strengthen the existing medical division
so as to provide immediate medical attention to the injured personnel at the site itself as the
area being covered mostly with dense forest and inaccessible by road. (Para 2.8.2)
HOUSING AND ACCOMMODATION
The Committee takes note of the fact that the construction of 497 houses out of the
approved 1467 is still pending even after five years. The Committee also understands the constraints
in the North Eastern region that can delay the construction process. Nonetheless, the Committee
feels that the period of five years is more than sufficient for completing the construction of all
the approved houses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction of the
remaining houses must be expedited and completed within a year. (Para 2.9.7)
The Committee also takes note of the proposal of construction of 384 additional houses by
2020 that is still under the consideration of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee feels
that the project needs to be expedited if it has to be completed by its stipulated deadline. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that an early decision may be taken to grant approval to this
proposal within the next three months and the construction may be started at the earliest during
this calendar year itself. (Para 2.9.8)
The Committee also exhorts the AR to explore the possibility of monetizing its existing
land so that their dependence on Home Ministry for funds to build houses may be reduced.
(Para 2.9.9)
GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL
The Committee feels that being in the Armed Forces, its personnel desist from expressing
their grievances. The Committee feels that an option to submit their grievances anonymously
via application or website must be provided to encourage them to express their grievances of
general nature. This would enable the commanding officers to get an honest feedback and allow
the personnel to raise their grievances without any fear of punitive action. (Para 2.10.2)
The Committee also feels that in order to ensure only genuine grievances are raised and
addressed adequately, a system must be evolved so that the identity of personnel are not known
to their commanding officers. To ensure this, the Committee recommends that for every battalion,
a welfare officer may be designated, from amongst the officers of the rank of 2IC or Commandant,
belonging to any other battalion in the same sector, to receive the grievances of personnel of that
battalion. The Committee also recommends that every Welfare Officer may be instructed to

113
forward a report on grievances directly to the Sector Headquarters, on a weekly basis, to ensure
that the grievances are addressed expeditiously at the Sector Headquarters level.
(Para 2.10.3)
TRAINING ISSUES
The Committee is of the considered view that with the fast-paced advancements in technology,
the induction of advanced weapons, equipment and vehicles, has become inevitable. Specialized
training of personnel in various streams has a force multiplier effect. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the AR besides imparting training continuously should also conduct a periodic
review of the training modules and redesign them to suit the changed circumstances to ensure
that its force is kept abreast with the advanced technologies and equipment. (Para 2.11.3)
ATTRITION
The Committee observes the excessively high number of voluntary retirements in Assam
Rifles during the past two years. Although the implementation of the Seventh Central Pay
Commission could have been a reason for this unusually high number of voluntary retirements,
the other factors that result in a high level of stress and strain may also cause the high level
of attrition. The Committee feels that such a high level of attrition may indicate dissatisfaction
with the working conditions in the Assam Rifles. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
urgent measures may be taken to improve the working conditions significantly to motivate the
personnel to stay, even when they are eligible for taking voluntary retirement, and thus stem
this trend of attrition. (Para 2.12.3)
DEPUTATION OPPORTUNITIES
The Committee is concerned to observe the lack of sufficient opportunities for the Assam
Rifles personnel to go on deputation and feels that this may have adversely affected the ability
to address issues relating to their personal lives. The Committee feels that the dual control
regime is one of the reasons due to which the Assam Rifles personnel have very few deputation
opportunities as they are unable to go on deputation either to the Armed Forces or to the Central
Armed Police Forces. The Committee is of the view that the MHA should engage the Ministry
of Defence to increase the deputation opportunities for AR personnel and also explore the
opportunities to increase deputation of AR personnel to the CAPFs. (Para 2.13.2)
ROAD CONNECTIVITY AND MOBILITY
The Committee is aware that several Company Operating Bases (COBs) are located in
remote areas due to which the Assam Rifles personnel have to suffer various hardships. Thus,
it is essential to connect every single COB with all-weather roads to improve the working
conditions of the personnel. The Committee takes note of the plan to provide connectivity by
constructing 4310.44 kms of roads at an estimated cost of ````` 9490.20 Crore. The Committee
recommends that this plan should be examined expeditiously and a decision on its implementation
may be taken at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the roads that are planned

114
to be constructed must be all-weather roads that are able to withstand the harsh geographical
and climatic conditions of the North Eastern region. (Para 2.14.3)
CASUALTIES IN ASSAM RIFLES
The Committee is worried at the high rate of casualties due to heart, liver and HIV related
problems. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry needs to identify the major factors
that have caused these health issues. The Committee recommends that regular health checkups
must be conducted for all the personnel and preventive measures like yoga/regular counseling
etc., may be proactively implemented to keep their health issues in check. (Para 2.15.3)
The Committee also takes a serious view of the issue of high incidence of HIV in the
Assam Rifles and recommends that the Ministry should conduct an intensive awareness campaign
among the personnel of the Assam Rifles to inform them about the preventive measures that
can be adopted/taken to obliterate HIV infection. (Para 2.15.4)
WELFARE SCHEMES AND ISSUES
The Committee notes that historically the Assam Rifles Force has performed the two
primary roles of conducting counter-insurgency operations in the Northeast and guarding the
India-Myanmar border. The Committee accepts the fact that the Assam Rifles is entirely different
from the other border guarding Forces such as BSF, SSB, and ITBP in as much as that these
Forces are situated right on the border as per the border-outpost based model, the Assam Rifles
on the other has continued to follow the Company-operating-base model, wherein the companies
of the force are located near but not at the border. The Committee is of the view that the dual
role of the Assam Rifles must be performed by two separate forces specially trained for the
purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Assam Rifles should be assigned a
single specialized role of performing counter-insurgency operations in the North-East. The
Committee also recommends that possibility of a separate Indo-Myanmar Border Force, under
the control of the Ministry of Home Affairs, may be explored for the purpose of guarding the
India-Myanmar border. (Para 2.16.8)
The Committee, in this connection, wishes to draw the attention of the Ministry towards
the recommendation made in para 2.14.3 of its 203rd report on 'Border Security: Capacity
Building and Institutions' and reiterate the said recommendation that an early decision should
be taken by the Government on deployment of a dedicated border guarding force for guarding
the India-Myanmar Border. (Para 2.16.9)
The Committee takes note of the fact that the personnel of the Special Frontier Force,
which is a paramilitary force like the Assam Rifles, have already been accorded parity with
Group 'Y' 'Personnel Below Officer Rank' of the Indian Army for the purpose of pay, allowance
and pension. The Committee wonders as to why the Assam Rifles personnel have been deprived
of such benefits. The Committee feels that this has caused undue discrimination towards the
personnel of the Assam Rifles, who have been deprived of the benefits accorded to other
paramilitary forces. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Assam Rifles may be

115
immediately given parity with Group 'Y' 'Personnel Below Officer Rank' of the Indian Army for
the purpose of pay, allowance and pension on the lines of the Special Frontier Force.
(Para 2.16.17)
WELFARE SCHEMES AND ISSUES-BENEVOLENT FUND
The Committee feels that the amount of ````` 1 lakh being provided as an immediate financial
assistance to the next of kin of the Assam Rifles personnel from Assam Rifle Benevolent Fund
(ARBF) on their death is paltry and not in keeping with the needs of the family. The Committee
also notes that this amount was last revised in 2013, almost five years ago. The Committee feels
that this amount is too little even for the purpose of providing immediate financial assistance.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that this amount of ````` 1 lakh should be immediately
revised to at least ````` 2.5 lakh w.e.f the beginning of the year 2018. The Committee also recommends
that this amount should be periodically revised every three years. (Para 2.17.3)
The Committee also notes that a one-time grant of Rs 25,000/- is paid to all the personnel
being discharged as invalidment on medical grounds. The Committee feels that this amount is
in dire need of revision as it is too little to provide any form of immediate assistance. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the one-time grant being paid to the personnel being
discharged as invalidment on medical grounds be revised to ````` 1 lakh w.e.f the beginning of the
year 2018. The Committee further recommends that this amount should be periodically revised
every three years. (Para 2.17.4)
WELFARE SCHEMES AND ISSUES-EX-CAPF/EX-SERVICEMEN STATUS
The Committee notes the reluctance to designate the retired personnel of Assam Rifles as
either ex-CAPF or ex-Servicemen and also takes note of the observation of the Ministry of Law
& Justice on this issue. The Committee believes that this issue can be resolved through imaginative
measures. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may designate the
retired personnel of the Assam Rifles as 'Ex-Central Armed Police Force' and consider granting
them post-retirement benefits available to the ex-CAPF personnel. (Para 2.18.4)
WOMEN REPRESENTATION IN AR
The Committee takes cognizance of the efforts being made to increase the representation
of women in Assam Rifles. The Committee observes that at present only 360 women personnel
have been recruited and this number is very low as compared to the percentage of women
employees stipulated as per the guidelines i.e. 5 per cent of total strength of 'General Duty'
personnel or around 2400 women. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Assam Rifles
should conduct a special recruitment drive to induct more women in the Force.
(Para 2.19.4)
The Committee notes the measures being taken to provide adequate facilities to the
women personnel for improving their working conditions and encouraging more women to join
the Force. The Committee, however, feels that women should be motivated to join the security

116
forces as they not only provide a different perspective but also allow the forces to utilize the huge
untapped pool of human resources in the country. For this, it is essential to allay any fears and
apprehensions that women may have relating to the working conditions in the Force. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that any grievances of women personnel should be considered
with utmost sincerity and seriousness by the Commanding Officers. The Committee also
recommends that the Commanding Officers should be regularly instructed to submit a report on
the challenges faced by women personnel in their respective battalions and the measures taken
to address them. (Para 2.19.6)
RECRUITMENT AND VACANCIES
The Committee takes note of the reasons stated by the Ministry of Home Affairs for
existence of several vacancies in various posts and cadres in SSB. The Committee understands
that recruitment of the personnel is a time consuming process. However, the Committee feels
that there is a lack of foresight, proper planning and proactive estimation of future vacancies
while reporting the vacancies to the recruitment agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry may explore the possibility of proactively identifying the vacancies and reporting
the same to the recruitment agencies, instead of reporting the vacancies that exist on the date
of notification of the recruitment examination. The Committee also recommends that the
respective CAPFs may alternatively notify the updated status of vacancies before the start of the
recruitment process by the recruitment agency concerned so as to eliminate any delay in filling
up the vacancies. (Para 3.4.4)
The Committee also observes that the recruitment agencies take around two years for
completing the recruitment process. The Committee is of the view that this time period can be
reduced to around one year by streamlining the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may request the recruitment agencies to undertake
necessary measures to reduce the timeframe within which various recruitment exams are to be
completed for the CAPFs. (Para 3.4.5)
PROMOTIONAL AVENUES AND STAGNATION
The Committee takes note of the fact that SSB is presently in expansion mode and
sufficient numbers of vacancies are available in almost all the ranks. The Committee, however,
observes that there is still some stagnation at the ranks of Constable and Head Constable. A
Constable gets promoted to the post of Head-Constable in 11-12 years as against the required
residency period of 8 years. It takes another 8-10 years for a Head-Constable to become an
Assistant Sub-Inspector as against the required residency period of 5 years. The Committee has
not received a satisfactory explanation why this stagnation exists despite the force being in
expansion mode. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issue of stagnation be addressed
so that promotions take place as soon as residency periods are completed. (Para 3.5.3)
The Committee takes note of the career growth chart of the General Duty cadre and finds
that the present ratio of posts at the levels of Assistant Commandant and Deputy Commandant

117
which is at 2:9, does not seem optimal for providing desirable promotional avenues. The Committee
feels that, at present, stagnation does not seem to be there apparently due to the ongoing
expansion of the Force. However, in future, this sub-optimal ratio can prove to be a bottleneck
for career growth of the officers serving at the level of Assistant Commandant. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review the number of posts at the level of Deputy
Commandant in the General Duty cadre of SSB and consider improving the ratio of the posts
at the levels of Assistant Commandant and Deputy Commandant to at least 1:4 and gradually
to 1:3 so as to ensure availability of sufficient promotional avenues. The Committee also
recommends that this should be brought to the notice of Cadre Review authorities if that process
has not been completed yet. (Para 3.5.7)
The Committee takes note of the career growth chart of the Communication cadre and
finds that direct recruitment to this cadre is conducted at four levels viz. Head-Constable,
Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI), Sub-Inspector (SI) and Assistant Commandant. Conducting direct
recruitment at so many levels, particularly in the successive levels of Head-Constable, ASI, and
SI, needs to be revisited. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review
the recruitment policy of conducting the direct recruitment at three successive levels of posts
in the communication cadre of SSB and explore the possibility of conducting direct recruitment
only at the levels of Head-Constable and Sub-Inspector for a majority of the posts at those levels.
(Para 3.5.10)
The Committee also observes certain anomalies in the organizational chart that may lead
to stagnation at levels such as Assistant Sub-Inspector and Deputy Commandant as the ratio of
the posts of SI and ASI at 1:6 and Dy. Commandant to Commandant at 1:5 are on the lower
side compared to the ratio of other successive posts. The Committee also feels that the situation
worsened further due to 25 per cent of the vacant posts getting filled up through direct recruitment.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may undertake measures to improve
the ratio of the posts of SI and ASI and Dy. Commandant to Commandant to at least 1:4 to
reduce the stagnation at these levels. (Para 3.5.11)
The Committee finds it quite anomalous that there are only two posts in the rank of
Commandant as compared to three posts in the rank of DIG. The Committee feels that there
is a scope of increasing the number of posts in this rank as it does not make any sense to have
only two Commandants under the control of three DIGs. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry may consider increasing the number of posts at the Commandant level from
two to at least four. (Para 3.5.14)
The Committee, while observing the career growth chart of the Ministerial cadre in SSB,
finds that the promotional avenues at the top of the cadre are relatively sparse as only 4 posts
of Deputy Commandant are available as against the 32 posts of Assistant Commandant. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider enhancing the number of the
posts at the Deputy Commandant level, to avoid stagnation at the rank of Assistant Commandant.
(Para 3.5.17)

118
The Committee takes note of the fact that there is no post at the rank of Deputy
Commandant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider creating
a few posts at the Deputy Commandant level, to obviate stagnation at the rank of Assistant
Commandant in stenographer cadre. (Para 3.5.20)
The Committee finds the career growth chart of the Tech (Armament) cadre in SSB to be
unusual and feels that it needs to be reviewed considering the fact that there are just two posts
at the level of Assistant Commandant as compared to eight posts at the level of Deputy
Commandant in this cadre. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may
review the structure of the Tech (Armament) cadre which seems to be anomalous as the number
of commanding officers at the level of Deputy Commandant is four times higher than the
number of junior officers at the level of Assistant Commandant. (Para 3.5.31)
The Committee takes note of the career growth of personnel in different posts in the para-
medical cadre of SSB and finds that promotional avenues in these posts are almost non-existent.
The ratio for successive levels in various posts viz. Staff Nurse, Pharmacist and Radiographer are
2:15, 1:9 and 1:21 respectively. There is evidently a lack of any promotional avenue for the staff
in this cadre. The Committee wonders why the Ministry is apathetic to the staff in this cadre.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must urgently conduct a
review of all the posts in the para-medical cadre of SSB and take appropriate and adequate
measures at the earliest to resolve the stagnation in this cadre. (Para 3.5.36)
CADRE RESTRUCTURING
The Committee is of the view that cadre restructuring, in accordance with the timeline and
procedure prescribed by the DoPT, is essential to obviate stagnation and to provide reasonable
career growth to all the personnel serving in various cadres. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that not only the pending cadre review of all the remaining cadres be completed at
the earliest, but also the cadre review of all the posts in the force should be undertaken every
five years. (Para 3.6.2)
ATTRITION
The Committee finds some merit in the explanation furnished by the Ministry that there
was a surge in the number of voluntary retirements in 2017 immediately after the Pay Commission
was awarded. However, the Committee feels that voluntary retirements are also indicative of
disenchantment with the working conditions as it is unusual for government employees to seek
retirements when they have more than ten years of service left. Moreover, the Committee
observes that even during 2012 and 2013, the years that did not follow any pay commission, there
were unusually high number of voluntary retirements at 447 and 341. The Committee, therefore,
feels that there are reasons other than Pay Commission award which are leading to such high
number of early retirements. The Committee is of the view that though the Ministry of Home
Affairs cited fulfilling domestic obligation as major reason for large numbers of personnel
preferring to take VRS in SSB, other reasons like career stagnation, tough working conditions

119
and lack of pay parity with the armed forces may also be equally important for this undesirable
trend. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should conduct a survey among
the personnel to assess the factors leading to such large number of personnel taking VRS and
undertake appropriate measures to address the concerns of the personnel so that this trend can
be curbed. (Para 3.7.6)
TRAINING ISSUES
The Committee notes the duration of the specialized training being provided by SSB
training institutions and feels that duration of some of the training programs such as Counter
Insurgency & Jungle Warfare does not seem enough to develop adequate capabilities for the
required purpose. The Committee also wonders how SSB training institutions provide training for
countering the LWE and North-East insurgency, for which some of its battalions have been
posted. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs needs to
strengthen and rationalise the training regimes for CAPFs to handle new internal security
challenges. (Para 3.8.4)
HOUSING AND ACCOMMODATION
The Committee is concerned that the delay in land acquisition, paucity of funds for
construction, and delay by the construction agencies have affected the completion of housing
projects and feels that the housing project monitoring mechanism needs to be strengthened. The
housing satisfaction level in the SSB at around 17 per cent is among the lowest in all the CAPFs
and even after the completion of various projects, some of which are likely to spillover to the
next year, the satisfaction level will still remain low at around 33 per cent of the authorized
housing level. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take necessary
measures to streamline the factors that have delayed the construction of projects and provide
adequate funds to the Force under appropriate budgetary head to achieve the completion of all
the projects as per the stated timeline. The Committee observes that such poor housing satisfaction
level could be one major reason behind high attrition/VRS, etc. (Para 3.9.6)
The Committee understands that SSB is a young Force and is in an expansion mode. The
Committee, however, feels that it is the responsibility of the Ministry to ensure that the relevant
infrastructure projects are implemented at a pace comparable to that of the expansion of the
Force to ensure satisfactory working conditions in SSB. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should regularly assess the housing requirement of SSB, proactively plan
housing projects, and closely monitor the implementation of construction projects to achieve a
good housing satisfaction level. (Para 3.9.7)
BASIC AMENITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE-FOOD
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the
present rate of the Ration Money Allowance was fixed at ````` 97.85 with effect from 1st April, 2015
upto 31st March, 2016 and the revision of Ration Money Allowance is due with effect from 1st
April, 2016. The Committee is unable to understand the reasons for the delay in the revision of

120
the Ration Money Allowance. The Committee is not satisfied with the submission of the
representatives of SSB that the present rate of Ration Money Allowance is sufficient to provide
three nutritious meals for a jawan simply because no feedback regarding ration money being
inadequate has been received. The Committee feels that this allowance should be revised
periodically after taking into account the prevailing inflation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the amount of Ration Money Allowance should be linked to the food inflation
component of the Consumer Price Index and must be revised accordingly. (Para 3.10.6)
The Committee observes that only 2,071 posts of Cooks are available as against the
authorization strength of 2,634 posts leading to more than 21 per cent vacancy in this cadre. The
Committee is of the considered view that filling up the vacancies in this cadre is vital for
providing good food for the personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a special
drive may be conducted by SSB to fill up the vacant posts of Cooks in the Force.
(Para 3.10.8)
BASIC AMENITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE-DRINKING WATER
The Committee finds the submission of DG , SSB made in his oral evidence before the
Committee that all BoPs have RO water filter systems and the data furnished by the Ministry
that around 134 BoPs do not have any type of water  filter system are contradictory. Moreover,
even among the 509 BoPs claimed by the Ministry to have ROs water purifiers, it is not known,
how many of these are in working condition. The Committee observes that around 134 out of
643 Border out Posts of SSB do not have any type of water filtration system and seem to rely
on whatever quality of water is available to them. The Committee is anguished to note that clean
drinking water is not available to the SSB personnel posted at more than 20 per cent of the BoPs
and considers this as a failure of the Ministry of Home Affairs to provide adequate basic amenities
to CAPF personnel. The high incidence of water-borne diseases, with more than 3,000 cases every
year, is evidence of this failure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should
ensure RO or other effective water purifying mechanism to all the BoPs are made available
expeditiously. (Para 3.11.4)
BASIC AMENITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE-ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
The Committee is worried to note that 328 BoPs do not have electricity available and feels
that this lack of infrastructure can adversely affect the operational ability of SSB, especially
during times of crisis. The Committee understands that the geographical constraints and variation
in the state of infrastructure in the States are the reasons for this lack of energy at BoPs.
However, the Ministry needs to adopt a progressive and futuristic outlook to ensure energy
security at the border outposts. The Committee is of the view that after ensuring 100 per cent
electrification of all the villages, the Government should focus on electrifying remote and off-
the-grid locations particularly the border outposts and military installations. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should form a working group to study
the issue of energy security for the border outposts in India by focusing on innovative solutions

121
such as micro-grids. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should consider initiating
a pilot project by installing micro-grids in certain remote border locations particularly at Indo-
Bhutan border and subsequently undertake a viability assessment of micro-grids for powering
the border outposts. (Para 3.12.4)
MEDICAL FACILITIES
The Committee is anguished to note that out of 217 posts in the Medical cadre, almost 45
per cent i.e. 99 posts are vacant. Mo reover, the situation is extremely worrisome in the case of
Specialist Medical Officers as 19 out of 21 posts are vacant. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry must urgently take remedial measures to improve the situation and fill the vacancies
in a time bound manner and submit special report on the progress achieved within three months.
(Para 3.13.4)
GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISMS
The Committee appreciates the 'E-Transfer Application System' initiative that has made it
easier for the personnel to file applications and requests for transfers. However, the Committee
is surprised to note that a huge number of applications, i.e 12795, were received in a single year.
This Committee notes that this number is roughly around 13 per cent of the sanctioned strength
of the Force and is worried to observe that such a large number of personnel are dissatisfied with
their postings. The Committee also observes that more than 50 per cent applications have been
denied and understands that the scope for granting transfer requests is limited. The Committee,
however, recommends that SSB should evolve a system so as to allow all the personnel to forward
their transfer requests along with proper reasons and justification so as to allow the senior
officers to understand the reasons behind the transfer applications and prioritise the requests
that are genuine and of urgent nature. (Para 3.14.8)
The Committee also observes that during the last three years the percentage of applications
that were rejected has remarkably increased from 29.58 in 2016 to 61.74 in 2018. The Committee
recommends that the cause of this increment needs to be looked into and remedial measures
be taken. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should monitor the number of
transfer requests received, accepted and denied and should strive to devise a mechanism wherein
as far as possible personnel are granted transfer as per their choice and transfer policy.
(Para 3.14.9)
DEPLOYMENT
The Committee observes that the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force was raised for the
purpose of border guarding, especially, the India-China Border, however, some battalions of ITBP
are deployed for ANO and internal security as a result of which the jawans suffer in terms of
training, rest and recuperation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ITBP should be
relieved from the task of internal security duties and personal protection and CISF's proposal
to augment the strength of SSG of CISF should be expedited. (Para 4.4.4)

122
RECRUITMENT
The Committee takes note of the pending recruitment examinations for the posts of Head
Constable (telecom) and Inspector (Hindi translation),which were cancelled by ITBP after completion
of the process of recruitment and declaration of the final list of the selected candidates on the
basis of suspicion on a few candidates. The Committee observes that the hasty manner in which
these recruitments have been processed has led to an unnecessary loss of time, effort and
monetary losses on the part of the Force. The Committee fails to understand why the entire
recruitment was cancelled when the appropriate course of action would have been to investigate
the authenticity of the results of those candidates, whose selection was under suspicion, instead
of cancelling the recruitment of all the candidates. The Committee is of the view that this was
against the established principles of law as even candidates who were not under suspicion were
punished as a consequence of cancellation of the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Ministry should direct the ITBP to settle the disputes by following
the established principles of law.
The Committee also recommends that ITBP should complete the recruitment process by
declaring the results of the candidates whose candidature was found to be fair and genuine.
(Para 4.5.3)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should ensure that all the
examinations conducted by the Forces themselves should be conducted with utmost care and
vigilance, within a stipulated timeframe so as to have timely availability of the selected candidates
to fill up the vacancies. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should keep a vigil
on the discretionary tendencies that may arise in such recruitment process and any final decision
pertaining to final selection or cancellation of recruitment should be made subject to the approval
of the Ministry of Home Affairs. (Para 4.5.4)
ATTRITION
The Committee understands that due to the implementation of the Seventh Central Pay
Commission there is a high rate of attrition in the year 2017. However, the Committee is of the
view that if better working conditions are created in ITBP that may reverse this trend of
attrition. (Para 4.6.3)
PROMOTIONAL AVENUES AND STAGNATION
The Committee takes note of the fact that ITBP is presently in expansion mode and
sufficient numbers of vacancies are available in almost all the ranks, due to which most of the
personnel are receiving timely promotions. The Committee, however, observes that there is still
some stagnation at the rank of Constable in GD Cadre. A Constable gets promoted to the post
of Head-Constable in 12-13 years in contrast to the required residency period of 5 years. This
is a demotivating factor for the ITBP jawans more so when the Force is in expansion mode. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that appropriate measures including cadre review must be
taken to reduce the actual time for promotion at the CT(GD) level to boost the morale of the
personnel in ITBP. (Para 4.8.2)

123
TRAINING
The Committee is extremely anguished to note that the ITBP who have been deployed in
the treacherous hills of the north against extreme weather on the India-China border since the
year 2004, have not been equipped with basic training gadgets and facilities, viz., modern equipment
like 8 lane firing simulator and interactive touch display. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that all these equipment, facilities and modern techniques should be procured expeditiously and
training be imparted to the personnel of the Force. The Committee feels that the modernization
of the Force must be given utmost priority as this Force not only has to face any enemy from
across the border but also the vagaries of Nature. (Para 4.9.5)
HOUSING AND ACCOMMODATION
The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level in ITBP at 13.41 per cent is
one of the lowest among the CAPFs. The Committee notes with concern that there is shortfall
of 16,537 quarters. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction of the 3,187
houses that are under construction must be expedited and completed as per schedule without
time and cost overrun. The Committee further recommends that the Government should chalk
out 'Action Plan' to achieve the objective of constructing the remaining 16,537 quarters within
the stipulated timeframe. (Para 4.10.2)
BASIC AMENITIES-FOOD
The Committee takes note of the innovative ideas of serving ready-to-eat meals that has
been appreciated by the jawans. The Committee, keeping in view the difficult terrain and peculiar
weather conditions faced by the ITBP Force and their line of duty, hopes that items in the ready-
to-eat meals would meet the nutritional needs of maintaining the physical fitness of ITBP jawans.
(Para 4.11.4)
BASIC AMENITIES-DRINKING WATER
The Committee is surprised to observe that in 82 per cent of the BoPs, drinking water is
obtained from rivulets and springs which are polluted and at some places the level of contamination
is alarming. Clean drinking water is a fundamental right of every person. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that proper provisions must be made to make clean and safe
drinking water available to the ITBP personnel in all the BOPs and wherever feasible, the
possibility of supplying piped regular drinking water to BOPs must be explored. This must be
done immediately and a special report submitted within 6 months. (Para 4.12.3)
BASIC AMENITIES-ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
The Committee observes that the electricity supply at the BOPs of ITBP is neither regular
nor sufficient. The downtime of generators must be reduced to a bare minimum. The Committee
recommends that the proposal to ensure regular electricity supply at BOPs of CAPFs must be
prioritized and implemented expeditiously. (Para 4.13.2)

124
MEDICAL FACILITIES
The Committee feels that vacancies of so many doctors and para medical staff in the ITBP
is having an adverse impact on the well being of its staff, particularly the jawans, affecting their
efficiency. At a time when the ITBP personnel suffer from various diseases, the vacancies of 8
Specialist Medical officers and 93 Medical Officers is quite alarming. There is no reason why
there should be such a large number of vacancies at any given point of time, especially for ITBP
as it has no other medical access at all because of the area of its deployment and inaccessible
terrain. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that urgent measures must be taken
to fill all the medical vacancies in the Force in a time bound manner and efforts must be taken
to ensure that no medical posts remain vacant for more than 2 months at any point of time. The
Committee further recommends that the Force may explore the feasibility of recruiting on ad-
hoc basis till the regular appointments are made. (Para 4.14.10)
The Committee is of the considered view that ITBP personnel must get adequate medical
facilities at ground level and if required medical attention at the referral hospital. Moreover,
evacuation facilities must be ready round the clock for sick personnel for better medical attention.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the strengthening of overall health care facilities for the
ITBP personnel. (Para 4.14.12)
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES- ROAD CONNECTIVITY
The Committee takes note of the on-going project of road connectivity consisting of 41
roads under phase-I, DPR of 46 roads under phase-II already approved, and construction of 50
roads at proposal stage under phase-III. The Committee recommends that all on-going road
construction works must be completed and proposal under phase-III must be approved within the
timeframe. The approved road construction projects must be taken up for completion within set
timeframe. (Para 4.15.3)
PERMANENT INTEGRATED COMPOSITE BUILDING (PICB)
The Committee understands that since ITBP personnel are working in high altitude
mountainous region, therefore, adequate and commensurate infrastructure is required to enhance
the professional efficiency of the ITBP. In this regard, the proposal of Permanent Integrated
Composite Building (PICB) is a welcome concept and the Committee hopes that the said project
at Leh would be completed within stipulated timeframe and at the estimated cost. The Committee
further recommends that similar PICB at various BoPs of ITBP may be constructed.
(Para 4.16.4)
SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENTS
The Committee is of the considered view that the latest and modern equipment must be
provided to the ITBP personnel at the place of their deployment for effective and efficient
working. The Committee, therefore, hopes that the Comprehensive Integrated Border Management
System (CIBMS) must include updated surveillance equipment that will work under the extreme

125
climatic conditions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
must consider all the proposals pertaining to critical infrastructure, night halt camps, Cutting
Edge Technologies and communication and surveillance equipment and take necessary action for
procuring/installing appropriate equipments for the ITBP personnel. (Para 4.17.2)
MOBILITY OF TROOPS
The Committee is of the view that movement of the ITBP personnel in the time of need
from one place to another is of high strategic importance. However, mobility must be hassle-free
and swift. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposals for procurement of special
vehicles must be considered without delay and the actual procurement must be done in a time
bound manner . (Para 4.18.2)
MODERNIZATION AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADV ANCEMENTS
The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Home Affairs is alive to the need for
procurement of modern and advanced weapons and deployment of the same to the ITBP personnel.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the recent initiatives taken in the field of IT
infrastructure and software applications must be taken to the logical conclusion to enable
digitization of the processes and optimal utilization of technology for the benefit of ITBP personnel.
(Para 4.19.5)
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
The Committee observes that there is no provision of mobile connectivity in many BOPs
of ITBP. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must explore the feasibility
of having mobile connectivity at the BOPs and if possible even by encouraging private operators.
The proposal for providing Optical Fiber Cable (OFC) connectivity to all BoPs by connecting all
villages through National Optical Fiber Network must be considered on priority.
(Para 4.20.3)
GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL
The Committee desires that ITBP's Grievance Cell must be robust and the mechanism
should reflect a system of speedy and fair adjudication of grievances without delay. It is worthwhile
to mention here that fair redressal of grievance of ITBP personnel would go a long way in
motivating the force to face the challenging task and discharge entrusted duties without any
worry and concern. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an effective and efficient grievance
redressal mechanism may be put in place quickly. (Para 4.21.6)
ATTRITION
The Committee observes that a major factor for attrition in 2017 has been voluntary
retirements. This may be due to implementation of 7th Pay Commission. The Committee is
concerned that such high rate of attrition may create a large number of vacancies which the
Force may not be able to fill soon. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may

126
urge the recruitment agencies to fast-track the recruitment exams to be conducted during this
year as well as next year so as to address the situation arising out of vacant positions to some
extent. (Para 5.5.1)
The Committee takes note of the reasons furnished by the Ministry for the personnel
committing suicide, some reasons are of a personal nature. However, the Committee finds that
some reasons such as punitive transfers, misuse of alcohol/drugs and humiliation in front of
others should have been addressed at the appropriate level of the Force. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry undertakes measures to help the Commanding Officers to improve
upon these aspects. The Committee also recommends that consumption of alcohol by the personnel
must be monitored by the Reporting Officers. The Committee further recommends that the
Force should adopt a zero-tolerance policy on the use of drugs by the personnel and stern
measures may be taken in case of any violations. (Para 5.5.3)
The Committee observes that certain measures have been taken to address the stress
levels of the personnel in the Force. However, there is a need to have an institutional set-up both
at the MHA level and at the level of the Headquarters of every Force, including BSF, for proper
identification of factors that cause stress, development of strategies to help the personnel in
addressing these factors and monitoring the implementation of these strategies in every battalion.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must have an institutional set-up
comprising officers from the MHA, Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPRD), heads
of various forces and experts from the areas of public health, mental health, psychology, psychiatry
etc. to deal with the issue of stress in the BSF as well as in other CAPFs in a professional
manner. (Para 5.5.5)
The Committee also observes that the Ministry has not taken suitable measures to recruit
or appoint counselors, psychologists and psychiatrists to address the stress and mental health
related issues in a professional manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should consider creating posts in the medical cadre of BSF and recruit and appoint suitable
professionals. The Committee also recommends that recruitment to these posts may be done so
as to provide at least one professional counselor for every battalion and one clinical psychologist/
psychiatrist at the Frontier HQ level. (Para 5.5.6)
The Committee notes the measures taken by BSF to address the problem of suicide among
BSF personnel and hopes that those measures do not remain on paper and are implemented
diligently at the Company level in every battalion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry should undertake sincere efforts to monitor the implementation of the stated
measures. (Para 5.5.7)
PROMOTIONAL AVENUES
The Committee finds some merit in the proposal to grant four financial up-gradations
under the Modified Assured Career Progression(MACP) scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24 and 32
years of service instead of the existing scheme that provides only three financial up-gradations

127
at intervals of 10, 20 and 30 years of service at par with other civilian employees. The Committee
is of the considered view that the BSF personnel, who are facing excessive stagnation in their
career growth, must be provided certain special incentives so as to keep their morale high.
Moreover, the Committee feels that it is unnecessary to equate them with civilian employees as
the nature of their duty is quite different and they require constant motivation and a high
morale to flawlessly perform the critical tasks assigned to them. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry may favorably reconsider the proposal to grant four financial up-gradations
under the MACP scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24 and 32 years of service to the BSF personnel.
The Committee is of the considered view that this proposal would stem the number of voluntary
retirements taking place immediately after completion of 20 years of service.
(Para 5.6.7)
The Committee is anguished to note that stagnation of personnel in some posts is so high
that it takes up to 23 years to get promotion. The Committee feels that the Ministry has not
taken suitable steps to remove such severe stagnation. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should urgently take cognizance of this issue and take appropriate measures
to shorten the long waiting period in career progression. (Para 5.6.10)
CADRE REVIEW/RESTRUCTURING
The Committee expresses its concern that there is excessive stagnation in the non-gazetted
ranks of BSF especially at the level of Constable. The Committee is disappointed to observe that
a Constable is able to get his first promotion after a long duration of around 20 years. The
Committee wonders how the Force expects the personnel at the lowest rank to maintain their
morale in view of such stagnation which would provide them with only one promotion throughout
their career. The Committee also feels that it is quite understandable that thousands of Constables
opt for voluntary retirement after 20 years of service as they are left with no hope of career
progression. The Committee fails to understand that cadre review started in November, 2015 is
pending at the Force level and has not reached the MHA, even after more than three years. The
Committee feels that this issue has been languishing for a long time and the Ministry needs to
urgently find a way out for expediting the process. A time limit needs to be fixed for each
process. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should prioritize the cadre review/
restructuring for Group - B & C of General Duty cadre. (Para 5.7.3)
The Committee observes that the cadre review for Stenographic, Medical Group-A, General
Duty Group-B&C and Supporting Cadres are under consideration at different stages. The
Committee recommends that review of all these cadres may be expedited and completed by the
end of the current year. (Para 5.7.7)
The Committee takes into account the submission of the Ministry that the review of Air
Wing and Veterinary cadres was not undertaken as they were strengthened or restructured
much earlier. The Committee, however, observes that the review of Law Cadre is still under
preparation by the Branch concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should instruct the officers concerned to expedite the review of the Law Cadre and ensure its
implementation at the earliest. (Para 5.7.9)

128
MEDICAL RESPONSE STAFF
The Committee notes that around 40 per cent posts in the Medical Officers cadre are
vacant and most of the vacancies are at the mid-level posts of Specialist Medical Officers and
General Duty Medical Officers that are critical for providing medical care to various battalions.
(Para 5.8.4)
The Committee also takes note of the submission of the Ministry that adverse and difficult
service conditions due to posting in far flung areas/remote areas, overall deficiency of doctors
in the country, and better pay, allowances and perks in private hospitals, are the possible reasons
for vacancies of Specialist Medical Officers and GDMOs, not being filled up. The Committee
appreciates that not much can be done to remove the bottlenecks of hard service conditions or
deficiency of doctors in the country. However, improvement in pay, allowances and perks are
possible through appropriate modifications in the recruitment rules and terms & conditions of
the contractual appointments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must
undertake measures to make the terms and conditions of the recruitment/contractual appointment
more attractive and offer them remuneration and perks comparable to the private sector.
(Para 5.8.5)
HOUSING AND ACCOMMODATION
The Committee is disappointed to note that the housing satisfaction level in BSF is very
low and despite completing pending construction of 9156 houses, the satisfaction level will only
become approximately 45 per cent, which is still quite low. The Committee finds it even more
worrying that a bulk of the shortage of houses is in Type-II and Type-III that cater to the non-
gazetted ranks of the Force. The Committee feels that a shortage of nearly 47128 houses in the
Type-II category is especially worrisome as even the pending construction projects may not be
able to reduce it by any significant margin. The Committee feels that the efforts of the Ministry
to improve the housing satisfaction level are not sufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should urgently draw a plan to reduce the housing shortage, particularly of the
non-gazetted personnel of BSF, by sanctioning sufficient number of houses in Type-II and Type-
III categories to achieve a satisfaction level of at least 50 per cent in both the categories.
(Para 5.9.3)
SHORTAGE OF BUDGET PROVISIONS FOR HOUSING
The Committee takes note of the shortage of budgetary allocation vis-a-vis  projected
demand of funds for construction of housing projects and is disappointed to note that the lack
of funds has delayed the construction of housing projects that were supposed to be implemented
as and when more battalions were raised. The Committee feels that this expansion of Force
without creation of commensurate number of houses has led to a situation where providing
housing accommodation has become extremely challenging for the Force. The Committee,
therefore, takes a strong exception to this trend of allocating lower budgetary grants and
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should make all efforts to convince the Ministry

129
of Finance to provide higher amount of funds to make up for the past shortfalls for constructing
the housing projects. (Para 5.10.3)
The Committee also takes note of the other reasons viz. delay in acquisition of land
through State Governments and limited capacity of executing agencies, especially in remote
areas, that have hampered the pace of construction of housing accommodation. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry must constantly impress upon the State Governments
and the executing agencies the importance of constructing houses for the BSF personnel. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must try to find innovative
solutions to overcome the problem of land acquisition and consider adopting the model of high-
rise buildings even in the remote areas so as to minimize the requirement of land and maximize
the number of houses that can be constructed. The Committee also recommends that the
Ministry may consider utilizing the land available to the Force under the 'Right of Way' and
adopting a linear housing model based on the linear Border out Post (BoP) model to overcome
the problem of land acquisition. (Para 5.10.4)
BASIC AMENITIES- FOOD
The Committee takes note of the explanation provided by the BSF on the controversy of
providing poor quality food to its personnel by commissioning a study conducted by Defence
Institute of Physiology and Allied Science (DIPAS). The Committee also notes that DIPAS has
found that 97 per cent personnel are satisfied with the quality and quantity of food being
provided. The Committee, however, observes that the sample size of the study was less than 3
per cent of the total strength of the Force and may be subject to error and, therefore, may not
accurately reflect the situation on the ground. (Para 5.11.8)
The Committee also takes note of the sampling technique used in the study and feels that
Stratified Random Sampling Technique may not be the best technique to identify potential issues.
The Committee is aware that food quality and quantity may not be an issue in the geographically
accessible areas but the problems exist in remote, inaccessible areas of deployment and where
there are harsh climatic conditions. The Committee feels that the study conducted by DIPAS,
instead of adopting a sampling technique based on random method should have adopted a more
focused technique such as selective sampling or modal instance sampling focused on the areas
that are more likely to have a compromised quality and quantity of food. In the Committee's
view, conducting such a focused study would have brought out the real concerns, which were
probably lost among the favorable outcomes obtained from a wider sample. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should commission another study based on selective or
modal instance sampling technique that focuses on particular locations that are remote, inaccessible
and suffer from the constraints of harsh climatic conditions. (Para 5.11.9)
TRAINING ISSUES
The Committee notes that certain kinds of training such as Induction Training before
deployment for particular duties are extremely important for the personnel to perform their

130
duty. The Committee recommends that all such Induction Training Programs should be meticulously
designed and implemented so as to impart necessary skills to the personnel. Furthermore, all
other mandatory training viz. pre-promotional training, coy collective training and on the job-
training to enhance the professional knowledge must be imparted with updated and latest
curriculum. (Para 5.12.4)
The Committee is of the view that the training system in BSF should be such wherein
personnel and officers, who are aware about their deficiencies or are inclined to improve certain
skills, may voluntarily opt for attending relevant training programs. The Committee, therefore,
feels that BSF should also strive to develop some short-duration training programs for the
personnel who want to voluntarily acquire certain skills. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should consider evolving a gamut of specific short-duration training programs
to allow the personnel to voluntarily opt for getting trained in certain tasks.
(Para 5.12.5)
RESERVE BATTALIONS
The Committee is astonished to observe that no reserve battalion of BSF is in a state of
rest out of the total of 186 battalions of BSF whereas, as per the policy, around 46 battalions
should be in a state of rest. The Committee is further dismayed to observe that all the 27 reserve
battalions designated for the purpose of rest and recuperation have been deployed for internal
security duties. The Committee feels that this situation needs to be remedied forthwith. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Report of the Emergency Committee of Secretaries in
1965 and accepted to by Group of Ministers in the year 2001, may be implemented and mandatory
guidelines laid down for keeping an appropriate number of battalions in a state of rest and
recuperation. (Para 5.13.3)
LEA VE AND TRANSFER ISSUES
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider reviewing the leave policy
presently in place for BSF in view of the fact that there is no rest or recuperation time for the
jawans of the BSF. (Para 5.14.3)
The Committee appreciates the difficulty in acceding to transfer requests of all the personnel.
However, there is a need to identify the factors that lead to such a huge number of transfer
requests every year. The Committee feels that if the pattern of recruitment, especially for the
Subordinate Officers and Other ranks, can be aligned to the geographical constraints faced by
the Force then it would be easier to provide posting in his State of residence or even near his
home town. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should review the
recruitment policies pertaining to BSF to align them with the geographical deployment of the
Force by recruiting more candidates from the States/Region where the Force is deployed. The
Committee is of the view that this could help in reducing not only the tendency to seek transfers
to preferred locations but also help in addressing the attrition to certain extent.
(Para 5.14.8)

131
GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL
The Committee appreciates various components of Grievance Redressal System of BSF.
The Committee desires that the Grievance Redresssal mechanism must be easily accessible,
user-friendly, transparent and fair in dealing with the grievances of BSF personnel.
(Para 5.15.7)
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES - ROAD CONNECTIVITY
The Committee is concerned to observe that there is a requirement of construction of
around 2032 kms link roads on the India-Pakistan and India-Bangladesh borders to provide
connectivity to every Border Outpost. The Committee also notes that apart from the project to
construct the link roads, there is another project under consideration of MHA to construct more
than 1426 kms of lateral roads and almost 752 kms of axial roads. The Committee feels that
there is a need to construct a huge length of more than 4210 kms of roads in the border areas
where BSF is deployed. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that border roads
is one of the most essential infrastructure requirements and the absence of connectivity affects
not only the operational efficiency but also the working conditions of the personnel. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that all these projects must be considered in a time-bound
manner and an early decision be taken to approve them so that construction work on ground
level is started without delay. (Para 5.16.3)
The Committee notes the measures taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to overcome
the infrastructural challenges caused due to the geographical constraints of the area of deployment.
The Committee feels that certain measures such as Construction of Pucca Naka Machan/Ambush
cum Patrol (ACP) Shelters, providing solar power to Border Outposts (BOPs) and Key Location
Positions, upgrading the existing conventional BOPs to Composite BOPs, construction of advanced
fibre reinforced plastic BOPs at forward defense locations etc., are critical for improving the
working conditions of the personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
must accord due priority for implementation of all these measures to upgrade the infrastructure
available for the BSF personnel at the earliest. (Para 5.16.6)
SECURITY OF PERSONNEL
The Committee notes the measures being taken to provide security against Improvised
Explosive Devices and land mines. The Committee feels that reducing casualties of personnel of
BSF should be a top priority for the Ministry. The Committee is aware that land mines have
consumed lives of several personnel and there is a need to employ technologically advanced
equipment that allow remote detection and detonation of land mines. The Committee, in this
regard, would like to point out that that some Unmanned Aerial Systems/Drones have been
developed that can autonomously map, detect and detonate land mines. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should explore the availability of such technological equipment
and procure them for protecting the personnel against the threat of land mines. The Committee,

132
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must give direction to BSF to employ state of
the art equipments to ensure remote detection and detonation of underground IEDs or landmines.
(Para 5.17.3)
The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that Bundhs
are being constructed along the International Border on the India-Pakistan Border to provide
adequate protection from cross border firing and shelling to the personnel. The Committee
recommends that the Bundhs may be constructed at all the Border Outposts that are affected
by cross-border firing and shelling. The Committee also recommends that the construction of
Bundhs may be expedited and completed in a time-bound manner. (Para 5.17.6)
GOLDEN JUBILEE SEEMA PRAHARI KALYAN KAW ACH (GJSPKK) SCHEME
The Committee is dismayed to observe that an insurance scheme with a huge financial
corpus was devised and implemented without consulting professionals having relevant experience
in the insurance sector. The Committee is also disappointed with the Ministry as it allowed
implementation of the Scheme in such a nonchalant manner without proper assessment of the
financial implications of the Scheme. The Committee takes strong exception to the discretionary
manner and financial imprudence with which this Scheme was drafted and allowed to be
implemented. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should engage professionals having
experience in insurance sector and background in actuarial sciences to comprehensively review
this Scheme and arrive at an optimum premium to be paid by the personnel and the maximum
benefits that can be granted to the personnel under this Scheme. The question of shortfall in
the promised refund of the premium must also be addressed and a solution found so that the
personnel who contributed to the scheme are not deprived of their legitimate dues.
(Para 5.18.6)
The Committee also takes note of the revisions made in the 'Golden Jubilee Seema
Prahari Kalyan Kawach' Scheme to make it financially viable. The Committee observes that the
problems occurred due to an improper financial analysis before the implementation of the
Scheme and in view of the reduced fund position it was arbitrarily decided to provide refund of
subscription fee to the retiree personnel at the rate of 41 per cent instead of 100 per cent with
interest. Moreover, when the Scheme was revised the refund of 100 per cent of the subscription
amount paid was stipulated for the retiree personnel with effect from 1st September 2017. The
Committee feels that this may have created an anomalous situation where a personnel retiring
during the period from 1st September, 2014 to 31st August, 2015would get refund of only 41 per
cent of his subscription amount while a personnel retiring after this date would get refund of 100
per cent of the subscription amount paid by him. The Committee, therefore, deplores the arbitrary
and discretionary measure in which this issue has been handled by BSF. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry may institute an enquiry into the matter and fix the accountability
of the officer(s) concerned. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may resolve
such anomalies that may have occurred due to the review of the scheme and undertake measures
to refund the promised amount to all the retiree personnel so that they are not deprived of their
legitimate dues. (Para 5.18.9)

133
FOOD
The Committee finds it hard to believe that everything is fine and there are no issues with
the quality of food and an effective system of checks and balances exists in all the forces. The
Committee feels that there should be location and geography specific systems of purchase,
procurement and provision of food items to be followed by all the Forces. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, after interacting with all the Forces,
should devise a comprehensive system of purchase, preparation and provision of food items.
(Para 6.1.6)
The Committee also takes note of the regular quality checks being done by the various
Forces and feels that the internal checks mechanism is more or less routine in nature. The
Committee feels that elements of externality and surprise are missing from the system of food
quality checks prevalent in various Forces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs should evolve an inspection mechanism comprising of dieticians,
experienced food inspectors and officials not belonging to the Force for surprise checks of the
quality and quantity served in various Forces, especially at the remote and inaccessible locations.
(Para 6.1.7)
RATION MONEY ALLOWANCE
The Committee notes the uniform rate of Ration Money Allowance prescribed by the
Ministry of Defence and adopted by all the forces. The Committee feels that the Forces are
deployed in different circumstances and varied geographical terrains. The geographical and climatic
conditions and the supply chain system vary from State to State and sometimes even within a
State. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the system of Ration Money Allowance to all
CAPFs irrespective of their topography of place of deployment needs to be revisited. The Committee
also recommends that the Ministry should adopt a bottom-up approach to calculate varying rates
of Ration Money Allowance for every battalion, by acquiring inputs from every single unit/
company of all the Forces, taking into consideration the supply chain constraints, geographical
limitations, vagaries of climate specific to every battalion. (Para 6.2.4)
The Committee does not find any merit in the existing system of adopting the rate
prescribed by the Ministry of Defence as they may not be aware about the requirements of the
CAPFs as much as the Ministry of Home Affairs or the CAPFs themselves. The Committee
further recommends that every Battalion/Sector HQ should be instructed to come out with an
assessment of monthly food requirement, along with the market price of various food items
prevailing in the area from where they purchase the ration, and this information should be
compiled at the Frontier Headquarters level and sent to the Ministry for approval to arrive at
appropriate rates of Ration Money Allowance for different battalions. The Committee also
recommends that the rates prescribed by the Frontier Headquarters for various battalions should
be approved by the Force Headquarters and any variance between the rates for different Battalions
should be examined and approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee further
recommends that once this exercise is done comprehensively, the rates arrived at may be revised

134
annually by linking them with the food inflation component of the Consumer Price Index and
may be reviewed after every 5 years. (Para 6.2.5)
DEPLOYMENT OF BGFS FOR ACTIVITIES OTHER THAN BORDER GUARDING
The Committee takes note of the Ministry's plan to progressively assign security of all VIP
protectees, apart from high risk protectees, to the Special Security Group (SSG) of CISF. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should implement this plan at the earliest and put an
end to the issue of multiple forces being assigned the task of VIP security. The Committee also
recommends that appropriate measures may be taken in a timely manner to augment the
strength of SSG to enable it to cope with the enhanced responsibility. (Para 6.3.3)
CADRE REVIEW
The Committee feels that regular cadre review of the Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) is
essential to maintain their organizational structure as per their requirements. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake measures to expedite the pending
cadre reviews of Assam Rifles and ITBP. (Para 6.4.2)
The Committee is disappointed to observe that restructuring of Group 'A' cadre is prioritized
in the Forces at the cost of Group 'B' and 'C' cadres. The Committee feels that stagnation is
more in the lowermost ranks and cadre reviews of lower ranks should be taken up before the
higher ranks. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should urgently expedite
the cadre reviews of Group 'B' and 'C' cadres. The Committee also recommends that the
Ministry, in future, should adopt a system to take up the cadre review of Group 'C' and 'B' first,
in that order, and then conduct the cadre review of Group 'A'. (Para 6.4.3)
NOMENCLATURE OF CAPFS
The Committee notes the contention of the NCC and the comments of the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the issue of change of nomenclature of the CPMFs to CAPFs.
(Para 6.5.8)
STATUS AND BENEFITS TO EX-CAPF PERSONNEL
The Committee is of the view that the issue of granting of Ex-Servicemen status and
Martyr/War Widow status for the CAPFs for their supreme sacrifices made for the nation needs
to be properly recognized by the Government and hence needs detailed examination to motivate
and encourage them. Therefore, the Committee recommends that there should be no difference
in the benefits being granted to CAPFs personnel and Defence personnel. The advisory issued
to State/UT Governments for extending suitable benefits to Ex. CAPFs personnel on the lines of
Defence personnel may be monitored and any difference therein may be brought to the notice
of State/UT Governments. (Para 6.6.5)
The Committee feels that leaving the decision to the State Governments to extend suitable
benefits to Ex-CAPF personnel on the line of Ex-Servicemen may not have the desired efforts.

135
It is therefore necessary that the benefits that are extended to Ex-Servicemen of the Ex-CAPF
personnel are monitored and if there is any variation that may be attended to.
(Para 6.6.6)
CENTRAL POLICE CANTEEN (CPC) AND THE WELFARE AND REHABILITATION BOARD
(WARB)
The Committee feels that both the organizations, i.e., CPC and WARB, though meant for
welfare of CAPF personnel, both serving and retired, need to be backed up by institutional
mechanisms like expediting the registration of WARB as a society so that it is able to serve its
intended purpose. The Committee recommends that working of both organizations may be
thoroughly reviewed and robust measures may be undertaken for carrying out the entrusted
functions effectively and efficiently. The Committee also recommends that to strengthen the
Central Police Canteens system, the Ministry of Home Affairs may explore the possibility of
exempting the goods provided to the personnel through Central Police Canteens from the State
component of GST by all the State Governments. (Para 6.7.4)
OLD PENSION SYSTEM
The Committee notes that the Cabinet and the Group of Ministers (GoM) have examined
the issue of regular (old) pension to CAPFs personnel employed from the year 2004 onwards and
could not find merit to revert to the old pension scheme. (Para 6.8.2)
PARA-MILITARY SERVICE PAY (PMSP)
The Committee notes the fact that Military Service Pay (MSP) is paid to the defence forces
personnel, in view of their service conditions viz. risk to life and social and family isolation. The
Committee feels that the CAPFs personnel also have the risk to life and undergo the similar
social and family isolation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Para Military Service
Pay (PMSP) may be granted to CAPF personnel and if it is difficult to grant PMSP to CAPFs then
some other incentive for their risk to life and social and family isolation, particularly for CAPFs
personnel deployed in hard areas, may be considered. (Para 6.9.3)
REMOV AL OF DEPUTATION QUOTA AT SENIOR OFFICERS LEVEL IN CAPFS
The Committee has noted Rule 6(1) of the IPS Cadre Rules 1954 that stipulates deputation
of IPS officers to the Central Government and deputation of State Cadre of IPS for central
deputation quota. (Para 6.10.6)
The Committee feels that the nature of duty of CAPFs are more similar to the Armed
Forces rather than Police Forces and it would make more sense to bring more officers from the
Armed Forces on deputation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs, in consultation with the Ministry of Defence, should explore the mechanism of lateral
induction of the Officers from the Armed Forces in the CAPFs on short-term deputation, especially
in the Battalions posted in the disturbed areas such as Kashmir and North-eastern States, where
the Armed Forces and the CAPFs work in tandem with each other. (Para 6.10.7)

136
The Committee also recommends that the Government may re-examine the Rule 6(1) of
the IPS Cadre Rules, 1954 for fixing a limited percentage of deputation of IPS officers in the
CAPFs keeping in view the interest of CAPFs personnel. The Committee also recommends that
not more than 25 per cent posts should be reserved for Officers coming on deputation, either
from IPS or from the Armed Forces, in any rank, and there should be no reservation for the
posts of Director General in any CAPF and the officers of the CAPF cadres should be given equal
opportunity to reach the topmost ranks. The Committee is of the view that this measure will not
only go a long way to boost the morale of the CAPFs but will also provide a bigger pool of
qualified Officers for selecting the heads of CAPFs. (Para 6.10.8)
RESERVE BATTALIONS
The Committee is pained to note that the reserve battalions, which are to be used judiciously
and provided rest for being in a state of preparedness, are engaged in duties such as internal
security and counter-insurgency, which are quite rigorous. The Committee takes a strong exception
to this overuse of the Force personnel. The Committee feels that the Ministry has to draw a line
firmly to allow much required rest and recuperation to the personnel. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should implement, without exception, the well-
defined policy regarding the number of battalions that are, at any given time in a state of rest
and recuperation. The Committee also recommends that the policy on battalion that should be
designated for training purposes at any point of time, should be rigorously followed.
(Para 6.11.2)
CLEAN DRINKING WATER
The Committee feels that providing clean drinking water to all the personnel who are
posted, particularly in remote areas, should be given priority. Contaminated water not only
causes water borne diseases but also leads to deterioration of overall health of the personnel if
consumed over a long period of time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should give this issue utmost importance and take measures to ensure that
personnel of all the CAPFs are provided clean and purified drinking water. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry should evolve an inspection mechanism for conducting surprise
checks of availability of clean drinking water at the BOPs. (Para 6.12.5)
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
The Committee takes note of the lack of electricity supply at several installations of
CAPFs particularly Border Out Posts (BOPs) of the Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) and Indo-Tibetan
Border Police (ITBP). These BOPs do not have a regular supply of electricity and are primarily
dependent on generator sets. The Committee feels that this is not a healthy state of affairs and
this seriously affects the working conditions of the personnel as well as operations of the Forces.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take decision
expeditiously on the pending proposal to ensure regular electricity supply at BOPs of CAPFs. The
Committee also recommends that special measures should be undertaken for electrifying remote
and off-the-grid locations. (Para 6.13.3)

137
The Committee feels that the State Governments should be impressed upon to ensure that
the requisite infrastructure is in place for providing power supply to the Forces even in the
remote locations. (Para 6.13.4)
HOUSING SHORTAGE
The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level vis-a-vis authorized number of
houses is quite low in all border guarding forces. The Committee also notes that the housing
problem is more acute when the satisfaction level is compared to sanctioned strength. The
Committee further notes that the construction of several housing projects is pending while
proposals of some housing projects are yet to be approved by the Ministry. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should expedite the completion of the
on going housing projects. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take an
early decision on all housing projects under consideration and expedite their completion in a time
bound manner to improve the satisfaction levels vis-a-vis authorised number of houses.
    (Para 6.14.9)

MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 24th October, 2017 in Room No. 63, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Dr. V . Maitreyan
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
5. Shri Derek O'Brien
6. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
8. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
9. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
12. Shri Kaushal Kishore
13. Shri P . Nagarajan
14. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
15. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
16. Shri Bishnupada Ray
17. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
141

142
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Home Secretary
2. Shri Praveen Vasistha, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Arvinda Kumar, Additional Director, Intelligence Bureau
4. Shri Mukesh Mangal, Director
5. Shri Shailendra Vikram Singh, Deputy General Manager/Director
6. Shri Janardan Singh, Deputy Director, Intelligence Bureau
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice
1. Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Rajveer Singh Verma, Joint Secretary
Representatives of UIDAI
1. Shri Satyanarayana, Chairman
2. Dr. A.B.P. Pandey , Chief Executive Officer
3. Capt. Davesh Singh, Assistant Director General
Representatives of NIC
1. Smt. Neeta Verma, Director General
2. Shri Rajesh Gera, Deputy Director-General
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the re-nominated Members and the four new Members, i.e.
Shri Pratap Keshari Deb; Shri K. Bhabananda Singh; Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh, Members of Rajya
Sabha, and Dr. Sanjeev Balyan, Member of Lok Sabha, to the first meeting of the reconstituted Committee.
The Chairman explained the mandate of the Committee as laid down under Rule 270 of the Rules of
Procedure and invited suggestions from Members regarding subjects for examinations by the Committee.
The Committee, after a brief discussion, decided to take up for examination and report thereon the
following subjects:
1. National Security and Privacy Concerns relating to Aadhaar (to continue from previous
Committee)
2. Internal Security:
(i) Security Situation in the North Eastern States of India;
(ii) T errorism in the Country; and
(iii) Naxalism

143
3. Social and Communal Harmony; Atrocities on Weaker Sections (Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes, Women etc.)
4. Modernisation of Police Forces; Road Map for Implementation of Police Reforms
5. Administration and development of UTs:
(i) Andaman and Nicobar Islands
(ii) Puducherry
6. Disaster Management
7. Central Armed Police Forces/Organisations
8. Development of North Eastern Region
3. * * *
4. * * *
4.1 * * *
4.2 * * *
4.3 * * *
4.4 * * *
4.5 * * *
4.6 * * *
4.7 * * *
5. * * *
5.1 * * *
5.2 * * *
5.3 * * *
5.4 * * *
6. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 6.51 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

144
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 18th January, 2018 in Committee Room "B",
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
5. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri S. SelvakumaraChinayan
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Kaushal Kishore
11. Shri P . Nagarajan
12. Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda
13. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
14. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
15. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
144

145
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Home Secretary
2. Shri Rabindra Panwar, Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser
3. Dr. R.K. Mitra, Joint Secretary (Police II)
4. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj, Joint Secretary (Police Modernisation)
5. Ms. Sreyasi Chaudhuri, Director
Representatives of Assam Rifles
1. Lt. General S. Chauhan, Director-General
2. Col. Anirban Saha, Military Secretary
3. Shri S. Sharma, Resident Director
4. Shri Ashish Jindal, Brigadier
Representatives of Sashastra Seema Bal
1. Shri Rajnikant Mishra, Director-General
2. Mrs. Renuka Mishra, Inspector-General
3. Shri Chanchal Shekhar, Inspector-General
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed
them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the Ministry of Home Affairs and other
concerned agencies on the subject 'Central Armed Police Forces/Organisations' with special focus on
working conditions in Assam Rifles and Sashastra Seema Bal.
3. Thereafter, the witnesses were called and Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary, Director
Generals of Assam Rifles (AR) & Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) and other senior officers and requested
them to make a presentation on the subject highlighting the working conditions, number of vacancies and
rate of attrition, reasons for unusually high number of voluntary retirement in the year 2017, details of
the trainings imparted, promotional avenues for the lower rung officials, financial requirements and the
operational issues and the initiatives taken for modernising these Forces, etc.
4. Then, the Home Secretary apprised the Committee in brief about the current level of housing
satisfaction in the Central Armed Police Forces, implementation of 7th Pay Commission recommendations
in regard to risk and hardship allowances, increase in Ex-gratia compensation paid with regard to 'active
duty deaths' and disability compensation. He also stated that all Jawans can register their grievances
through online portals or mobile applications that are regularly monitored for redressal.
5. Thereafter, the Director-General, Assam Rifles briefed the Committee about his Organization.
While explaining the reasons for attrition, he stated that hard operational duties, less promotional avenues

146
and desire to work near native place are some of the reasons that drive the soldiers to leave Force on
completing their pensionable service. He also explained that many steps have been taken for morale
boosting of the Force inter-alia release of 2648 additional vacancies by the Ministry and better promotional
avenues. He cited that currently a Jawan could become Havildar in 19 years which earlier was 24 years
for unreserved category. Every unit had been kept at par for giving first promotion of Havildar by
centralising their record. After getting promoted to Havildar they get promoted subsequently to the posts
of Warrant Officer, Naib Subedar, Subedar and Subedar Major. Through limited departmental examination
soldiers having 11 to 13 years of service also get promoted to the rank of Assistant Commandant.
5.1 With regard to Training of the Assam Rifles, the Committee was informed that there are three
Training centers in North-East which are considered as Institutes of Excellence and can train up to 16
thousand soldiers or 69 Companies in a year. Assam Rifles had recruited 127 women soldiers and was
planning to raise the number of Women Soldiers in the Force up to 5 percent.
5.2 The Committee was informed that the Quality of food served in the Assam Rifles is of the high
standard. Officers and soldiers eat the same food. Regarding arrangement of food stock during monsoon
when roads are blocked, the Committee was informed that during monsoon, the six-month lock-in
period, stocked ration or tinned food is used. The Chairman suggested that small cold storage facilities
should also be developed and the DG, AR agreed to the idea.
5.3 With regard to drinking water, DG, AR stated that RO systems had been installed considering the
strength of the post and purified drinking water bottles are provided to the soldiers while operating on
foot/patrol duty.
5.4 As regards untimely deaths of the soldiers it was stated that in the year 2017, 164 soldiers died
unnatural death. 50 per cent of them died due to various diseases related to heart, liver and HIV . On this
issue the Members of the Committee expressed their concerns as to how at a young age, soldiers could
die because of cardiac problems, liver diseases and HIV, when they were medically fit at the time of
recruitment. The Committee was informed that during the long service period of the soldiers till they
retire at the age of 57 or above, they might suffer from various life style diseases.
5.5 Members of the Committee sought some more clarifications on different issues. The queries raised
by the Members and the replies furnished thereto are as under:
(i) Housing satisfaction level vis-a vis the sanctioned strength : The Home Secretary stated that
satisfaction level of housing should not be seen in relation to the sanctioned strength of the
Force but in relation to its authorization. Because it might not be appropriate to build houses
at the forward locations or outposts where large number of troops remain deployed. Houses
can be built at safe locations like battalion headquarters, company headquarters and some
other key locations. The DG , Assam Rifles also added that satisfaction level of 35-40
percent housing of total strength is considered sufficient and they have clear time bound
plans to achieve that target.
(ii) Reservation of medical seats: 15-17 Reserved Medical seats are reserved for all the CAPFs
put together.

147
(iii) Career Progression : In addition to the promotion to the next rank, there is Modified
‘Assured Career Progression Scheme’ under which soldiers get time bound next scales after
completing every 10, 20 and 30 years of service;
(iv) Fencing of the India-Myanmar border (1MB) : As there is 'Free Movement Regime' agreed
upon bilaterally between India and Myanmar, there is no proposal to fence the India-
Myanmar border. A lot of work was being done to improve the infrastructure including
roads on 1MB and on India-China Border.
(v) Fragging, fratricide, suicide and extra-judicial killings : No case of fragging or fratricide or
extra-judicial killings was reported during 2016-17. 4 cases of suicide have been reported.
Officers regularly communicate with the soldiers to redress their problems as precautionary
measures.
(vi) Road connectivity and infrastructure related thereto :  India Myanmar Border (1MB) is full
of jungles. Roads are very few and they also get damaged during monsoons. There is a plan
to build 4800 kms long additional roads along the 1MB in the coming ten years;
(vii) Coordination between local police and Assam Riffles : There is very good coordination
between local police and Assam Rifles. Information sharing takes place on daily basis
between them. State Multi-agency centers are playing important role in this regard.
(viii) Disposal of contrabands, fake currencies, banned wildlife products and weaponries seized
by Assam Riffles : Whatever illegal drugs, weapons, fake currency and banned wildlife
products like ivory etc. are intercepted, they are handed over to the local police and an FIR
is also lodged. Assam Rifles continuously follows up these cases in local courts. Seized
genuine currency is also deposited with the treasury. All records are available with the
Assam Rifles.
6. Thereafter, Director-General (DG), Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) made a brief presentation regarding
working condition of the Force. The DG, SSB stated that its personnel have grown from 31,541 in 2001
to 97,014 in January, 2018. The Force has been given the responsibility to guard India's borders with
Bhutan and Nepal.
6.1 About promotion avenues, it was informed that a constable gets promotion technically up to
Assistant Commandant and even higher ranks. The SSB has unit level hospital at every battalion headquarters
where two doctors (medical officers) are posted to take care of the medical needs of the personnel of
whole battalion; they are also taking doctors on contract basis because there are some vacancies.
6.2 In SSB, the total casualty was 127 in the year 2017. Out of this, seven were suicide cases; 25
deaths due to accidents when personnel were on leave; two personnel were killed in action; deaths on
duty other than action were 33 due to some ailments.
6.3 Current housing satisfaction level is only 16-17 percent. Housing satisfaction level would be 33.65
percent after the completion of most of the under-construction projects by 31st March, 2018; Generally
during wedding and festival time there is rush of leave applications. So local commanders have been
advised to ask the Jawans for early planning of leave so that leaves could be granted or adjusted.

148
6.4 The Inspector-General, SSB informed the Committee that SSB has its own grievance redressal app
which has already been downloaded by 59,000 personnel and they are also using it for intended purposes.
6.5 After the presentation the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some pointed questions.
The queries raised by the Members and the replies furnished thereto are as under:
(i) Food to SSB Personnel : The DG, SSB stated that at the border outposts, officers, sub-
ordinate officers and Jawans get ration money at the rate of ` 97.85 paisa per day. They
run their own mess and eat the same food. The SSB also has a separate cadre of the cooks
at every post; at some distant places and on high altitude location the ration is supplied from
the Battalion headquarters. The Chairman raised a doubt that there is the possibility that
soldiers by taking collective decision to save some ration money might compromise with
nutritional value of food at the cost of their health under the existing system.
(ii) Provision of drinking water : The DG informed that Out of 643 BoPs, there is RO facility
at 509 BoPs and other water purification system at remaining BoPs. They have piped
drinking water supply at 138 BOPs and for the rest of the BOPs they have Mark-2 and India
Mark-3 hand-pumps, some have bore-well and tube-wells and at some places where the
drinking water is not available in all these forms, they have got tankers.
(iii) Power connectivity : Where the units or BOPs are near to habitation or villages, regular
electricity supply is there else where there are solar lights and mini generators.
(iv) vacancies : The Home Secretary clarified that as the large number of personnel were
recruited together recently, they have not completed the residency period. That is why a
larger number of vacancies exist at certain levels in SSB.
(v) Improving the infrastructure : The Committee desired to know whether the state government
where SSB is deployed would take interest in investing to develop infrastructure for SSB
as it is deployed in some peaceful locations and does not always remain engaged in combat
operations. The Committee was informed that the Ministry is trying to improve the
infrastructure and other facilities for the SSB with the help of the State Government of
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim where they are deployed.
7. The Committee was assured by the Ministry to furnish written replies on the fallowings issues:
(a) the vacancy positions at every level in the SSB, especially, at inspector and sub inspector
level; vacancies existing in respect of medical doctors, paramedical Staff and nurses;
(b) the number of personnel died of diarrhoea, dysentery, tuberculosis, cholera and HIV etc.;
(c) a note on the grievance redressal app developed for the Jawans in SSB particularly for
redressal of the complaints filed by Jawans on issues like not getting timely leave which
creates emotional and medical problems for them; and
(d) the reasons behind receiving more than 100 resignation from service per year from Personnel
in SSB.
8. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 6.04 
P.M.

149
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M on Monday, the 21st May, 2018 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
5. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Shri Ramen Deka
9. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
10. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
11. Shri Kaushal Kishore
12. Shri P . Nagarajan
13. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
14. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
1. Shri B.R. Sharma, Special Secretary (BM)
2. Shri Rabindra Panwar, Special Secretary/FA
149

150
3. Shri Mukesh Mittal, Joint Secretary (IS. II)
4. Dr. R.K. Mitra, Advisor (P.II)
5. Shri A.V. Dharma Reddy, Joint Secretary (BM-I)
6. Ms. S. Chaudhuri, Director
7. Shri Harish Chander, Director/Consultant
Representatives of National Security Guard (NSG)
1. Shri S. Lakhtakia, Director-General
2. Dr. Sanjeev Mishra, Financial Advisor
3. Shri P.S. Phalnikar, Inspector-General
4. Shri Abhishek Trivedi, Inspector-General
Representatives of Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
1. Shri R.K. Pachnanda, Director-General
2. Shri R.K. Mishra, Additional Director-General
3. Ms. Nishtha Upadhyay, Internal Financial Advisor
4. Shri D.S. Chawdhary, Inspector-General
5. Shri Anand Swaroop, Inspector-General
6. Shri S.S. Harta, Deputy Inspector-General
7. Shri Ajaypal Singh, Deputy Inspector-General
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and informed them about the
agenda of the meeting, i.e.,
(i) to hear the views of the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs on working conditions
in Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) and National Security Guard (NSG) under the subject
'Central Armed Police Forces / Organisations'; and
(ii) * * *
2.1 The Chairman informed the Members that the Home Secretary had sought leave of absence and
the Special Secretary (Border Management), MHA would represent MHA in his place.
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, ITBP and NSG .
The Committee decided to first hear about the working conditions in ITBP . The Chairman requested the
Ministry to apprise the Committee about the following aspects:-
(i) measures taken by the Government to enable the ITBP personnel to withstand the extreme
geographical and harsh weather conditions;
*** Relates to other matter.

151
(ii) issues pertaining to recruitment, promotional avenues, transfers, training, duty hours, leave
position, housing, stagnation and attrition rate and the measures being taken to address
them;
(iii) the measures taken to provide basic facilities such as electricity, drinking water, transportation,
etc. in all the border outposts;
(iv) the status of construction of various infrastructure projects on the India-China border;
(v) the initiatives taken for the modernization of the Force; and
(vi) the impact of delegating financial powers to the CAPFs in the previous year.
4. The Special Secretary (BM), MHA apprised the Committee that the overall level of housing
satisfaction in the CAPFs is 37 per cent and on completion of the ongoing projects, the satisfaction level
will go up to 52.32 per cent. He further apprised the Committee that cadre review for the ITBP is at
an advanced stage of examination in the MHA whereas for other CAPFs it has already been approved
by the MHA. He also briefly apprised the Committee regarding the recruitment of constables and head
constables, revision of the Central ex-gratia compensation, approval of the demand of the Forces for the
issue of operational casualty certificate to CAPFs, grant of scholarships to the next of kin and the
children of the personnel of CAPFs, implementation of 7th Pay Commission recommendations in regard
to risk and hardship allowances, launch of a mobile application for grievance redressal of the jawans and
the steps undertaken to connect the BOPs to the nearest road head.
5. Thereafter, the Director-General, Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) made a brief power point
presentation regarding the working conditions in ITBP. The Chairman and the Members raised queries
regarding personnel who have been affected by certain health hazards, number of personnel present in
each BOP and the number of sanctioned and vacant posts regarding Medical Response personnel. The
DG , ITBP informed the Committee that on an average, one company is present at each BoP. The DG ,
ITBP assured the Committee to send details with regard to these questions later.
5.1 The Chairman sought clarification regarding the ration money given to the ITBP personnel. The
DG , ITBP informed that the personnel at the border have a mess facility and those in areas other than
border are given ration money. He further apprised the Committee about procurement of ready-to-eat
meals for the personnel. The Chairman then enquired about the number of days spent by the DG and
IGs in the highest border post to which the DG , ITBP replied that he as well as the other senior officers
visit the highest border posts regularly and spend a few days there.
5.2 The Chairman then enquired about the battalions that are not deployed on the India-Tibet border
and its effect on the training of the personnel. The DG, ITBP apprised the Committee that ITBP troops
are deployed on internal security duties, election duties, anti-naxal operations and VIP protection duties.
Some troops are deployed in Afghanistan also. The Chairman expressed his concern over the fact that
approximately half of the Force was not being used for what it was raised. The Chairman then enquired
about the downtime of generators and satellite phones used in the BoPs, availability of drinking water,
sanctioned strength and number of vacancies of medical personnel pertaining to all ranks in the Force.
Responding to the queries, DG , ITBP assured the Committee that boiled/filtered water is used for

152
drinking. He also apprised the Committee about the recent completion of a recruitment process of the
medical personnel.
5.3 Members of the Committee sought some more clarifications on different issues like deployment
of ITBP troops, disparity in hard area allowance, pay, pension and food given to ITBP personnel and
defence personnel, proposal of 'Special Pay' to CAPFs, sanctioning of leaves, provision of guest houses
for the recuperation of jawans, presence of professional experts in traumatic stress and proposal of
recruitment of local boys in the Force. The DG , ITBP assured to send written replies of all these
questions to the Committee later. Some of the Members also expressed their concern over deployment
of the Forces such as ITBP, NSG, CRPF and CISF in duties other than the ones that they were raised
for and suggested that a separate security agency should be created to oversee VIP security all over the
country.
5.4 Some of the Members raised queries regarding different criteria of death allowance given to
personnel who died on duty. The DG , ITBP stated that in such a case, a lump sum amount is given by
the government and some money is given from the welfare fund of ITBP. Thereafter, some of the
Members raised queries regarding rotation time of jawans posted at high altitudes, the policy of contingency
leave in ITBP and number of earned leaves and casual leaves given to the personnel. The DG, ITBP
replied that the rotation time for jawans has been reduced from 6 months to 3 months and there is no
problem of sanctioning of leaves resultantly. The satisfaction level with respect to leaves is quite good
in ITBP. Replying to the queries related to quality of food, he informed the Committee that the food
provided to the personnel is tested and certified by the army. Fresh vegetables are bought every month
by a committee headed by a Gazetted Officer . Thereafter some queries were raised regarding increase
in the rate of attrition in case of NGOs and delay in the joining of new recruits in ITBP due to a
recruitment case pending in court. The DG, ITBP replied that the sudden spike in attrition was because
some of the personnel were waiting for the implementation of the seventh CPC in order to get benefits
of it before resigning. He assured to send the details of the pending case in court later to the Committee.
Thereafter, one of the Members enquired about use of snow scooters for patrolling long distance by the
personnel across BoPs. The DG , ITBP stated that 2-9 km of foot patrolling is done across BoPs and use
of snow scooters is at trial stage.
6. * * *
6.1 * * *
6.2 * * *
6.3 * * *
6.4 The representatives of MHA replied to most of the queries. With regard to queries not answered
orally, the Ministry was requested to send written replies. The witnesses then withdrew.
7. * * *
7.2 * * *
7.3 * * *
8. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

153
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M on Tuesday, the 26th June, 2018 in Room No. G-074, Ground
Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri P. Chidambaram — Chairman
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
5. Shri Ramen Deka
6. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
7. Shri Kaushal Kishore
8. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
9. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
10. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
SECRETARIAT
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
1. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Secretary
2. Shri B.R. Sharma, Special Secretary
3. Shri Rabindra Panwar, Special Secretary/FA
4. Shri P.K. Srivastava, Additional Secretary
5. Shri S.C.L. Das, Joint Secretary
153

154
6. Shri Praveen Vashista, Joint Secretary
7. Shri Vivek Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary
8. Dr. R.K. Mitra, Advisor/Joint Secretary
9. Ms. Sreyasi Chaudhuri, Director
10. Shri Harish Chander, Director/Consultant
11. Shri D.P. Tripathy, Director
Representatives of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
1. Shri R.R. Bhatnagar, Director-General
2. Shri Dhiraj Kumar, Director Inspector General
3. Shri M.S. Bhatia, Inspector-General
4. Shri Sunil Thorpe, Director Inspector General
5. Dr. Sanjeev Mishra, Financial Advisor
Representatives of Border Security Force (BSF)
1. Shri K.K. Sharma, Director-General
2. Shri Sandeep Salunke, Inspector-General
Representatives of Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
1. Shri Rajesh Ranjan, Director-General
2. Shri Alok Kumar Pateria, Additional Director-General
3. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Additional Director-General
4. Shri Anurag, Inspector-General
5. Ms. Ritu Arora, Inspector-General
6. Shri N. Venugopal, Inspector-General
7. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Inspector-General
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed
them about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of the representatives of the Ministry of
Home Affairs and other concerned agencies/CAPFs on the working conditions in Border Security Force
(BSF), Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) and Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) under the
subject 'Central Armed Police Forces/Organizations'.

155
2.1 The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary, Director Generals of Border Security Force (BSF),
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) and Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) and other senior
officers and requested them to make a presentation on the subject highlighting the issues pertaining to
recruitment, promotional avenues, training, duty hours, attrition rate, access of all the personnel to the
basic facilities such as electricity, hygienic and good food, clean drinking water, transportation, etc. The
Chairman also asked the officers to apprise the Committee about the grievance redressal system existing
in the forces, its effectiveness and initiatives taken for modernization of these forces.
3. The Home Secretary apprised the Committee about the constraints in improving the working
conditions including housing and other infrastructure and he further informed the Committee that the
issue had been discussed with the Ministry of Finance for additional funds. He also briefed the Committee
about delegation and enhancing of financial powers of the DGs and other officers to be able to utilize
the funds for procurement of various items under various heads viz. clothing, tentage, machinery,
equipments. He also informed the Committee that an engineering wing of the CAPFs had been designated
as Public Works Organization with the approval of the Ministry of Urban Development and the officers
posted in these wings have been given technical powers at par with their counterparts in the CPWD to
speed up the implementation of infrastructure related projects. On the issue of housing satisfaction level,
the Home Secretary informed the Committee that it was at 37 per cent and a large number of projects
were under implementation. The Home Secretary also informed the Committee that the MHA was
working in tandem with the forces to undertake and complete the Cadre Review to sort out the cadre
management issues. Filling up of vacancies had been taken up on priority basis and selection in the year
2016-17 spilled over to 2017-18 for 57,264 constables and head constables and have been completed and
fresh requirement for 54,953 posts have been placed in 2018-19.
3.1 The Home Secretary also stated before the Committee that a number of measures have been taken
to improve the welfare aspects. The grant of HRA was revised and the issue of allowing the forces to
retain the Government accommodation in Delhi or other family stations have been taken up with the
Ministry of Urban Development. The Committee was further informed that the ex-gratia component has
been revised from ` 15 lakh to ` 30 lakh in case of death in action, from ` 10 lakh to ` 25 lakh in
case of death on duty and ` 9 lakh to ` 20 lakh in case of 100 per cent disability. A long pending demand
of CAPFs for issuance of Operational Casualty Certificate at par with the defence personnel has been
approved. The certificate is beneficial for allocation of petrol pumps, gas stations and free passes for
travelling by air and train. As regards, grievance redressal, the Home Secretary informed the Committee
that online portal and mobile apps have been operationalised and jawans could interact with the senior
officers and get their grievances redressed.
I. * * *
4. * * *
4.1 * * *
4.2 * * *
4.3 * * *
4.4 * * *
*** Relates to other matter.

156
II. Presentation of the representatives of BSF
5. Thereafter, the DG, BSF gave a power point presentation and gave an overview of the computer
advance, BSF education loan scheme and DGs merit scholarship. He apprised the Committee about the
Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Informatics (BISAG) through which he was
able to address the entire force at the same time. Regarding grievance redressal system in BSF, the DG
stated that the grievances received through the mobile app were mainly about transfers and pension. He
further briefed the Committee about the ration money per day for a personnel, housing and accommodation
satisfaction level in the Force and the Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach Policy (GJSPKKP).
5.1 Some of the Members raised queries regarding infiltration across the International Border (IB) and
the efficiency of Unarmed Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) in checking the cross-border infiltration and smuggling
incidents. The DG , BSF replied that with the help of technology no cases of infiltration across the
International Border (IB) were reported in 2016, 2017 and 2018. The DG, BSF then apprised the
Committee about an online coaching system through which the wards of the BSF personnel could avail
online coaching classes wherever they were stationed at.
5.2 The Members then raised queries regarding the stagnation at the post of constable in BSF. The
Committee was informed that it takes more than 20 years for a constable in BSF to become a Head
Constable. When Committee was informed that cadre review of Group A officers had completed,
Chairman observed that it should have been started from C instead of Group A as the problem is in Group
B and C. The DG, BSF apprised the Committee about the Comprehensive Integrated Border Management
System (CIBMS) that is being installed as a pilot project in Jammu and Assam. In response to query,
The about the funds allocated for the Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS)
the DG , BSF replied that ` 50 crore has been allocated for CIBMS for the year 2018-19.
III. * * *
6. * * *
6.1 * * *
6.2 * * *
6.3 * * *
7. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.38 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

157
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M on Thursday, the 25th October. 2018 in Room No.63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri P . Chidambaram — Chairman
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
5. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
9. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
10. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed
11. Shri Nagarajan P.
12. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
13. Shri Dilip M. Patel
14. Shri S. Selvakumarachinayan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed
them that although the Committee had met once on 4th October 2018 after its reconstitution, but certain
decisions could not be taken in that meeting for the want of quorum. Therefore, the day's meeting was
convened to deal with administrative matters that mandatorily require quorum.
157

158
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee took up item No.2 of the agenda, i.e., to consider and adopt the draft
214th and 215th Reports of the Committee.
6. The Committee first considered the draft 214th Report and adopted the same without any change.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.