120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH REPORTS
ON
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007)
OF THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF
NORTH EASTERN REGION
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH MAY, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19TH MAY, 2006)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2006/VAISAKHA, 1928 (SAKA)
 
CONTENTS
1. Composition of the Committee  
2. Introduction  
3. Report  
 Chapter–I  
  Overview
 Chapter–II  
  Overall assessment of detailed Demands for Grants
 Chapter–III  
  Schemes, Policies and Programmes
4. Observations/Conclusions/Recommendations –– At A Glance           
5. Relevant Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee   
 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(CONSTITUTED ON 5 AUGUST 2005)
 
            #1.        Shrimati Sushma Swaraj               -----Chairperson
                        RAJYA  SABHA
            2.         Shri V. Narayanasamy
            3.         Shri Rishang Keishing
            4.         Shri R.K. Dhawan
            5.         Shri N. Jothi
            6.         Shri Satish Chandra Misra
            *7.       Shri Sitaram Yechury
            **8.     Shri Sanjay Raut
            
$9.        Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
            10.       Vacant
                        LOK  SABHA
            11.       Shri L. K. Advani

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
            12.       Shri S. K. Bwiswmuthiary
            13.       Shri C. K. Chandrappan
            14.       Shri Biren Singh Engti
            15.       Shri Rahul Gandhi
            16.       Shri Tapir Gao
            17.       Shri T. K. Hamza
            18.       Shri Naveen Jindal
            19.       Shri Ajit Jogi
            20.       Prof. K. M. Kader Mohideen
            21.       Shri Tek Lal Mahato
            22.       Shri Sachin Pilot
            23.       Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
            24.       Prof. M. Ramadass
            25.       Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
            26.       Shri Baju Ban Riyan
            27.       Dr. H.T. Sangliana
            28.       Choudhary Bijendra Singh
            29.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
            30.       Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
            31.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
                        SECRETARIAT
                        Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
                        Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
                        Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
                        Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee Home Affairs, having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Twentieth
Report on the Demands for Grants (2006-07) relating to the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
(DoNER).
2:         Under Rule 272 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States, during the Budget
Session after the general discussion on the Budget in the Houses is over and the Houses are adjourned for a fixed period,
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees are mandated to consider the Demands for Grants of the
related Ministries during the said recess period of Parliament and make reports thereon to the Houses within the specific
period. But in view of the rescheduling of the Budget Session (2006), a decision was taken to conclude the entire
financial business before the Houses adjourned for the Budget recess and Rule 272 was suspended in its application to
consideration of Demands for Grants 
(2006-07) of the related Ministries/Departments by Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, by a
Motion moved by the Minister of State  in the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs in the Rajya Sabha on March 18, 2006
which was adopted by the House on the same day. Notwithstanding discussion and voting on the Demands for Grants of
the respective Ministries/Departments for the year 2006-07 by the Lok Sabha, during the first part of the Budget
Session, it was decided by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha that the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committees will examine the Demands for Grants and present their reports thereon to
the respective Houses.
3.         In pursuance thereof, the Committee heard the presentations of the Secretary, DoNER and Secretary, North
Eastern Council (NEC) in its sitting held on 19 April, 2006 which was followed by a Question - Answer session and
general discussion on the Demands of the Ministry. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its sitting held
on 12 May, 2006.
4.         The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, has relied mainly upon the following:–
(i)         Presentation made by the Secretary of the Ministry and Secretary, NEC;
(ii)        Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2006-07;
(iii)       Explanatory Notes on the Demands for Grants (2006-07);
(iv)       Performance Budget (2006-07) of the Ministry;
(v)        Outcome Budget (2006-07) of the Ministry;

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
(vi)       Annual Report (2005-06) of the Ministry;
(vii)      Written replies furnished by the Ministry to the Questionnaires sent to it by the Committee Secretariat; and
(viii)      Oral and written clarifications of the Ministry to the points/issues raised by the Members in the meeting of the
Committee.
5.         For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
New Delhi;
 12 May, 2006
SUSHMA SWARAJ
Chairperson,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
 
REPORT
CHAPTER - I
OVERVIEW
            The North-Eastern Region comprising of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim has rich natural resources with fertile land, dense forests and substantive
mineral and hydrocarbon deposits. It is a land of infinite opportunities with huge investment potential. The region
presents a wide spectrum of choices for investment. However, the resources have not been fully tapped due to which the
region has not developed. The region, therefore, needs focused attention as far as the development is concerned. To
convert the region’s potential into an opportunity, the policy of the Central Government inter alia focuses on special
assistance to upgrade and expand infrastructure and accords priority to the development and expansion of physical
infrastructure like roads, highways, power, water supply etc.
1.1       North-Eastern Region has over ninety per cent of its border with neighbouring countries and is connected with
the Indian heartland by a chicken neck called “Silliguri Corridor” with its distinct geographical entity, varied habitat,
extremely rich bio-diversity and mountains and hills. The Region has a population of 39.04 million out of which various
tribal groups constitute almost thirty per cent of the total population.
2.0       As per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the Ministry of DoNER has following
subjects under its remit to fulfil the above mentioned objects: ––­
(i)         Matters relating to the planning, execution and monitoring of developmental schemes and projects of North
Eastern Region including those in the sectors of Power, Irrigation, Roads and Communications;
(ii)        Hill Area Development Programme and Border Area Development Programme in North Eastern Region;*
(iii)       Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources for North Eastern Region (NLCPR);  
(iv)       North Eastern Council (NEC);
(v)        North East Development Finance Institution (NEDFi);  
(vi)       North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited (NERAMAC);
(vii)      Sikkim Mining Corporation Limited (SMC);
(viii)      North Eastern Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation (NEHHDC);
(ix)       Road works financed in whole or in part by the Central Government in the North Eastern Region; and
(x)        Planning of Road and Inland Waterways Transport in the North Eastern Region.
3.0       The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) has four Central Plan Schemes viz. Advocacy,
Capacity Building, Assistance to Sikkim Mining Corporation (SMC) and North East Development Finance Corporation
Ltd. (NEDFi) and the State Plans, which include ‘Grants’ and ‘Loans’ from the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of
Resources for North Eastern Region (NLCPR) and the Schemes of the North Eastern Council (NEC). The projects for
infrastructure development under NLCPR are identified/prioritized by State Governments and submitted to the Ministry
of DoNER whereas NEC as a Regional Planning Body provides financial assistance for the regional infrastructure
projects like construction of roads, improving air-connectivity, assistance to regional medical colleges, etc. In NEC,
special emphasis is given on the projects/schemes, which have bearing on two or more States of NER.
4.0       PLAN SCHEMES, ATTACHED BODIES AND PUBLIC SECTOR UNITS OF THE MINISTRY:-
4.1      Advertising and Publicity:  The Plan Scheme of Advertising and Publicity has been formulated to showcase the
inherent potentials and achievements in social, economic and cultural sectors of the North Eastern Region to the rest of
the country. It also proposes to highlight the strengths and potential of the region through other suitably desired
programmes cutting across the NE region.
4.2       Capacity Building: Capacity Building and Technical Assistance to the North-Eastern States is the key mandate
of the Ministry. It is envisaged to cater to the needs of the people of the North Eastern Region by enhancing their skills,

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
involving them in self generating activities, financial and administrative functioning, resulting in overall Human
Resource Development of the region.
4.3      Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources: The Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) has been
constituted out of the unspent amount  from ten per cent of the budget of various Union Ministries and Departments
(except those specifically exempted) exclusively earmarked for the socio-economic development of the North East. The
broad objective of the NLCPR scheme is to ensure speedy development of infrastructure in the region by increasing the
flow of funds for new projects/schemes specially in economic and social sectors such as power, roads and bridges,
education, health, water supply and irrigation and flood control. Funds from the Central Pool can be released for State
Sector as well as Central sector projects/schemes.
4.4      Externally Aided Projects: Externally Aided Projects (EAPs) in core infrastructural areas have been recognized
as a major tool for rapid development. After completion of studies of the core sectors, the Government of India, if
required will take loan from Asian Development Bank (ADB) and other external agencies for implementing the
projects. As Ministry of DoNER is the executing agency for these EAPs in the NER, the loan taken from external aid
agencies will be routed through the budget of the Ministry for the studies being carried out.
4.5       North Eastern Council: The North Eastern Council (NEC) was set up in 1972, following the enactment of the
North Eastern Council Act, 1971 as an advisory body to discuss and recommend any matter of common interest in
economic and social sector covering all the North East States except Sikkim. North Eastern Council is mandated to plan,
implement and manage regional projects. It is also mandated to review measures taken by North East States for
maintenance of security and public order.
4.5.1    Consequent upon the amendment of the North Eastern Council Act in 2002, NEC has become a Regional
Planning Body and special emphasis has been given on the projects/schemes, which would benefit two or more States.
Sikkim was also brought under the purview of the Council by the amendment. In addition, the NEC will also review the
implementation of projects/schemes and recommend measures for effective coordination in the matter of
implementation. The Council is now required to meet at least twice in a year.
4.6       Sikkim Mining Corporation (SMC) : Sikkim Mining Corporation is a joint venture of Government of Sikkim
(51%) and Government of India (49%) for the purpose of exploration and exploitation of mineral deposits like copper,
lead, zinc and other minerals of the States. It is based at Rangpo, East Sikkim and running in losses since its inception.
4.7      North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Ltd. (NEDFi) : North Eastern Development Finance
Corporation Ltd. is a financial institution which acts as a proactive catalyst stimulating industrial and economic
development of the NE region. It supports entrepreneurs in the region by sanctioning projects and disbursement of
loans. It has worked towards improving the region’s connectivity, increasing its visibility and transforming its economy.
The main objectives of NEDFi are to, carry on and transact the business of providing credit and other facilities for
promotion, expansion and modernization of industrial enterprises and infrastructural projects in North Eastern Region
and also to carry on and transact the business of providing credit and other facilities for promotion of agri-
horticulture/medicinal/sericulture plantation, aquaculture, poultry, dairy and animal husbandry development in order to
initiate large involvement of the rural population in the economic upsurge of the society and faster economic growth of
different parts of the North Eastern Region. During the Tenth Plan Rs. 100 Crore is being given to NEDFi in the form of
a soft loan, which is repayable as bullet repayment at the end of the Tenth Plan.
4.8      North Eastern Handicrafts and Handloom Development Corporation Ltd. (NEHHDC): The main objective
of the NEHHDC is to develop and promote handicrafts, handlooms and allied projects of the North Eastern Region and
the welfare of the indigenous artisans and weavers. NEHHDC was incorporated on 
31 March, 1977 as a Central Public Sector Undertaking and is owned by the Government of India. Currently, the
Corporation is running in losses and the net loss is Rs. 2.11 crore in the current financial year. The Disinvestment
Commission has recently recommended that the Government of India should disinvest its entire     shareholding in
NEHHDC or wound it up as it has been making operational level loses since its inception and its financial performance
is deteriorating over the years.
4.9      North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Ltd. (NERAMAC):  NERAMAC is expected
to build up marketing infrastructure,  processing facilities and providing assistance in marketing arrangement for
agro/horticulture products of the region. The Corporation has also been associated in programmes of helping the farmers
of the region in making them aware about the competitive prices for their produce and organizing training for technical
know-how on commercial aspects. The Corporation has been mainly operating in two areas:
(i)         Food Processing:- Pineapple Juice Plant at Nalkata, Tripura; Cashew Processing Plant at Agartala and Ginger
Processing Plant at Bymihat, Meghalaya.
(ii)        Trading in Agricultural Produce:- Trading in various important agricultural commodities including fruits and

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
cash crops in the region.
CHAPTER-II
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
5.0       The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) has one Demand (Demand No. 28) and for the
financial year 2006-07, a total of Rs. 1362.79 crore was projected and sought under the said Demand for both the plan
and non-plan outlays.
5.1       The Budgetary provisions of the Ministry have been appropriated under ten Major Heads (i.e. 2052, 2070, 2250,
2552, 3601, 4552, 4853, 6851, 6885 and 7601) for the programmes, schemes and organizations under the Ministry. The
variation between BE 2005-06 and BE 2006-07 and RE 2005-06 and BE 2006-07 in percentage terms are given below:
TABLE-I
BUDGET–AT A GLANCE
(Comparative Analysis)
(Rs. in crore)
Grant Number and BE RE BE Variation between Variation
Head (2005-06) (2005-06) (2006-07) BE (2005-06) and between RE
    BE (2006-07) (2005-06) and BE
     (2006- 07)
28 - Ministry of      
Development of      
North Eastern      
Region      
(i) Plan 1086.25 1188.48 1350.00 263.75 (24.28%) 161.52 (13.59%)
(ii) Non-plan 12.48 12.48 12.79 0.31 (2.48%) 0.31 (2.48%)
Total 1098.73 1200.96 1362.79 264.06 (24.03%) 161.38 (13.47%)
 
5.2       Out of the total demand of Rs. 1362.79 crore, Rs 1350.00 crore is in plan outlay and the remaining 
Rs. 12.79 crore is non-plan allocation, which is less than one percent of the total demand. The Acutals for 2004-05, BE
2005-06, RE 2005-06 and BE 2006-07 break-downs in respect of Demands of the Ministry are given below in the
following Tables II and III: ­-
TABLE-II
Detailed Budgetary allocation
(Plan Outlay)
(Rs. in crore)
Plan Scheme Actuals BE RE BE
 2004-05 2005-06 2005-06 2006-07
     1 2 3 4 5
NLCPR 650.00 585.00 679.17 700.00
NEC 498.72 461.50 461.50 600.00
NEDFi 24.50 22.33 22.33 31.48
Advocacy 1.92 5.00 5.00 6.00
Capacity Building 2.70 12.40 8.00 10.00
SMC 0.50 0.00 0.00 2.51
Central Capital 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00
Investment     
Scheme*     
Central Interest 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00
Subsidy Scheme*     
Externally aided 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
Projects     
Total: 1178.34 1086.25 1176.00 1350.00
 
* Transferred back to Department of Industrial Policy and         Promotion in 2006.
TABLE –III
(Non-plan Outlay)

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
(Rs. in crore)
Non-plan scheme Actuals 2004-05 BE 2005-06 RE 2005-06 BE 2006-07
NEC’s Establishment 4.35 5.67 5.67 5.90
DONER’s Establishment 2.06 3.25 3.25 3.33
Loan to NEHHDC 4.76 3.56 3.56 3.56
Total: 11.17 12.48 12.48 12.79
 
5.3       It may be noticed from Table ‘II’ and Table ‘III’ that there has been increase in plan outlay under all the schemes
from BE 2005-06 to BE 2006-07 and marginal increase in Non-plan outlay over BE (2005-06) except under the head
loan to NEHHDC.
6.0       Plan outlay of the demand includes the budgetary provisions for the following eight programmes/schemes/
public sector units:
(i)         Grants from Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR);
(ii)        Schemes of North Eastern Council (NEC);
(iii)       Grants to North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Ltd. (NEDFi);
(iv)       Advocacy and Publicity;
(v)        Capacity building and Technical Assistance;
(vi)       Loan to NEDFi;
(vii)      Sikkim Mining Corporation; and
(viii)      Externally Aided Projects.
6.1       The Tenth plan outlay/Annual outlay/utilization of funds in respect of plan schemes has been given in the
following Table IV:
TABLE-IV
(Rs. in crore)
Name of 10th Plan Annual Exp. Annual Exp Annual Exp. Annual Exp.
Schemes Outlay Plan 2002-03 Plan 2003-04 Plan 2004-05 Plan 2005-06
  2002-03  2003-04  2004-05  2005-06 (Pro-
         visional)
NLCPR No fixed 550.00 550.00 550.00 550.00 650.00 650.00 679.17 679.17
 Outlay         
NEC 3500.00 450.00 441.45 500.00 499.86 500.00 498.72 461.50 461.50
Advocacy 22.50 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 5.00 1.92 5.00 4.76
Capacity 22.50 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 5.00 2.70 8.00 8.00
Building          
Loan to 100.00 15.40 15.40 15.40 15.40 24.50 24.50 22.33 22.33
NEDFi          
Sikkim 5.00 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.00 0.00
Mining          
Corporation          
Total:  1019.90 1011.35 1069.9 1069.76 1185.00 1178.34 1176.00 1175.76
 
Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR)
7.0       NLCPR is accruals from unspent amount of ten per cent of Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) of various
Ministries/Departments of Government of India. The total notional accrual in the NLCPR as on 1 April, 2005 is Rs.
3676.61 cr. of which the Planning Commission has granted Rs. 700 cr. for the financial year of 2006-07. The Secretary,
DoNER clarifying about the accumulated amount in the fund stated that this is a notional amount that mounts up in a
pool according to the unspent balance that is left out of the ten per cent of the compulsory spending of the Ministries.
Out of the Rs. 700 cr. allocated under the Fund, Rs. 100 cr. has been allocated for Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC)
and Rs. 90 cr. for Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA).
7.1       The Committee observes that NLCPR being a developmental corpus, it should be used for various development
projects of the region but is constrained to note that special packages are also met out of this fund. Any allocation from
this fund for some other purpose is neither desirable nor permissible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government should stop such practice and make separate allocation for special packages.
7.2       The Committee was informed that the following eighteen Ministries/Departments have been exempted by the

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
Government from contributing a minimum of ten per cent of their GBS for the development of NER:
“Atomic Energy, Bio-Technology, Company Affairs, Economic Affairs, Expenditure, External Affairs, Legal Affairs,
Ocean Development, Official Language, Personnel & Training, Petroleum & Natural Gas, Planning, Revenue, Social
Justice & Empowerment, Steel, Space, Science and Technology & Scientific and Industrial Research”.
7.3       On being asked to clarify the position relating to the criteria for exempting these Ministries/Departments, the
Secretary, DoNER clarified in her oral submission before the Committee that those Ministries/Departments mandated to
spend ten per cent of their GBS for the development of NER, can spend more than ten per cent of their Budget for NER.
But in the case of exempted Ministries/Departments, exemption does not mean that they should not spend any money in
the North East. For example, for the North Eastern Space Application Centre (NESAC), Shillong, the funding is shared
between NEC and the Department of Space. But it is not compulsory that they spend ten per cent and the unspent
balance accrues into the pool. In their case unspent balance does not go into the pool. She also added that the exempted
list had been there from the very beginning and though there had been some revision in the past but at present eighteen
Ministries/Departments were exempted. The Secretary, however, assured the Committee to have a re-look into the
exemption list.
7.4       The Committee finds that very important Ministries/Departments from the point of view of NER such as
Ministries/Departments of Science & Technology, Bio-technology and Space are in the list of exempted
Ministries/Departments. These Ministries/Departments can play an important role in the development of NER. Keeping
in view the forest cover of the region, the bio-diversity development can be given a boost through the involvement of
Ministry of Science & Technology and Department of Bio-technology. Likewise, the Department of Space, which has
given matching contribution along with NEC for development of NESAC, Shillong, can also contribute significantly for
the development of NER. These exempted Ministries/Departments should be reviewed by the Government and
considered for the purpose of spending ten per-cent of their GBS for the development of NER. The Committee hopes
that the assurance given by the Secretary would be fulfilled at the earliest.
7.5       Till 2004-05, the funds released under NLCPR were ninety per cent as ‘grant’ and ten per cent as ‘loan’. From
2005-06, as per the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission, only ‘grant’ portion is being released to the
State Governments. The Committee in its 113th Report on the Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of DoNER
expressed its concern over the decision of the Government to stop budgeting the loan component. The Ministry in its
written reply has stated that the Central Government has decided not to act as an intermediary for future lending and
allow the States to approach the market directly to raise its loan. It was further stated that the Finance Minister vide his
letter dated 5 January 2006 assured that his Ministry would provide all support to the special category States in raising
resources from the market for plan financing, including raising ten per cent of the loan component so that the financing
for development of North East is not affected.
7.6       However, the Secretary, DoNER and the Secretary, NEC in their oral submission before the Committee stated
that all the NE States have requested for budgeting of ten per cent loan component also, as it used to be earlier. The
Secretary, DoNER further stated that the Ministry would take it up with the Finance Ministry again for providing loan
component in their budgetary provision.
7.7       The Committee does not agree with the Ministry of Finance of its plan to enable the NE States to raise loans
from the open market. The Committee is of the firm view that these States would not be able to raise loans from the
market. The prevailing atmosphere in the NE region too is not conducive for private investment. The Committee
therefore, reiterates its earlier observation that non-budgeting of loan component of Central assistance to States is not a
viable proposition for the special category States of NER and recommends that the budgeting of loan component may be
provided.
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL (NEC):
8.0       NEC, a high profile body comprising Chief Ministers and Governors of all eight States of NER, headed by
Union Minister of DoNER and Tribal Affairs is a special vehicle created primarily for speedier development of special
category States of NER. The NEC during its three-decades of existence* has been instrumental in releasing funds for the
projects/schemes beneficial to two or more states of the NER for speedier development of that region.
8.1       The Committee was informed that Rs 3500 crore was earmarked as Tenth plan outlay for the NEC out of which
Rs 2511.50 crore have been released/allocated through Annual plans of the Ministry till the current financial year (2006-
07) which is also the terminal year of the Tenth Plan. An allocation of Rs. 600 crore has been made for NEC in BE
(2006-07). This allocation (Rs. 600 crore) has been made against the requirement of Rs.1337 crore as projected by the
NEC.
8.2       During the Tenth Plan period, a total of 116 projects have so far been initiated by NEC in different sectors out of
which seventeen projects have been completed so far whereas two projects are yet to commence and ninety seven are in

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
various stages of completion.
8.3       When the NEC Secretary’s attention was drawn to non-completion of various projects in the Tenth Plan period,
he stated that a host of projects were languishing at different stages due to dearth of funds. He brought to the notice of
the Committee that the yearly allocation of plan funds to NEC were much less than the projections made by it. The
actual allocation of Planning Commission & expenditure by the NEC during the Tenth Plan period is given in the table
below:
TABLE-V
NEC Tenth 
 Plan – An Overview
(Rs. in crore)
Year-wise Allocation by Expenditure
 Planning by NEC
 Commission  
Annual Plan 450.00 441.44
(2002-03)   
Annual Plan 500.00 497.54
(2003-04)   
Annual Plan 500.00 498.71
(2004-05)   
Annual Plan 461.50 462.73
(2005-06)   
Annual Plan 600.00 -
(2006-07)   
Total : 2511.50 1900.42
 
Amount proposed by NEC for Tenth Plan:               Rs. 6600 crore
Earmarked amount for Tenth Plan:              Rs. 3500 crore
8.4       In spite of nearly hundred per cent expenditure each year till the end of financial year 2005-06, the outlay for the
year (2006-07) has been fixed at Rs. 600 crore leaving Rs 988.50 crore as unallocated amount for Tenth Plan period.
The Secretary, NEC sought Committee’s intervention to get the amount of Rs. 988.5 crore allocated at RE stage to
accelerate the languishing projects as well as to take up new projects to be identified by NEC during the current
financial year.
8.5       The Committee notes with concern that the Tenth Plan outlay for NEC has not been adhered to till 2006-07 even
though it is the terminal year of the plan. The final allocation made in each year putting together leaves a gap of Rs.
988.5 crore Had this amount been allocated, all the projects could have been completed. The explanation of the
Secretary, NEC that a host of projects are languishing due to scarcity of funds can be understood from the fact that the
expenditure on the projects has been around hundred per cent all the years. The Committee fails to understand why the
Planning Commission makes outlay for the Plan period and does not adhere to it while making allocations every year.
This is not the right approach, particularly in view of requirement of funds for the development of NER. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the amount required for completion of the projects in the current
financial year, which is also a terminal year for Tenth Plan, may be made at RE stage.
8.6       The Committee is also given to understand that there is no proper mechanism to ensure monitoring the quality in
the execution of the project of NEC. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the monitoring mechanism may be
strengthened to ensure quality in the execution of the projects.
ADVOCACY AND PUBLICITY
9.0       The Ministry of DoNER has two Plan Schemes, namely, Advocacy & Publicity and Capacity Building &
Technical Assistance. For Advocacy and Publicity the budgetary provision of Rs 6 crore for 2006-07 was pegged above
the BE 2005-06. For capacity building, the budgetary provision has been augmented from Rs. 8 crore in RE 2005-06 to
Rs. 10 crore in 2006-07. There was a provision of Rs. 12.40 crore at BE 05-06 for this purpose, which was brought
down to Rs. 8.00 crore at RE 2005-06 stage. Justifying the augmentation the Ministry stated that it was to consider the
proposals of the State Governments and other organizations, which were coming up with more projects for capacity
enhancement and HRD programme.
9.1       The Committee appreciates the positive attitude of the States in coming up with proposals for capacity
enhancement and hopes that this approach would be maintained in implementing the schemes successfully. The

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
Committee also notes that under the Advocacy and Publicity, more than ninety five per cent expenditure of the
allocation has been made and the Ministry has also indicated that several activities have been taken up at various places
in the country. The Committee, however, feels that more needs to be done under this scheme until the entire region is
brought into the mainstream of the economy. More innovative programmes may be undertaken and the Ministry may
approach the Ministry of Finance for higher allocations, if need be.
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS (EAPS)
10.0     The Ministry of DoNER have stated that they have initiated a comprehensive dialogue with the Department of
Economic Affairs (DEA), the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the World Bank (WB), to develop Vision
Documents for some of the core sectors in the North Eastern Region highlighting the gaps and also recommending
specific projects for investment. Both ADB and the World Bank came forward to support the Plan of Action and
consequently a number of projects have been initiated in the North Eastern Region. The core sectors identified were
urban infrastructure, road infrastructure, energy sector, trade infrastructure and water resources. After completion of the
studies of the core sectors, the Government of India, if required, would take loan from ADB and other external agencies
for implementing the projects. As Ministry of DoNER is the executing agency for these EAPs in the North Eastern
Region, the loan taken from external aid agencies will be routed through the Budget of Ministry of DoNER. The
Secretary of the Ministry added that for counterpart funding to the studies being carried out for the EAPs a new budget
Head 3601 has been opened with a token provision in 2006-07 for Rs. 1 lakh.
10.1     Explaining about the externally aided projects, the Secretary, DoNER stated in her oral submission that there
were three projects  i.e. (i) NE Urban Development Project (Phases I and II); (ii) NE State Road Project and (iii) NE
States’ Trade and Investment Creation Initiative. All the three projects would be assisted by ADB. The Secretary also
stated that the final report on Phase I of the first project was being processed and the Ministry would examine it in
consultation with the Ministry of Urban Development & Department of Economic Affairs. In regard to NE States Road
Projects, the Secretary stated that the draft report was already prepared and was under scrutiny. The project at (iii) could
not make much progress as the studies were still on, the Secretary added. The Secretary further informed the Committee
that the World Bank was also involved on a study on natural resources, water & environment nexus for development
and growth and the water part of the project would be finalized by the year end.
10.2     The externally aided projects, if implemented in the right earnest, would go a long way in improving the
infrastructure in the North East. The final report on phase I of the NE Urban Development Project may be processed and
examined at the earliest and the project proposals may be prepared soon. The Ministry should make all efforts to ensure
that Phase I goes through this year. As regards the NE State Road Project, the Committee desires that the submission of
draft Report be completed at the earliest and efforts be made to see that the project takes off this year. The study of NE
Trade and Investment Creation Initiative may be got completed at the earliest so that other processes could be taken up.
In regard to the World Bank study on natural resources, water and environment nexus for development and growth,
efforts may be made to complete the study on all aspects positively in this financial year.
CHAPTER - III
SCHEMES, POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES
VISION NER: 2020
11.0     The Committee was informed that NEC has initiated a process of preparing a 15 year perspective plan for
integrated and holistic development of NER through a process of participatory planning. The vision document will be
perceived as a people’s plan and the people must develop faith therein and see constructive avenues being made
available to them. The Committee noted that the Chairman, NEC desired that the document should take into account the
heightened consciousness of the people of the region, their aspirations, needs and sensitivities. During the year 2005-06,
NEC initiated a mass exercise for formulation of the vision document introducing for the first time a paradigm shift in
the planning process with a bottom up approach. A catalytic awareness and mass contact campaign to elicit suggestions
and ascertain the felt need of the people has been completed. It covered about 50,000 households (more than 2 lakh
people) in over 60 districts of the region. The feedback, containing suggestions and views from people down to the
grassroot level, as thrown up by the campaign, would form the broad framework for the vision document, it was stated.
11.1     The Committee was informed that NEC has constituted a Committee consisting of Minister, DoNER as
Chairperson, nominated Members and Secretary, NEC for formulation of a comprehensive Road Map for speedy socio-
economic upliftment of the North Eastern Region. The Secretary, NEC informed that the Committee is at an advanced
stage of finalisation of first draft of the vision document “Vision NER 2020” and would place the same for the
consideration of NEC by the end of the May 2006 and its final version would be ready by June 2006. The document
would define fifteen years perspective goals strategies and thrust area for the development of NE region. During the
visit of the Committee to North East in February 2006, the representative of the North East MPs Forum suggested that

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
Fashion School and Sports School be established in NER. On being asked, the Secretary, NEC agreed that they could be
included in Vision Document.
11.2     The Committee is of the view that the vision document being a 15 year perspective plan for integrated and
holistic development of NER through the process of participatory planning, must provide for concerted efforts to tap the
potential and strengths of the region, remove weaknesses and it should be prepared in consultation with all the
stakeholders. Sports and textiles are two sectors that have tremendous potential of growth in the NE region. Prowess of
Sports Persons of the region has been manifested at various national and international levels. The need is for providing
the ideal environment and infrastructure for allowing this talent to grow. Textiles are one of the most important thrust
areas not only to earn foreign exchange but also to provide employment to a large number of people particularly to the
rural artisans. Thus sports and textiles are two major strength of the region and need to be given special thrust in the
Document. The Committee also recommends that establishment of a national level sports school and an institute like
National Institute of Fashion Technology in NER should be included in the Vision Document 2020.
CIVIL AVIATION IN NER
12.0     Because of hilly and forest terrain and heavy rainfall, transportation has always been a major problem area in the
NER as rail and road routes have also not been well developed. This remains a major impediment for the economic and
industrial progress of the region and the people as well. Insufficient and improper transport has kept the North East
aloof from the rest of the country. This leaves air connectivity as the best available option for transportation and
communication in the region. The Committee had recommended in the past, that all projects concerning development of
civil aviation should be taken up on priority basis and funds should be released for early completion of those projects.
Better air connectivity not only helps in formulating the perspective plan for development of tourism in the region but
also provide an opportunity for the marketing of cash crops of the region in other parts of the country.
12.1     The Committee was informed that the NEC undertook upgradation of ten Airports in the NER, which are Jorhat,
Guwahati, Lilabari, Tezpur, Dimapur, Imphal, Agartala, Umroi, Silchar and Dibrugarh. Besides these, three more
airports namely, Lengpui (Aizawl) in Mizoram, Tezu and Pasighat in Arunachal Pradesh are also being taken up to be
executed in the Tenth Plan. It was further informed that the number of flights in NER has increased from 78 to 128 and
the number of seats has increased from 7518 to 8740 due to the efforts of NEC.
12.2     In regard to Passighat and Teju airport projects, the Secretary, DoNER has stated that the projects are pending
for ‘in-principle’ approval of the Planning Commission, and they are pursuing it with the Planning Commission. Funds
have been earmarked by the Planning Commission for the Tenth Plan, but the ‘in-principle’ approval has not been
received, the Secretary added. On being asked to comment on this, the representative of the Planning Commission stated
that the air connectivity in the North East is a major issue and it was taken up five years before. He has also stated that
they cannot take a decision in isolation with regard to Passighat and Teju projects as they have received proposals for
airports at Gangtok, Kohima, Rupsi, etc. The major problem is the viability of these airports. Once approval is given,
and if set up, there could be operational problems.
12.3     The Committee is not happy with the way the issue of air connectivity in the North-Eastern Region has been
handled, particularly by the Planning Commission. It is surprising that the Planning Commission has taken more than
five years to process the proposals for airports at Passighat Teju in Arunachal Pradesh and even after five years, no
decision has been taken and ‘in-principle’ approval has not been given. The Committee observes that such delays are
one of the factors for which the North-Eastern Region has remained backward. The real potential and the strengths
available in the region have not been properly tapped and air connectivity is no exception to this. Such casual approach
and bureaucratic delays only create heart burning amongst the people of the region. When the Committee visited North
East early this year, several people who met the Committee sought to know as to how long they have to wait for
implementation of these projects. The Committee takes strong note of this nonchalant approach and recommends that
the Planning Commission should clear the projects without further delay to enable the Ministry of Civil Aviation and
the State Governments to implement the projects at the earliest.
12.4     There are four 50-seater aircrafts operating in the North East, out of which three are operating from Kolkata and
one from Guwahati. On being asked to explain the reasons for operating the aircrafts from Kolkata, the Secretary,
DoNER had stated that in the MoU signed by the NEC with the Alliance Air, it was Guwahati that had been mentioned
for operating the aircrafts. When the Ministry had asked the Alliance Air about this, they replied that to station and
operate from Guwahati, they needed a full-scale technical unit there, manned by qualified engineers and other ground
staff, the Secretary added. She also said that the Alliance Air stated that they did not have such technical personnel who
were willing to be stationed at Guwahati and they did not have the kind of facilities that were required there. Therefore,
the Alliance Air was finding it technically impossible to do it at that point of time. However, the Secretary informed the
Committee that they had insisted that the Alliance Air should develop such facilities and see that the aircrafts operate

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
from Guwahati.
12.5     On being asked to comment on this, the Managing Director, Alliance Air, had stated that for making Guwahati
as a base for aircraft operations, there were several issues; one of them was traffic potential which made operations out
of Guwahati financially viable and also the availability of technical manpower i.e., engineers and pilots. He also said
that the situation then was such that these categories of employees were in such great demand and there was so much
competition that they choose their employment and their place of posting. In fact, even for Kolkata, they did not have
sufficient pilots and they had to call pilots on duty from Delhi to flights out of Kolkata. On being asked to comment on
setting up a Pilot Training Institute, he had agreed with the suggestion and said that the local youth should take up these
professions. Otherwise, this situation would remain a problematic one because pilots, particularly and engineers, to
some extent, were not willing to be posted outside the State, he added.
12.6     The Committee appreciates the problem involved in this regard and also in regard to the demand for pilots and
engineers from the private sector. However, the problem of air connectivity in the North-Eastern Region cannot be
ignored just because of this factor. As a short-term measure, the Government may take up the matter with the Indian Air
Force to provide some air force pilots and engineers until a permanent arrangement is made. For solving the problem on
a long-term basis, the Ministry may discuss the issue of setting up a Pilot Training Institute at Lilabari with Ministry of
Civil Aviation at the earliest. Necessary allocation may also be made for starting the Institute at the Revised Estimate
stage. The Government may also include this in the ‘Vision Document 2020’.
HEALTH SYSTEM IN NER
13.0     There are only six medical colleges to serve 39.04 million people  of North East. At present the States of
Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh do not have any medical college. When the Committee visited the NE
region early this year, there was a strong demand from NE MPs Forum for at least one medical college in each State of
the region and one for Bodoland Territorial Council areas of Assam as all three Medical Colleges of Assam are situated
in upper Assam.
13.1     The Ministry in its written replies has stated that the Government of India is planning to designate the North
Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences (NEIGRIHMS), Shillong as a Post Graduate
Medical Institution on the lines of All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), New Delhi. NEIGRIHMS, once fully
functional, will provide for teaching at post-graduate level in 35 specialities, superspecialities with a 500-bedded referral
hospital and a nursing college with intake of 50 students per year. The Committee was also informed that the
Department of AYUSH would be setting up an Institute of Homoeopathy and Ayurveda in Arunachal Pradesh. It was
also stated that “in principle” approval of , the Planning Commission has been obtained for the upgradation of RIMS,
Imphal.
13.2     The Committee finds it quite unusual that even after fifty-nine years of independence there are States which do
not have even one medical college and that the demand for the same is quite justified. Setting up of a medical college,
besides providing trained medical graduates, would also bring with it better medical facilities and health infrastructure.
The States without medical colleges would all the more require such facilities besides getting medical graduates. The
Committee strongly recommends that at least one medical college in each of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram
and Nagaland may be set up. This should be considered on priority basis and allocation may be made at RE stage. This
may also be included in the Vision Document, 2020.
ROPEWAY AT TAWANG
14.0     During the Committee’s visit to Tawang Monastery in Arunachal Pradesh as part of its study visit to NER, it had
witnessed a foundation stone laid by His Excellency, the President of India in 2002 for construction of a ropeway
between Tawang and Gyangong Anigonpa, a beautiful nunnery constructed on a hillock, five Km. away to the north of
Tawang. The nunnery is residence to 45 Buddhist nuns. During the visit, the local people informed the Committee that
not a single stone had been added after the foundation stone. The Committee had witnessed the resentment on the
lackadaisical approach of the Government to the project. In reply the Ministry had stated that the project was waiting
approval of the Minister, DoNER, after receiving all the approvals as it has already been recommended for sanction.
14.1     The Committee is dismayed at the extraordinary delay in the commencement of work on the project inaugurated
by His Excellency the President of India. Such delays and procrastination breeds resentment amongst the people of the
region against the administration. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government to seek early sanction for the
project and complete the same in the shortest possible time frame.
NATIONAL BAMBOO MISSION
15.0     Under the new initiative taken by the NEC, a Bamboo Mission is to be launched in the North Eastern States. The
Secretary, NEC in this regard stated that a National Bamboo Mission Project has to be approved by the Ministry of
Agriculture. Shoot Bamboo for the production of vegetables, soups etc. have also been promoted.

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
15.1     The Committee agrees that in view of the conducive climatic condition and heavy rainfall, the Bamboo Mission
would boost the plantation of bamboo in the region, which would certainly help the sagging economy of the NE states.
The Committee wants early implementation of National Bamboo Mission in the region so that the Ministry of DoNER
and NEC could accelerate projects under the Mission. The Ministry and NEC may, therefore, take up the matter with the
Ministry of Agriculture for early approval of the Mission.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS––AT A GLANCE
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
            The Committee observes that NLCPR being a developmental corpus, it should be used for various development
projects of the region but is constrained to note that special packages are also met out of this fund. Any allocation from
this fund for some other purpose is neither desirable nor permissible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government should stop such practice and make separate allocation for special packages.     (Para 7.1)
            The Committee finds that very important Ministries/Departments from the point of view of NER such as
Ministries/Departments of Science and Technology, Biotechnology and Space are in the list of exempted
Ministries/Departments. These Ministries/Departments can play an important role in the development of NER. Keeping
in view the forest cover of the region, the bio-diversity development can be given a boost through the involvement of
Ministry of Science and Technology and Department of Biotechnology. Likewise, the Department of Space, which has
given matching contribution alongwith NEC for development of NESAC, Shillong, can also contribute significantly for
the development of NER. These exempted Ministries/Departments should be reviewed by the Government and
considered for the purpose of spending ten per cent of their GBS for the development of NER. The Committee hopes
that the assurance given by the Secretary would be fulfilled at the earliest.         (Para 7.4)
            The Committee does not agree with the Ministry of Finance of its plan to enable the NE States to raise loans
from the open market. The Committee is of the firm view that these States would not be able to raise loans from the
market. The prevailing atmosphere in the NE region too is not conducive for private investment. The Committee
therefore, reiterates its earlier observation that non-budgeting of loan component of Central assistance to States is not a
viable proposition for the special category States of NER and recommends that the budgeting of loan component may be
provided.          (Para 7.7)
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL (NEC)
            The Committee notes with concern that the Tenth Plan outlay for NEC has not been adhered to till 2006-07 even
though it is the terminal year of the plan. The final allocation made in each year putting together leaves a gap of Rs.
988.5 cr. Had this amount been allocated, all the projects could have been completed. The explanation of the Secretary,
NEC that a host of projects are languishing due to scarcity of funds can be understood from the fact that the expenditure
on the projects has been around hundred percent all the years. The Committee fails to understand why the Planning
Commission makes outlay for the Plan period and does not adhere to it while making allocations every year. This is not
the right approach, particularly in view of requirement of funds for the development of NER. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the amount required for completion of the projects in the current financial year, which is also
a terminal year for Tenth Plan, may be made at RE stage.      (Para 8.5)
            The Committee is also given to understand that there is no proper mechanism to ensure monitoring the quality in
the execution of the project of NEC. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the monitoring mechanism may be
strengthened to ensure quality in the execution of the projects.            (Para 8.6)
ADVOCACY AND PUBLICITY
            The Committee appreciates the positive attitude of the States in coming up with proposals for capacity
enhancement and hopes that this approach would be maintained all through in implementing the schemes successfully.
The Committee also notes that under the Advocacy and Publicity, more than ninety-five percent expenditure of the
allocation has been made and the Ministry has also indicated that several activities have been taken up at various places
in the country. The Committee, however, feels that more needs to be done under this scheme until the entire region is
brought into the mainstream of the economy. More innovative programmes may be undertaken and the Ministry may
approach the Ministry of Finance for higher allocations, if need be.   (Para 9.1)
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS (EAPS)
            The externally aided projects, if implemented in the right earnest, would go a long way in improving the
infrastructure in the North East. The final report on phase I of the NE Urban Development Project may be processed and
examined at the earliest and the project proposals may be prepared soon. The Ministry should make all efforts to ensure
that Phase I goes through this year. As regards the NE State Road Project, the Committee desires that the submission of
draft Report be completed at the earliest and efforts be made to see that the project takes off this year. The study of NE
Trade and Investment Creation Initiative may be got completed at the earliest so that other processes could be taken up.

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
In regard to the World Bank study on natural resources, water & environment nexus for development and growth,
efforts may be made to complete the study on all aspects positively in this financial year.   (Para 10.2)
VISION NER: 2020
            The Committee is of the view that the vision document being a 15 year perspective plan for integrated and
holistic development of NER through the process of participatory planning, must provide for concerted efforts to tap the
potential and strengths of the region, remove weaknesses and it should be prepared in consultation with all the
stakeholders. Sports and textiles are two sectors that have tremendous potential of growth in the NE region. Prowess of
Sports Persons of the region has been manifested at various national and international levels. The need is for providing
the ideal environment and infrastructure for allowing this talent to grow. Textiles are one of the most important thrust
areas not only to earn foreign exchange but also to provide employment to a large number of people particularly to the
rural artisans. Thus sports and textiles are two major strength of the region and need to be given special thrust in the
Document. The Committee also recommends that establishment of a national level sports school and an institute like
National Institute of Fashion Technology in NER should be included in the Vision Document 2020.         (Para 11.2)
CIVIL AVIATION IN NER
            The Committee is not happy with the way the issue of air connectivity in the North-Eastern Region has been
handled, particularly by the Planning Commission. It is surprising that the Planning Commission has taken more than
five years to process the proposals for airports at Passighat and Teju in Arunachal Pradesh and even after five years, no
decision has been taken and ‘in-principle’ approval has not been given. The Committee observes that such delays are
one of the factors for which the North-Eastern Region has remained backward. The real potential and the strengths
available in the region have not been properly tapped and air connectivity is no exception to this. Such casual approach
and bureaucratic delays only create heart burning amongst the people of the region. When the Committee visited North
East early this year, several people who met the Committee sought to know as to how long they have to wait for
implementation of these projects. The Committee takes strong note of this nonchalant approach and recommends that
the Planning Commission should clear the projects without further delay to enable the Ministry of Civil Aviation and
the State Governments to implement the projects at the earliest.            (Para 12.3)
            The Committee appreciates the problem involved in this regard and also in regard to the demand for pilots and
engineers from the private sector. However, the problem of air connectivity in the North-Eastern Region cannot be
ignored just because of this factor. As a short-term measure, the Government may take up the matter with the Indian Air
Force to provide some air force pilots and engineers until a permanent arrangement is made. For solving the problem on
a long-term basis, the Ministry may discuss the issue of setting up a Pilot Training Institute at Lilabari with Ministry of
Civil Aviation at the earliest. Necessary allocation may also be made for starting the Institute at the Revised Estimate
stage. The Government may also include this in the ‘Vision Document 2020’.       (Para 12.6)
HEALTH SYSTEM IN NER
            The Committee finds it quite unusual that even after fifty-nine years of independence there are States which do
not have even one medical college and that the demand for the same is quite justified. Setting up of a medical college,
besides providing trained medical graduates, would also bring with it better medical facilities and health infrastructure.
The States without medical colleges would all the more require such facilities besides getting medical graduates. The
Committee strongly recommends that at least one medical college in each of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram
and Nagaland may be set up. This should be considered on priority basis and allocation may be made at RE stage. This
may also be included in the Vision Document, 2020.           (Para 13.2)
ROPEWAY AT TAWANG
            The Committee is dismayed at the extraordinary delay in the commencement of work on the project inaugurated
by no less than the President of India. Such delays and procrastination breeds resentment amongst the people of the
region against the administration. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government to seek early sanction for the
project and complete the same in the shortest possible time frame.      (Para 14.1)
NATIONAL BAMBOO MISSION
            The Committee agrees that in view of the conducive climatic condition and heavy rainfall, the Bamboo Mission
would boost the plantation of bamboo in the region, which would certainly help the sagging economy of the NE States.
The Committee wants early implementation of National Bamboo Mission in the region so that the Ministry of DoNER
and NEC could accelerate projects under the Mission. The Ministry and NEC may, therefore, take up the matter with the
Ministry of Agriculture for early approval of the Mission.     (Para 15.1)
MINUTES
*XII
TWELFTH MEETING

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, 19 April, 2006 in main Committee Room, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
                        MEMBERS  PRESENT
            1.         Shrimati Sushma Swaraj               ------      Chairperson
                        RAJYA  SABHA
            2.         Shri V. Narayanasamy
            3.         Shri R.K. Dhawan
            4.         Shri Sitaram Yechury
            5.         Shri Sanjay Raut
                        LOK  SABHA
            6.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
            7.         Shri C.K. Chandrappan
            8.         Shri Biren Singh Engti
            9.         Shri Tapir Gao
            10.       Shri Naveen Jindal
            11.       Shri Tek Lal Mahato
            12.       Prof. M. Ramadass
            13.       Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
                        SECRETARIAT
                        Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
                        Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
                        Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
                        WITNESSES
                        Representatives of Ministry of DoNER
            1.         Shrimati Gauri Chatterjee, Secretary
            2.         Shri Rajendra Mishra, JS
            3.         Dr. H.K. Paliwal, JS
            4.         Shri D. S. Poonia, JS
            5.         Shri B. Balagopal, Director
            6.         Shri Amit Sahai, Director
            7.         Shri Surender Kumar, Director
            8.         Shri Nikhil Pandey, Director
            9.         Shri P.R. Mesh Ram, Joint Director
            10.       Shri S.K. Nayyar, Deputy Secretary
            11.       Shri B.B. Samaddar, Deputy Secretary
            12.       Shri Jiwan Das, Deputy Secretary
                        Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
            1.         Shri N.A. Vishwanathan, AS & FA
            2.         Shri V. Ravindran, Director
            3.         Shri Jawahar Thakur, CCA
                        Representatives of NEC and Other PSUs
            1.         Shri H.V. Lalringa, Secretary, NEC
            2.         Shri P.K. Deb, Adviser
            3.         Shri Binoy Singh, Adviser
            4.         Shri R.P. Kharpuri, Director
            5.         Shri Brahmo choudhary, Director
            6.         Shri K.N. Hazarika, CMD, NEDFi
            7.         Shri R. S. Chankum, MD, NEHHDC
            8.         Shri S. Bhattacharjee, ED, NERAMAC
                        Representatives of other Ministries/Departments
            1.         Shri Jayant Das Gupta, Joint Secretary, M/o Commerce
            2.         Shri Puran Chand, Deputy Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
            3.         Shri Anil Goyal, Managing Director, Alliance Air
            4.         Shri P.B. Deswani, General Manager, Airports Authority of India

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
            5.         Shri A.K. Misra, Member (Planning), Airports Authority of India
            6.         Dr. J.S. Samra, Deputy Director General, Indian Council of Agriculture and Research
            7.         Shri L. Shivaraman Reddy, Dy. Commissioner, Horticulture Division M/o Agriculture &
                        Cooperation
            8.         Shri T. Shrinidhi, Director (Fin.), M/o Surface & Transport
            9.         Shri V. Kaul, Suptd. Engineer, Department of Road, Transport & Highways
            10.       Shri Kuldip Kumar, Deputy Secretary, M/o Tourism
 
2.         The Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) and
other officials to the meeting of the Committee. She then invited the Secretary, DoNER to make a presentation on the
budgetary provisions of the Ministry, indicating expenditure; shortfalls etc. therein.
3.         The Secretary, DoNER made brief presentation on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of DoNER
highlighting inter-alia the enhancement of allocation in plan schemes of the Ministry. Thereafter, the Secretary, NEC
made a detailed power-point presentation which inter alia included mandate of NEC; plan-wise investment up to Tenth
Plan;. overview regarding Tenth Plan period; major achievements in various sectors by NEC; evaluation and monitoring
schemes of NEC; and new initiatives undertaken by NEC and its Vision Document-2020.
4.         The Chairperson while appreciating the concise and comprehensive presentation of the Secretary, DoNER and
Secretary, NEC sought clarifications on the issues relating to exemption of some Ministries/Departments from
allocating ten percent of gross budgetary support to NLCPR particularly in relation to the Ministries/Departments of the
Science & Technology, Biotechnology and Space which though have larger role in NE States but are exempted. She
also enquired about the projects to be undertaken under the Externally Aided Projects. She then raised points regarding
allocation of amount for upgradation of Regional Institute of Medical Science (RIMS), Imphal; reasons for delay
completion of a large number of projects in NER; status of construction of airports at Passighat and Teju and ropeway at
Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh.
4.l        Some Members sought clarifications on allocation of Rs. 100 crore and Rs. 90 crore for Bodoland Territorial
Council (BTC) and Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA), respectively as special package from NLCPR; funds spent on creating
sports infrastructure in NER; opinion of NE States regarding non budgeting of ten percent of loan component as central
assistance; status of vision document i.e., Vision NER: 2020 of NEC, setting up of a medical college in States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland; implementation of National Bamboo Mission; status of establishment of
Pilot Training Institutes in Assam and reasons for not operating Alliance Air flights from Guwahati airport as per the
MoU in that. regard.
4.2       One Member stressed the need to have balanced development amongst all the NER States. Clarifications were
also sought as to why Planning Commission has not allocated the projected allocation earmarked for Tenth Plan period
to NEC.
5.0       Secretary, DoNER and the Secretary, NEC clarified most of the queries of the Chairperson and Members and
assured to send written replies on some of the issues soon.
5.1       The Chairperson, then, thanked the officers for attending the meeting and clarifying the points/issues raised by
the Members.
5.2       Thereafter, the Committee held internal discussion and flagged the points to be included in the Report on
Demands for Grants..
            (Witnesses then withdrew)
6.0       A verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept.
7.0       The meeting then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on 25 April, 2006.
 
*XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Friday, 12 May, 2006 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
                        MEMBERS  PRESENT
            1.         Shrimati Sushma Swaraj                ------      Chairperson
                        RAJYA  SABHA
            2.         Shri V. Narayanasamy
            3.         Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
                        LOK  SABHA

120th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/120threport.htm[01-07-2016 11:35:45]
            4.         Shri Tapir Gao
            5.         Shri Ajit Jogi
            6.         Shri Tek Lal Mahato
            7.         Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
            8.         Prof. M. Ramadass
            9.         Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
            10.       Shri Baju Ban Riyan
            11.       Dr. H.T. Sangliana
            12.       Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
                        SECRETARIAT
            1.         Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
            2.         Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
            3.         Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
            4.         Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
2.         *          *          *
3.0       *          *          *
3.1       *          *          *
3.2       The Committee then took up One Hundred Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of
DoNER for its consideration and adoption. A Member suggested that proper monitoring to ensure quality in the
execution of projects by North         Eastern Council (NEC) may also be mentioned in the Report. The Committee
agreed to the suggestion and directed the Secretariat to incorporate the same in the Report. The Committee then adopted
the One Hundred Twentieth Report with the amendment proposed.
4.         The Committee decided to present/lay its Reports to/in both Houses of Parliament on 19 May 2006. The
Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence Shri V. Narayanasamy to present the Reports to the Rajya
Sabha. The Committee also authorized Prof. M. Ramadass and in his absence; Shri G. Karunakara Reddy to lay the
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5.      The meeting then adjourned at 10.25 A.M.