PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
New Delhi 
November,  2023/Kartika,  1945 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
246 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 
(PRESE
NTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 10TH NOVEMBER, 2023) 
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 10TH NOVEMBER, 2023) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2023)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2023) 

 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available   
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 10TH NOVEMBER, 2023) 
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 10TH NOVEMBER 2023) 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2023)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2023) 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
 November 2023/Kartika, 1945 (Saka) 
  


C O N T E N T S 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) - (iii)
2. ACRONYMS (iv) 
3. PREFACE (v)-(vi) 
4. REPORT      1-42
CHAPTER -1 
INTRODUCTION 
1-10
CHAPTER-2 
VIEWS OF THE STAKEHOLDERS 
11-15
CHAPTER-3 
RECOMMENDATIONS ON CLAUSES 
16-42
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – 
AT A GLANCE 
43-54
6. NOTE OF DISSENT 55-199
7. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 200-257
8. ANNEXURES  (I) BILLS 
(II) LIST OF DOMAIN EXPERTS
258-397

 
i 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal    - Chairman 
 
            RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb  
3. Shri N. R. Elango  
4. Dr. Anil Jain  
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar  
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar  
7. Shri Digvijaya Singh  
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
9. *Shri Derek O’Brien  
10. †Shri P. Chidambaram  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar  
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh  
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami  
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher  
17. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran  
18. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik  
19. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar  
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal  
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri R. K. Singh Patel  
24. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
25. Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi 
26. ≠Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale  
27. Shri Ravneet Singh  
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
29. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga  
30. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
31. ¥Vacant 
                                                           
* Shri Derek O'Brien, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 23rd  August, 2023. 
† Shri P. Chidambaram, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f  28th  August, 2023 in place of Shri P. Bhattacharya, who retired  from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha on the 18th August, 2023. 
≠ Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f.  19th October, 2022 in place of Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar, MP, Lok 
Sabha. 
¥ Consequent upon disqualification of Shri  Faizal P. P. Mohammed  from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 11th January, 2023  in terms of the 
provisions of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section   8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1 951, he ceases to be a 
Member of the Committee. 

 
ii 
 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal    - Chairman 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri P. Chidambaram 
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb  
4. Shri N. R. Elango  
5. Dr. Anil Jain  
6. Shri Sujeet Kumar  
7. Shri Derek O’Brien 
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar  
9. Shri Digvijaya Singh  
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar  
14. Dr. Nishikant Dubey‡ 
15. Shri Dilip Ghosh  
16. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami  
17. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran  
18. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik  
19. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar  
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal  
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel  
24. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
25. Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi 
26. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale  
27. Shri Ravneet Singh  
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
29. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga  
30. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
31. Vacant 
                                                           
‡ Dr. Nishikant Dubey, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 5th October, 2023 in place of Shrimati Kirron Kher, MP, Lok Sabha. 

 
iii 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri Manoj H M, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
iv 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ATM Automated Teller Machine 
BNS Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 
BNSS Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research & Development 
BSB Bharatiya Sakshya Bill 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation 
CPOs Central Police Organisations 
DRSC Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
FIR  First Investigation Report 
IB Intelligence Bureau 
IPC Indian Penal Code 
IPS  Indian Police Service 
JJ Act  Juvenile Justice Act 
LGBTQ Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Queer 
MCOCA Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
NCPCR National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau 
NLU National Law University 
PMLA Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 
POCSO Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 
POTA Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 
TADA Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 
UAPA Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967 
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
v 
 
PREFACE 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this 
Two Hundred Forty Sixth Report of the Committee on THE BHARATIYA NYAYA 
SANHITA, 2023 (Annexure-I). 
2.  In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the 
Council of States relating to the Department- related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the 
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha had on 18th 
August, 2023 referred The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, as introduced in the Lok Sabha  on 
11th August, 2023 and pending therein, to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs for examination and report within three months. 
3.  The Committee held 12 meetings during the course of examination of the Sanhita. In its first 
sitting held on 24 th August, 2023, the Home Secretary made a presentation on the Sanhita.  
Thereafter, in the meetings  held on 25 th and 26th August, 2023, the views and opinions of the 
Members of the Committee were gathered. On 11 th, 12th, 13th, 22nd, 23rd September, 2023 and 3rd 
October, 2023, the Committee heard the views of domain experts. A list of domain experts, who  
appeared before the Committee is at Annexure -II. The Committee held clause -by-clause 
consideration with regard to the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita , 2023 on 4 th and 5 th October 2023.  
Further, on 27 th October, 2023, the Members of the Committee again expressed their views on 
the Bill.    
4.  The Committee in its sitting held on 06 th November, 2023, considered the draft 246 th 
Report on the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and adopted the same. 
5.  The Committee relied on the following documents in finalizing its Report:  
i. The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;  
ii. The Indian Penal Code, 1860; 
iii. Background Note on the Sanhita received from the Ministry of Home Affairs;  
iv. Presentation, clarifications and oral evidence of Home Secretary and senior officials 
of Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice; 
v. The Constitution of India; 
vi. Suggestions received on the Sanhita from serving and former Members of Parliament, 
various private individuals/associations/organisations/experts, State Governments and 
replies of the Ministry on such suggestions; 
vii. Oral evidence and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts on the 
Sanhita; and  
viii. Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the questions/queries raised by 
Members and the domain experts during the meetings on the Sanhita. 
 

 
vi 
 
6.   On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made 
by those who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their valua ble suggestions 
to the Committee through their written submissions. I also thank Home Secretary and other 
officials for their deliberation on the Sanhita. 
7.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
6th  November, 2023 
New Delhi 
Kartika, 1945 (Saka) 
Brij Lal 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
REPORT 
Chapter - 1 
INTRODUCTION 
Necessity of the Sanhita  
1.1  The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 introduced in the Lok Sabha on 11 th 
August, 2023 seeks to replace the Indian Penal Code (IPC), 1860. This Sanhita was 
introduced along with Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS), 2023 and 
Bharatiya Sakshya Bill (BSB), 2023. All the three legislations propose a complete 
overhaul of the criminal justice system in our country. The Statement of Objects 
and Reasons (SOR) of the Bill state s that the Indian Penal Code , enacted in 1860, 
is still continuing in the country with certain amendments made therein from time 
to time.  
1.2 It is also stated in the SOR that the Government considered it expedient and 
necessary to review the existing criminal laws to strengthen law & order and also 
to focus on simplifying legal procedure so that ease of living is ensured to the 
common man. The Government also considered making, the existing laws relevant 
to the contemporary situation and provide speedy justice to common man. To 
achieve this objective, various stakeholders were consulted keeping in mind the 
current needs and aspira tions of the people , and with a view to create a citizen 
centric legal structure and to secure life and liberty of the citizens. 
1.3 The existing laws, stemming from the colonial era, no longer represented the 
present day dynamics and aspirations of Indian society. The existing laws have 
often been criticised for being outdated and not in tune with present needs. The 
proposed Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 seeks to change the nature of the law 
towards providing justice rather than punishment and would be a step forward to 
remove traces of colonial mind-set.  
Background 
1.4 Amendment in the criminal laws is a continuous process. MHA in its 
background note has stated that various reports including reports of the Law 
Commission of India, Bezbaruah Committee, Vishwanathan Committee, Malimath 

 
2 
 
Committee, Madhav Menon Committee, etc, made recommendations for section-
specific amendments in criminal laws and general reforms in criminal justice 
system, whereas 111th (2005), 128 th (2006) and 146 th (2010) Reports of th e 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs had 
recommended for a comprehensive review of the criminal justice system in the 
country and stressed upon the need to reform and rationalise the criminal laws of 
the country by introducing a comprehensive legislation in Parliament rather than 
bringing about piecemeal amendments in the criminal laws.  
1.5 The Home Secretary, during his presentation before the Committee on 24th 
August, 2023  inter alia  highlighted the main problems in present legal system, 
which can be summarised as under:-  
 Complex nature of the legal system; 
 Huge pendency of cases in the courts; 
 Low conviction rate; 
 The amount of fine prescribed in the laws is very less (from Rs. 10 to Rs. 
500); 
 Overcrowding of undertrials prisoners in prisons; 
 Very little use of modern technology in the legal system; 
 Delay in investigation, complicated investigation/ pending hearing process;  
 Delayed justice due to inadequate use of forensic evidence etc.,  
1.6 The Home Secretary stated that the pre -independence criminal laws were 
used by the British to protect their colonial interests, to rule the people and the 
country and to maintain their authority and supremacy over India. There was a 
need for comprehensive review of the criminal laws, especially the Indian Penal 
Code, Criminal Procedure Code, Indian Evidence Act and adapt them according to 
the present day needs and aspirations. Therefore, in accordance with the basic 
principles enshrined in the Constitution of India, it was proposed to bring about 
fundamental comprehensive changes in the framework of Indian criminal laws. 
With this objectives in view, the existing Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 would now be 
repealed and replaced by the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and the Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023, respectively. 

 
3 
 
Journey of the Sanhita  
1.7 The Home Secretary in his presentation before the Committee stated that the 
process of consultation before bringing the BNS, 2023 to the Parliament, ha d 
started way back in September, 2019. Consultations were held with various 
stakeholders to create a robust legal structure in the country. He stated that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs  had requested all Governors, Chief Ministers, Lt. 
Governors/ Administrators of States and Union Territories to send their 
suggestions on comprehensive amendments to the criminal laws. Suggestions were 
also sought from the then Chief Justice of India, Chief Justices of all High Courts, 
Bar Councils and Law Universities/ noted In stitutions. Members of Parliament 
(both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha) were also requested to share their valuable 
inputs on the amendment of existing criminal laws.  
1.8 It was further informed by the Home Secretary that subsequently a 
committee was constituted in March, 2020 under the Chairmanship of Vice 
Chancellor, National Law University (NLU), Delhi, to suggest reforms in existing 
criminal laws. That committee also invited suggestions from various quarters and 
in response it had received the view s of States, Union Territories, Supreme Court 
of India, various High Courts, legal experts, research centres, academicians, 
lawyers, civil society group, noted law universities, Members of Parliament, etc, 
from across the country. Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI); Director, 
Intelligence Bureau (IB); Director General, Bureau of Police Research & 
Development (BPR&D); and more than 1000 Indian Police Service officers also 
sent their suggestions to that committee. The NLU committee after extensive 
deliberations and research submitted its report to the Government in February, 
2022 with its recommendations. The Home Secretary also informed that a total of 
3200 suggestions were received by that committee which were consolidated in the 
report submitted by it.  
1.9 The Home Secretary also informed the Committee that all the suggestions 
received were in-depth examined by the Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation 
with the officers of the Ministry of Law & Justice and thereafter three new 
legislations, namely, Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 and Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 were drafted for re -enactment and 

 
4 
 
replacement of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.  
Observations/Recommendations 
1.10 The Committee has taken note of the milestone initiative of the 
Government for bringing these legislations , which shall form the bedrock of 
our criminal justice administration. The Committee is of the view that the 
process of consultation undertaken has been exhaustive and comprehensive. 
The Committee appreciates the work done by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and the Ministry of Law & Justice in undertaking this mammoth task of 
drafting comprehensive amendments to the criminal laws and 4 years of 
intense discussions for making new laws that imbibe Indian thought process 
and the Indian soul. A comprehensive review of criminal justice system in our 
country was a need of the hour to b ring it on par with the contemporary 
aspirations of the people.  Having taken a citizen -centric approach, these  
proposed laws serve as a reassurance to the Indian citizens. The Committee 
feels that these Bills are much -awaited and much-needed reforms as we ll as 
imperative for smooth and transparent functioning of our legal system.  
BNS, 2023 vis-a-vis IPC, 1860 
1.11 The Home Secretary in his presentation highlighted the major changes/ 
amendments that have been introduced in the proposed Sanhita vis-a-vis the IPC, 
1860. He informed that clauses in the proposed Sanhita  have been rearranged 
keeping in mind the  contemporary situation and priorities. The offences against 
women and children, murder and offences against the State have been given 
precedence in the Sanhita. The Sanhita has been streamlined, overlapping sections 
have been merged,  simplified and now it consist s of 356 sections as against 511 
sections in existing IPC, 1860.  Further, definitions scattered from section 6 to 
section 52 have also been br ought under one section now, whereas 18 sections 
already stands repealed & 4 sections relating to weights and measures are covered 
under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009. Important changes in the proposed 
legislation listed out by the Home Secretary, MHA are as under in detail:- 
 

 
5 
 
 
Newly added sections/ clauses:-  
i. ‘Transgender’ has been defined in accordance with the Transgender Persons 
(Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 under clause 2(9) of the proposed Sanhita. 
ii. ‘Community Service ’ has been introduced as one of punishments under 
clause 4(f). The proposed law prescribes this punishment for petty offences: 
like non-appearance in response to a proclamation, attempt to commit 
suicide, to compel or restraint exercise of lawful power of public servant, 
petty theft on r eturn of theft money, misconduct in public by a drunken 
person, defamation, etc. 
iii. Abetment by a person outside India has been made an offence under section 
48 to allow prosecution of person located in foreign country. 
iv. Sexual intercourse by employing deceitf ul means has been made a 
punishable offence under clause 69. “ Deceitful means ” shall include the 
false promise of employment or promotion, inducement or marr ying after 
suppressing identity. 
v. There was no provision to prosecute a person who employ or engage a child 
for the purpose of committing offences. A new section 93 has been adde d to 
make; hiring, employing, engaging or using a child for committing offences 
including sexual exploitation or pornography offence as if such person 
himself has committed the offence. 
vi. A new provision has been inserted in clause 101 relating to murder: “when a 
group of five or more persons acting in concert commit a murder on the 
ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language , personal 
belief or any other grou nd, each member of such group shall be punished 
with death or with imprisonment for life or imprisonment which shall not be 
less than seven years and shall also be liable to fine.” 
vii. The Supreme Court has struck down existing section 303 of IPC pertaining 
to punishment for murder by life -convict on the ground that it provided for 
only single punishment and the court had no discretion. Now, two alternate 
punishments which will run consecutively have been provided to remove the 
said infirmity under clause 102 of the new law. 
viii. As the instances of hit and run cases are on the rise, a new provision under 
clause 104(2) has been made 

 
6 
 
ix. To curb the rise in instances of organized crime and subversive activities 
against the country, clause 109 has been inserted in the new law which 
prescribes punishments for various offences of organized crime. 
x. A new clause  110 has been added in the proposed law which deals with 
‘petty organised crime.  
xi. A clause 111 has been added in the proposed law to provide for punishments 
in respect of acts of terrorism. 
xii. The law provides for new claus e under clauses 115(3) and 115(4) which 
covers the offences of ‘ grievous hurt resulting in persistent vegetative state 
or in permanent disability’ and ‘grievous hurt by a mob’ respectively. 
xiii. A new offence relating to act of endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity 
of India has been added under clause 150 in the new law. 
xiv. A new clause  224 has been added to punish those who attem pt to commit 
suicide with the intent to compel or restrain the exercise of any lawful power 
by a public servant and the punishment prescribed is imprisonment up to one 
year or with fine or with both or with community service. 
xv. A new clause 302 has been inse rted providing for imprisonment extendable 
to 3 years to deal with the offence of snatching which has become rampant 
these days particularly chain snatching or mobile snatching. Earlier there 
was no provision to address snatching. 
Repealed/deleted/omitted sections:- 
i. Section 377 of IPC has been deleted which is relating to unnatural sex 
against the order of nature. 
ii. Section 497 of IPC relating to adultery has been deleted as Supreme Court 
read down the provision. 
iii. The section 124A of IPC relating to sedition has been deleted. 
Amendments made to introduce gender neutrality:- 
i. Clause 75 about disrobing a woman and clause 76 about voyeurism have 
been made gender neutral. 
ii. Both boys and girls are procured for sexual exploitation. The word “ minor 
girl” in section 366A of IPC has been replaced with the word “ child” in 
clause 94 of the proposed law to cover both male and female children below 

 
7 
 
the age of 18 years and the offence of procurement has been made 
punishable. 
iii. The section 366B in IPC has been made gender neutral by replacing the 
phrase ‘importation of girl from foreign country ’ by ‘ importation of girl or 
boy from foreign country’ and has been introduced as clause  139 in the new 
law to cover the offence of importing into India any girl under the age of 
twenty-one years or any boy under the age of eighteen years with intent that 
such person will be forced or seduced to illicit sexual acts with another 
person. 
Other amendments/changes:- 
i. The reference to the year has been changed from “British calendar year” to 
“Gregorian calendar year” in clause 2(20). 
ii. The terms like idiot, lunatic, unsound mind, etc. have been replaced with 
intellectual disability, mental illness, etc. in line with the terms used in the 
Mental Health Care Act, 2017. 
iii. Imprisonment for life has been def ined as imprisonment for remainder of a 
person’s natural life under clause  4(b). 
iv. It has been proposed in the clause  70 that punishment for gang rape on a 
woman under the age of 18 years shall be life imprisonment (till remainder 
of that person's natural life) or death. 
v. Section 242 of IPC has been amended and introduced as clause  178 to 
protect the public who are merely  in possession of forged or counterfeit 
currency-notes or bank-notes etc. The amended law provides that possession 
of counterfeit currency note has to be accompanied by the intention to use 
the same as genuine. Also various s ections on counterfeiting of co ins, 
Government stamps, currency notes and bank notes have been merged. 
vi. The existing section 152 in IPC regarding ‘ assaulting or obstructing public 
servant when suppressing riot, etc. ’ has been divided into 2 parts and 
included under clause 193 of the  new  law, one for the offence of assault or 
obstruction of public servant and the other for threatening to assault or 
attempt to obstruct having different punishments and fine.  
vii. The relevant sections of IPC relating to ‘ promoting of enmity between 
groups on the ground of religion, race, place of birth, language, etc. and 
doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony’ have been amended so as 

 
8 
 
to cover offences committed through electronic communication- along with 
other means. 
viii. Sections 378 and 379 of IPC have been clubbed and introduced as clause  
301 under the new law. Additionally it also provides that in cases where 
theft value of the stolen property is less than Rs 5000/ -, and the person is 
first time convict, upon return of the value of property or restorat ion of the 
stolen property, he shall be punished with community service. 
ix. Section 380 of IPC relating to ‘ theft in dwelling house etc. ’ has been 
expanded to cover theft of idol, Government property, theft of vehicle and 
theft of any article/goods from the v ehicle. The corresponding clause  in the 
Sanhita is clause 303 – ‘theft in a dwelling house, or means of transportation 
or place of worship, etc.’ 
x. The offence of mischief in the relevant sections of IPC has been expanded 
and causing loss or damage to any pr operty including the property of 
Government or Local Authority has been made punishable with 
imprisonment extendable up to one year, or with fine, or with both (as 
against just 6 months or with fine, or both for offence of mischief presently).  
xi. Fines in th e IPC were very low (Rs.10 to Rs. 500). Similarly, the 
punishments for various offences also needed rationalization. Fines and 
terms of imprisonment for various offences have been enhanced in the 
proposed law. 
IPC, 1860 Provisions Omitted in BNS, 2023 
1.12 It has been pointed out that section 153AA of IPC that provides ‘punishment 
for knowingly carrying arms in any procession or organizing, or holding or taking 
part in any mass drill or mass training with arms’ has been omitted in the proposed 
Sanhita. The Committee opined that this omission may encourage groups having 
such tendencies to organize such drills with weapons etc., which might create 
enmity among various groups and also have potential to disturb the peace . In this 
regard, the MHA has commented th at this provision was passed by the Parliament 
in 2005 but its date of enforcement has not been notified since 2005. 
1.13 The Committee takes note of the submission made by the Ministry.  

 
9 
 
1.14 Members of the Committee and several stakeholders expressed objection to 
section 377 of IPC being completely deleted in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
The experts who appeared before the Committee stated that the Supreme Court in 
Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India (2018)  read down section 377 of IPC  as 
violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21 of t he Constitution as it penalizes 
consensual unnatural sexual acts of adults. It is a positive change especially for the 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender ( LGBTQ) community as the changing 
needs of the s ociety require the laws to change as well. Following this decision, 
section 377, IPC is now applied to prosecute only non-consensual sexual acts.  
1.15 The Committee understands that the unnatural sex which was an offence 
under section 377, IPC has been read down by the Supreme Court,  but non -
consensual sexual acts of unnatural order are still prosecuted under this section . 
Several Members expressed their opinion about section 377 IPC and were of the 
view that the remaining part of section 377 IPC, which is still valid, should be 
retained in the Sanhita, appropriately. 
Observations/Recommendations 
1.16 The Committee observes that in Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India  
(2018) case, a five -judge bench of the Supreme Court unanimously held tha t 
section 377 of IPC is in violation of Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21 of the 
Constitution of India. Provisions of section 377, however, remain applicable in 
cases of non -consensual carnal intercourse with adults, all acts of carnal 
intercourse with minors, and acts of bestiality. However, now, in the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, no provision for non-consensual sexual 
offence against male, female, transgender and for bestiality has been made.  
1.17 The Committee feels that to align with the objectives stated in the BNS’s 
Statement of Objects and Reasons, which inter-alia highlights the move 
towards gender-neutral offences, it is mandatory to reintroduce and retain the 
section 377 of the IPC. The Committee therefore recommends the 
Government to include section 377 of IPC, in the proposed law. 
1.18 Some Members of the Committee suggested for reintroduction of provision 
in section 497 of IPC relating to ‘adultery’ in the new law. Domain experts also 
expressed that it may be considered whether, for the sake of protecting the 

 
10 
 
institution of marriage, this section should be totally deleted or retained by making 
both men and women equally culpable under the law. MHA in its comments has 
expressed that the earlier section 497 under IPC relating to ‘adultery’ has been read 
down by Supreme Court of India and opined that the Committee may take a view 
in this regard. 
Observations/Recommendations 
1.19 The Committee notes that the Supreme Court Bench headed by the then 
Chief Justice of India, in the Joseph Shine v. Union of India, 2018 case struck 
down section 497 of IPC as it violated Article s 14, 15, and 21 of the 
Constitution. The Court held that this law was archaic, arbitrary and 
paternalistic and infringed upon a woman’s autonomy, dignity and privacy. 
The provisions under this section only penalised the married man, and 
reduced the married woman to be a property of her husband. In this regard, 
the Committee is of the view that the institution of marriage is considered 
sacred in Indian society and there is a need to safeguard its sanctit y. For the 
sake of protecting the institution of marriage, this section should be retained 
in the Sanhita by making it gender neutral. 
*****  

 
11 
 
Chapter – 2 
VIEWS OF STAKEHOLDERS 
Examination by Committee 
2.1 The Committee had extensive deliberations on different provisions of the 
BNS, 2023. Keeping in view the objectives envisaged in the proposed legislation 
and their impact on the people, the Committee decided to elicit the views of 
various domain experts inc luding various State Government/UT Administrations 
on the BNS, 2023. Besides, the Committee also received a number of suggestions/ 
comments from Members of Parliament and ex- Members of Parliament and other 
private individuals/ organisations.  
2.2 A total of 19 domain experts were invited to present their views on the 
Sanhita. Besides, the presentation on the Sanhita  by Home Secretary, the domain 
experts invited to participate in the deliberations included Senior Advocates 
practicing in Supreme Court & vario us High Courts; renowned Vice Chancellor & 
University Professors of Law; Retired Judges; Chairman, Law Commission of 
India; Retired Director Generals of Police; Former Additional Solicitor General of 
India; Former Special Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI); Additional 
Director General, Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D); and 
Chairperson, National Commission for Protection of Child Rights, etc  
Representatives from the Ministry of Law & Justice have also attended the 
meetings of the  Committee. The Committee held a total of 9 meetings to hear the 
views/opinions of the stakeholders.   
Views of Stakeholders  
2.3 Several important issues were deliberated extensively during interactions 
with the experts/stakeholders which are mentioned briefly in succeeding paras. 
2.4 All domain experts welcomed the initiative of the Government to introduce 
these legislations in the Parliament. They were of the view that the new proposed 
laws reflect the Government’s intention to align the legal system with the 21 st 
Century, emphasizing citizen centric legal structures, digital transformation, and a 
focus on justice rather than punishment.  The Committee was informed by these 
experts that the BNS, 2023 inter alia provides new age crimes of economic 

 
12 
 
offences; organized crime; cybercrimes; penal provision with adequate safeguards 
to protect the public order, safety and integrity of India that has been fleshed out by 
Parliament with a democratic mandate. The structure of BNS vis -à-vis IPC has 
been altered. Most of the changes have been done as per the stated aims and 
objective. Numerically, the number of sections have been reduced from 511 to 
356; and Chapters from 23 to 19. Twenty -four sections have been deleted; twenty-
two have been added; and a large number r e-arranged. In contrast to the IPC, the 
BNS is more structured and a variety of outdated and outmoded British era 
colonial provisions have also been removed.  
2.5 However, these changes will not result in sudden disruption of the system, as 
there is contin uity in the basic system of jurisprudence.  The presumption of 
innocence till proven guilty and the standards of proof required, i.e., beyond 
reasonable doubt remain intact.  The adversarial system and the appellate structure 
continue to remain. Through clause 356, BNS repeals IPC.  However, as has been 
settled by the Supreme Court, the provisions in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
that have been retained from the IPC will continue to be governed by judicial 
interpretation given to those provisions under the IPC. 
2.6 The experts inter alia shared their views on, introduction of “community 
service” as a punishment for the first time for petty offences; change in the 
definition of imprisonment for life under clause 4(b), defining it as imprisonment 
for the remainder of a person’s natural life ; clause 111(2)(i) of BNS which 
introduces the offence of terrorist act and provides life imprisonment without the 
benefit of parole as the possible punishment; offences against women and children 
which have been given precedence; sexual intercourse by dec eitful means; gang 
rape; mob lynching in clause 101(2); hit and run cases; offences against the State; 
abetment; offences against public tranquility; decriminalizing suicide; etc. 
2.7 The domain experts also enlightened the Committee about the legality of 
various clauses of the Sanhita by quoting the judgments of the Supreme Court and 
High Courts in some of the landmark cases such as –  Swamy Shraddhananda @ 
Murli v. State of Karnataka (2008); Union of India v.  V. Sriharan (2016); Tehseen 
Poonawala v. Union of India (2018); Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab (1980) case 
about imposing death penalty in rarest of rare cases; State of Maharashtra v. Bharat 
Shanti Lal Shah (2008) case which upheld the Constitutional validity of 

13 
Maharashtra Control of organized Crim e Act, 1999; State of Rajasthan v. Shera 
Ram (2012); S.G Vombatkere v. Union of India (2022) case which put section 
124A of IPC in abeyance.  
2.8 The stakeholders/experts made submissions before the Committee which 
inter alia focused extensively on some provisions in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023, which may be summarized as under: 
i. Clause 4(f) regarding ‘ community service ’: The experts observed that the
Sanhita does not offer any explanation or clarification of what constitutes
‘community service’, even though it provides for community service as a
penalty for minor offences.
ii. Clause 22 which provides for general exception for an act of a person with
mental illness: As regards this clause, the experts suggested that the phrase
“person of mental illness” should be replaced with “person of unsoun d
mind”.
iii. Clause 101(2) regarding ‘ mob lynching ’: Before the Committee, it was
suggested that mob lynching needs to be explicitly recognized as a distinct
offence, and a legal definition for the term ‘lynching’ should be included in
the proposed Sanhita.
iv. Clause 104(2) about ‘ hit-and-run’ offences: The stakeholders and the
experts opined that the expressions used in this provision such as ‘escaping
from the scene of the offence’ and ‘failure to report to the police officer or
magistrate’, are not clear and that this provision requires a re -evaluation to
remove any ambiguities.
v. Clause 109 about ‘ organised crime ’: This clause was appreciated by the
experts and considered it as a very effective addition in the substantive law.
However, suggested certain corrections in its drafting.
vi. Clause 110 regarding ‘ petty organized crime ’: The expression “ causes
general feelings of insecurity” in this clause was described as too vague and
ambiguous. The experts suggested that the phrase be explained/ defined.
vii. Clause 111 about ‘terrorist act’: The experts welcomed the introduction of a
specific provision relating to a terrorist act within the BNS and also
suggested that certain phrases in this provision require re -wording or
clarification.

14 
viii. Clause 150 regarding ‘ acts endangering sovereignty unity and integrity of
India’: The experts opined that it is a very progressive development without
compromising the security of the state.
ix. Clause 224 about ‘attempt to commit suicide to compel or restraint exercise
of lawful power’: The experts appreciated this clause for decriminalisin g
attempt to suicide unless done with intent to stop a public servant from
discharging his duty.
2.9 Besides, the domain experts also deliberated at great length about the need to 
abolish death penalty. It was observed that the proposed legislation has increased 
the number of crimes which can attract death penalty from 11 to 15; and the 
number of trial courts awarding death sentence are on the rise since the Bac han 
Singh v. State of Punjab case, 1980. The experts also presented the global trend 
wherein more countries, over the years, have abolished death penalty and held that 
the global opinion is overwhelmingly in favour of abolition of death penalty. The 
Committee was also informed about the research works done by social scientists 
such as Barbara Wootton which have proved that death penalty has no deterrent 
effect; and the statistical trend of the judgments given by the Supreme Court 
leaning away from death penalty. 
2.10 The Committee was informed that in 2023, the Supreme Court of India has 
either set aside all death penalties that were awarded to a convict or commuted it to 
life imprisonment as the cases did not fall under the category of rarest of rare cases 
as laid down in the case of Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, or the charges could 
not be proved. Even though death penalties are imposed by Trial Courts, the 
Supreme Court has only awarded death penalty to 7 people from 2007 to 2022. It 
seems there is confusion in capital sentencing at the Trial Court contributing to the 
poorly reasoned and consistently high number of death sentences. It is evident 
from the trend in Supreme Court that they are pro- life sentence and not pro- death 
penalty. 
2.11 It was also submitted before the Committee that the retention of death 
penalty as a punishment should be reconsidered in view of the large -scale debate 
on the philosophical and empirical aspects; the ‘rarest of rare case’ doctrine should 
be defined in more objective terms, if the death penalty has to be retained; various 
mitigation steps and processes in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita should 

15 
be demarcated, by taking guidance from the principles laid down by the Supreme 
Court of India; the ‘ Sentencing Councils’ si milar to the ones instituted in United 
Kingdom should be constituted in India to formulate guidelines on sentencing for 
the judiciary and to increase public understanding of sentencing; the role of the 
Sessions Courts and High Courts in cases where evidence is apparent but defence 
is ill -equipped should be articulated, as per the principles laid down by the 
Supreme Court; the provisions for mistrial should be inserted to cover instances 
where media influences outcomes, legal aid counsel fail to provide adequate 
defence, court does not act impartially or counsel refuse to represent accused - 
especially in cases involving religious or caste prejudice; the quasi -judicial boards 
should be made to exercise probation, commutation and remission, to provide 
greater scope for victims to have a say; and time -lines should be indicated for 
mercy petitions to be heard and disposed. 
Observations/Recommendations 
2.12  The Committee after considering the submissions regarding the death 
penalty has understood that the reason for a passionate argument against 
death penalty is that the judicial system can be fallible and to prevent an 
innocent person from being wrongly sentenced to death. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the matter may be left for the Government to 
consider.  
***** 

 
16 
 
Chapter - 3 
RECOMMENDATIONS ON CLAUSES 
3.1 During the course of the examination of the Sanhita, the Committee took 
note of concerns, suggestions and amendments expressed by various experts/ 
stakeholders on the Sanhita. Those suggestions were communicated to the Ministry 
of Home Affairs for their response. The observations and recommendations 
contained in the Report reflect an extensive scrutiny of submissions and all the 
viewpoints put forth before the Committee. Upon scrutiny of the replies received 
from the Ministry, the Committee is of the view that certain provisions of the 
Sanhita need to be redrafted to serve the intended purpose of the Sanhita in a better 
way. Various amendments to the Sanhita have been recommended by the 
Committee which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
Clause 1 – Short title, commencement and application 
3.2 This clause seeks to provide short title, commencement and application of 
the proposed legislation. 
Suggestions 
3.2.1  Members of the Committee raised concerns over the BNS being given 
a Hindi name. Concerns have been expressed that the Hindi name may be in 
violation of the Article 348 of the Constitution of India. The MHA in its response 
has mentioned that the Article 348 of the Constitution of India inter alia says that 
the authoritative texts of all Acts passed by the Parliament shall be in English 
language. As the text of the proposed law is in English, it is not in violation of 
Article 348 of the Constitution of India. 
Observations/Recommendations 
3.2.2  The Committee notes the wording of Article 348 of the 
Constitution of India which says that language to be used in the Supreme 
Court and in the High Courts, as well as for Acts , Bills and other legal 
documents shall be in English language. The Committee finds that as the text 
of the Sanhita is in English, it does not violate the provisions of Article 348 of 
the Constitution. The Committee is satisfied with the response of the Ministry 

17 
and holds that the name given to the  proposed legislation is not in violation of 
Article 348 of the Constitution of India. 
Clause 2 
3.3 This clause seeks to define certain words and expressions used in the 
proposed legislation such as act, omission, counterfeit, dishonestly, gender, good 
faith, offence, voluntarily, etc. 
Suggestions 
3.3.1  In BNS, definitions have been consolidated under clause 2(1) to (39) 
and General Explanations and expressions are under clause 3(1) to (9). All the 
definitions are alphabetically arranged.  
3.3.2  Domain Experts expressed their view that the IPC recognised only 
two genders: man and woman. It is a welcome change that the BNS recognises 
transgender as well. The Explanation to clause 2(9) of BNS lays down that 
‘transgender’ shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (k) of section 2 of the 
Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. In this regard, Experts were 
of the view that the referencing to any other legislation should be avoided and a 
full-fledged definition as assigned to the term ‘transgender’ in clause (k) of section 
2 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019, must be brought 
under clause 2 of the BNS. As per clause (k) of section 2 of the Transgender 
Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019, ‘transgender’ has been defined as 
follows:  
“(k) “transgender person” means a person whose gender does not match with the 
gender assigned to that person at birth and includes trans-man or trans-woman 
(whether or not such person has undergone Sex Reassignment Surgery or hormone 
therapy or laser 2 therapy or such other therapy), person with intersex variations, 
genderqueer and person having such socio -cultural identities as kinner, hijra, 
aravani and jogta.”  
3.3.3  Further, the Home Ministry informed the Committee that many 
definitions have been merged and listed alphabetically under clause 2 of BNS; 
gender has been redefined; word ‘British’ has been changed to ‘Gregorian’; the 
word ‘corporeal’ has been deleted; the word ‘juryman’ has been removed as jury 

18 
system no longer exists; the definition of expressions like – queen, British India, 
servant of Government, and Government of India have been deleted as they are not 
used anywhere in the IPC. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.3.4  The Committee lauds the efforts of the Government in logically 
reorganising the Chapter on ‘General Explanations’ in IPC containing 
sections from 6 to 52A into clause 2 on ‘definitions’ and clause 3 on ‘general 
explanations’ under Chapter I of BNS. Sub -clauses in ‘definitions’ have been 
alphabetically arranged which is not the case in IPC. The deleting of the 
expressions like British, Queen, etc., is also a welcome step in the direction of 
legal decolonisation.  
3.3.5  The Committee notes the widening of the ‘gender’ definition in 
the BNS. Considering the fact that the population of transgender persons is 
4,87,803 (as per the Census 2011), the Committee appreciates that the scope of 
gender under clause 2(9) has been expanded by the Government to make it 
more inclusive. This change gives effect to the rights of transgender persons 
recognised by the Supreme Court in the Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India 
case, 2018.  
3.3.6  The Committee also notes that the word ‘document’ mentioned in 
clause 2(7) may be defined in consonance with the definition of the word 
‘document’ in clause 2(c) of the Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the words ‘and includes electronic and digital 
records’ may be suitably incorporated in the existing definition proposed in 
the BNS.  
Clause 4 
3.4 This clause seeks to provide punishments for various offences provided 
under the provisions of the proposed Bill. 
Suggestions 
3.4.1  One of the domain experts informed the Committee that the meaning 
and consequences of the suggested alteration in the definition outlined in clause 

 
19 
 
4(b) of the BNS remains ambiguous. A potential interpretation suggests that clause 
4(b) merely reflects the legal stance that life imprisonment essentially equates to a 
sentence for the entire duration of a person’s life, with no changes to the 
Government’s authority regarding early release. In this context, it becomes unclear 
why certain provisions introduced by the BNS mention ‘imprisonment for life’ as a 
possible sentence, while others explicitly define it as ‘imprisonment for life, which 
shall mean the remainder of that person's natural life.’ It was therefore suggested 
that clause 4(b) of BNS should be worded as:  
“Imprisonment for life, which wherever hereinafter expressly specified, shall mean 
imprisonment for remainder of a person’s natural life.”  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.4.2  The Committee notes that the BNS proposes to change the 
definition of im prisonment for life, defining it as imprisonment for the 
remainder of a person’s natural life. The corresponding section 53 of the IPC 
provides only for the punishment of life imprisonment simpliciter though in 
certain offences of sexual nature, imprisonme nt for the remainder of a 
person’s natural life has been mentioned. The Courts have interpreted 
imprisonment for life simpliciter to mean ‘whole life sentence’.  The 
Committee recommends that suitable amendments may be made in 
consultation with the Ministr y of Law & Justice to make clause 4(b) more 
comprehensive. 
Suggestions 
3.4.3  Almost all domain experts pointed out that the ‘Community Service’ 
as a punishment has been provided for petty offences namely - public servant 
engaging in unlawful trade; non -appearance in response to a proclamation under 
clause 82 of BNS; attempt to comm it suicide to compel or restraint exercise of 
lawful power; first offence of theft of property (value under ₹ 5000); misconduct in 
public by a drunken person; and defamation. However, the Sanhita does not offer 
any explanation or clarification of what cons titutes ‘community service’, even 
though it provides for community service as a penalty for minor offences.   

 
20 
 
3.4.4  It was suggested that community service should be defined under the 
definitions clause of BNS.  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.4.5  The Co mmittee notes that the introduction of ‘Community 
Service’ under clause 4(f) of the BNS is a welcome step. This is a very 
commendable effort and a reformatory approach to tackle the delinquent.  Its 
introduction as a punishment was appreciated by all stakeholders as it shall 
not only reduce the burden on the pri son infrastructure by reducing the 
number of prison inmates but also improve the management of prisons in the 
country. However, the term and nature of ‘community service’ has not been 
specified.  
3.4.6  In this regard, the Committee observes that Community Service 
represents a form of unpaid work that offenders might be obligated to 
undertake as an alternative to incarceration. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the term and nature of ‘community service’ should be 
specified and suitably defined.  
3.4.7  The Committee also recommends that while inserting definition of 
the phrase ‘Community Service’ in the proposed law, a provision may also be 
made with regard to making a person responsible to supervise the punishment 
given in the form of community service.  
Clause 5 
3.5 This clause seeks to empower the appropriate Government to commute the 
sentence of death or imprisonment for life. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.5.1  The Committee after careful consideration notes that there is a 
discrepancy between clause 5 of BNS and clause 475 of BNSS with regard to 
commutation of death and life imprisonment sentences. The Committee 
recommends that clauses 5(a) and 5(b) of BNS may b e changed to bring it in 
conformity with clauses 475(a) and 475(b) of BNSS respectively.   
 

21 
Clause 22 
3.6 This clause seeks to provide that nothing is an offence which is done by a 
person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of mental illness, is incapa ble of 
knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary 
to law. 
Suggestions 
3.6.1  Various domain experts stated that section 84 of IPC corresponds to 
clause 22 in BNS. The Government has changed the word ‘unsound mind’ in 
section 84 of IPC to ‘mental illness’ in the corresponding clause 22 of BNS. Now, 
as per clause 22 of BNS, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is 
mentally ill. The definition of ‘mental illness’ in BNS is derived from the Mental 
Health Care Act, 2017 which says –  
‘mental illness means a substantial disorder of thinking, mood, perception, 
orientation or memory that grossly impairs judgment, behaviour, capacity to 
recognise reality or ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, mental conditions 
associated with the abuse of alcohol and drugs, but does not include mental 
retardation which is a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of 
a person, specially characterised by sub-normality of intelligence’.  
3.6.2  It was further suggested that the definition of “mental illness” under 
the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 is too wide in its scope and ambit and can include 
drug addiction and a lcohol addiction. It can only prove medical insanity and not 
legal insanity and therefore needs to be re-drafted. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.6.3  The Committee observes that in Indian Penal Code, the term a 
person of unsound mind carried a restricted interpretation as per judicial 
precedents and was available as a defence for the accused. The Committee is 
of the view that mere medical insanity cannot be a ground for acquittal of the 
accused and legal insanity is required to be proved for claiming a valid 
defence. However, the term mental illness is too wide in its import in 
comparison to unsound mind, as it appears to include even mood swings or 
voluntary intoxication within its ambit.  

22 
3.6.4  The Committee is also of the view that such a frivolous claim if 
recognised as a valid defence, will spell doom for the prosecution as all 
defences will be claimed under this provision, thereby defeating the very 
purpose of this Sanhita. The Committee accordingly recommends that the 
word ‘ mental illness ’ in this Sa nhita may be changed to ‘unsound mind’ 
wherever it occurs, as the present one can create problems during the trial 
stage as an accused person can simply show that he was under the influence of 
alcohol or drugs during the time of the commission of crime and  he cannot be 
prosecuted even if he has committed the crime without intoxication. 
Clause 23 
3.7 This clause seeks to provide that nothing is an offence which is done by a 
person under intoxication unless that the thing which intoxicated him was 
administered to him without his knowledge or against his will. 
Observations/Recommendations 
3.7.1  The Committee notes a minor correction and recommends that 
the word ‘unless’ may be replaced with the word ‘provided’. This change will 
make sure that the onus is on the accused to prove that he/she was intoxicated. 
Clause 48 
3.8 This clause  seeks to provide that a person abets an offence within the 
meaning of this Sanhita who, without and beyond India, abets the commission of 
any act in India which would constitute an offence if committed in India.  
Suggestions 
3.8.1  The Committee was informed that clause 48 is the new insertion in the 
Sanhita. Earlier, if a person sitting in India is abetting an offence, he could be 
prosecuted but now if somebody is outside the territorial jurisdiction and abetting a 
crime which is an offence in India, would also be subjected to criminal 
prosecution.   
3.8.2  It was further informed that in Fatima Bibi Ahmed Patel v. State of 
Gujarat (2008), it was held that section 4 of IPC extended the scope of territorial 
jurisdiction of Indian courts to try a case even if the cause of action took place 

23 
outside geographical limits of India and the Parliament indisputably may enact 
legislation having extra-territorial application but the same may be applied subject 
to the fulfilment of the requirement contained thereon. However, Members raised 
concerns as to how one could possibly execute or implement the sentence awarded 
to somebody who is not available physically.   
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.8.3  The Committee appreciates that the Government has introduced 
a new clause 48 in the proposed Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita to allow prosecution 
of a person located in foreign country who abets the commission of any act in 
India which would constitute an offence if committed in India. The Supreme 
Court of India in the year 2008 had opined that the Parliament may come out 
with an appropriate legislation in this regard. The Committee feels that 
addition of this provision has given effect to the opinion of the Supreme 
Court. Prior to this proposed provision, there was no law to prosecute a 
person located outside India and who abets the com mission of an offence in 
India. However, the Committee contemplates that execution of sentence 
outside territorial jurisdiction of the country would still be strictly governed 
by the international treaties. It is pertinent that clause 356 of BNSS - ‘Inquiry 
trial or judgment in absentia of proclaimed offender’ and clause 112 of BNSS 
– ‘letter of request to competent authority for investigation in a country or
place outside India’ are put to use with seriousness in order to bring the
offenders to justice under section 48 of BNS.
Clause 63 
3.9 This clause seeks to provide for definition of rape and various circumstances 
under which the offence shall be treated as rape. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.9.1  The Committee has noted that Supreme Court had read down the 
section 375 of IPC as far as the age of sexual consent for married women is 
concerned and had also raised the same to 18 years in conformity with 
POCSO Act. The Committee now  appreciates that the proposed Sanh ita has 
raised the age of sexual consent for married women provided under Exception 

24 
2 of this clause  from 15 to 18 years. It gives legislative effect to the Supreme 
Court judgement in Independent Thought v. Union of India case (2017). 
Clause 67 
3.10 This clause seeks to provide for punishment of a person to two years which 
may extend to seven years and also liable for fine if such person commits sexual 
intercourse with his own wife during separation whether under a decree of 
separation or otherwise, without her consent. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.10.1  The Committee notes minor modifications in this clause and 
recommends deletion of the words “or by person in authority” from the 
marginal heading of clause and deletion of the word ‘own’ in the firs t line of 
this clause as it is redundant. 
Clause 69 
3.11 This clause seeks to provide that whoever, by deceitful means or making by 
promise to marry to a woman without any intention of fulfilling the same, and has 
sexual intercourse with her, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence 
of rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine. 
Observations/Recommendations 
3.11.1  The Committee has noted minor typographical error which needs 
correction and recommends replacing the word “marring” in the Explanation 
to clause 69 with “marrying”. The Committee also recommends addition of 
the words “or marital status” after the words “suppressing identity” in the 
Explanation part of this clause, for the reason that there are plethora of ca ses 
that have been decided by the judiciary wherein the accused has deceived 
multiple women into marrying him or having sexual intercourse with him, 
without revealing that he is already married. Hence, ideally, concealing one’s 
marital status should also constitute “deceitful means”. 

25 
Clause 70 
3.12 This clause seeks to provide for punishment for gang rape, by one or more 
persons, to rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty 
years, but which may extend to life which shall mean imprisonment for the 
remainder of that person's natural life, and with fine and also provide for 
punishment for imprisonment for life or with death when a gang rape is committed 
with a woman under eighteen years of age. 
Suggestions 
3.12.1  The domain experts extensively deliberated on the topic of ‘gang rape 
of a woman’. With respect to the ‘gang rape’, the MHA has merged sections 376D, 
376DA, and 376DB of IPC and introduced it as clause 70(1) and (2) in the 
proposed legislation. The proposed clause 70 of the BNS has enhanced the age -
based qualifiers to consider gang rape of any minor women from 16 to 18 years. 
Further, it considers gang rape of all minor women as aggravated offence and 
punishes the offenders with imprisonment for life, which shall mean impr isonment 
for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and with fine, or with death. 
Observations/Recommendations 
3.12.2  The Committee welcomes the changes introduced in this clause 
vis-à-vis relevant sections of IPC. The removal of age -based qualifiers to 
consider gang rape of any minor woman as an aggravated offence is in line 
with the position under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences 
(POCSO). Further, the minimum sentence for gang rape of a minor woman 
under the Sanhita which is ‘whole life sentence’ is greater than the minimum 
sentence under POCSO which is regular imprisonment for 20 years.  
Clause 72 
3.13 This clause seeks to provide for punishment to offender who prints or 
publishes, the name or any matter which may make known the identity of any 
person against whom an offence under section 63 or section 64 or section 65 or 
section 66 or section 67 or section 68 is alleged or found to have been committed 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the victim), with imprisonment of either 

 
26 
 
description for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to 
fine subject to certain conditions.  
Suggestions 
3.13.1  The experts opined that the term ‘minor’ appears only once 
throughout the Sanhita  and it is in clause 72(2)(c), while the term ‘child’ is 
consistently used throughout the Bill. Further, all child-centric legislations such as 
the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015,  the POCSO Act, 2012, etc. use the term ‘child’ 
instead of ‘minor’. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.13.2  The Committee agrees with the opinion expressed by the experts 
and recommends that the word ‘minor’ in clause 72(2)(c) may be replaced 
with the word ‘child’. 
Clause 75 & 76 
3.14 These clauses seek to provide that whoever assaults or uses criminal force to 
any woman or abets such act with the intention of disrobing or compelling her to 
be naked, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which shall not be less than three y ears but which may extend to seven years, and 
shall also be liable to fine.  
3.15 These clauses seek  to provide for punishment for voyeurism, such as 
watching or capturing the image of a woman engaging in a private act in 
circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed 
either by the perpetrator or by any other person, at the behest of the perpetrator or 
disseminates such image and punishment thereof. 
Suggestions 
3.15.1  The provisions relating to ‘disrobing’ and ‘Voyeurism’ were taken up 
together for discussion during the meetings of the Committee with the domain 
experts. The experts opined that the offences of disrobing and voyeurism have 
been made gender neutral so far as the accused is concerned. The instances of 
perpetrators disseminating the images of woman as mentioned in clause 76 are on 
the rise in recent times. Such acts are an outrage on the modesty of a woman 

 
27 
 
thereby taking a toll on the lives of women leading to mental and physical agony 
particularly when such images go viral on the internet.  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.15.2  The Committee lauds the efforts of the Government in 
introducing gender neutrality wherever possible and in bringing all the 
offences committed on women and children under one chapter and in giving 
them precedence. As mentioned in the Statement of Objects,  it shows a citizen 
centric approach.  
Clause 93 
3.16 This clause seeks to provide that whoever hires,  employs or engages any 
person below the age of eighteen years to commit an offence shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description or fine prov ided for that offence as if the 
offence has been committed by such person himself. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.16.1  The Committee notes that clause 93 regarding hiring, employing 
or engaging a child to commit an offence is a very serious form of offence,  
which was, so far, not taken note of, even by the Courts and the Legislatures. 
The Committee lauds the efforts of the Government in introducing this new 
provision. 
Clause 94 
3.17 This clause seeks to provide that whoever, by any means whatsoever, 
induces any child below the age of eighteen years to go from any place or to do 
any act with intent that such child below the age of eighteen years may be, or 
knowing that it is likely that such child will be, forced or seduced to illicit 
intercourse with another person shall be punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Suggestions 
3.17.1  Home Ministry informed that Committee that the word ‘minor girl’ in 
the 366A of IPC has been replaced with the word ‘c hild’ in the corresponding 

28 
clause 94 of the BNS, which includes both male and female children below 18 
years of age. The modification was made to cover the cases of procurement of 
young boys for sexual exploitation. Further the Ministry in its response to a 
memorandum received by the Committee which suggested that the ‘definition of 
child should also include trans-kids’ informed the Committee that the definition of 
‘child’ may be considered for inclusion to define ‘child’ as a person below the age 
of 18 years and the person will include trans-kids. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.17.2  The Committee agrees with the suggestion provided by the 
Ministry in this regard and recommends that the word ‘child’ may be defined 
as ‘a person below the age of 18 years’ and included in the definition clause of 
the Sanhita. 
Clause 101 
3.18 This clause seeks to provide punishment for murder which shall be death or 
imprisonment for life, and also fine. Sub -Clause (2) further provides that when a 
murder is committed by a group of five or more persons acting in concert on the 
ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief 
or any other ground each member of such group shall be punished with death or 
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
Suggestions 
3.18.1  Domain experts debated that the offence under clause 101 of BNS is 
an aggravated form of murder and hence the alternate punishment of 7 years 
imprisonment may be removed. On the contrary, it was also debated that the 
alternate punishment of 7 years imprisonment may be provided under clause 
101(2) to allow courts to have discretion in deciding the punishment for the 
accused persons to match with the degree of their participation in the crime. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.18.2  The Committee notes that the Sanhita  includes a new provision 
for offence under clause 101(2) in line with the Supreme Court of India 

 
29 
 
recommendation in Tehsin S Poonawalla v. Union of India case (2018). The 
issue regarding provision of an alternate punishment of seven years 
imprisonment to an accused under clause 101(2), was debated in detail in the 
Committee. The Committee recommends to the Government that the 
punishment of 7 years from the clause may be deleted. It is also recommended 
that opinion of learned Attorney General and Solicitor General of the country 
may be sought in this regard.  
Clause 102 
3.19 This clause seeks to provide that whoever, being under sentence of 
imprisonment for life, commits murder, shall be pun ished with death or with 
imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder of that person's natural life. 
Suggestions 
3.19.1  The Home Ministry informed the Committee that the Supreme Court 
of India had struck down section 303 of IPC that provided punishment for murder 
by life -convict and that the BNS proposes to bring back the same by removing 
infirmity in the provision. It may be noted that section 303 of IPC imposes death 
penalty as a punishment for the offence of murder committed by a life convict. The 
Supreme Court in Mithu v. State of Punjab case (1983) held section 303 of IPC as 
arbitrary and unreasonable as there was only one mandatory death punishment. It 
took away judicial discretion and no right to sentence hearing. Now the proposed 
clause 102 of BNS has cured this defect by giving alternate punishments. A similar 
alternative punishment has been provided under clause 107(2) for attempt to 
murder (if hurt is caused) by life-convict. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.19.2  The Committee compliments the Government for providing a 
legislative effect to the judicial pronouncement of a five -judge bench of the 
Supreme Court of India in Mithu v. State of Punjab case (1983), thereby 
closing the arbitrary distinction between  persons committing murder and 
persons undergoing life imprisonment who committed murder. 
 

30 
Clause 104 
3.20 This clause seeks to provide that whoever causes the death of any person by 
doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years and shall also be liable to fine. It further provides that whoever causes 
death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable 
homicide and escapes from the scene of incident or fails to report the incident to a 
Police officer or Magistrate soon after the incident, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description of a term which may extend to ten years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
Suggestions 
3.20.1  It was suggested by some Members of the Committee that the 
punishment provided under clause 104(1) is high as compared to section 304A, 
IPC, which is proposed to be replaced by clause 104(1) in BNS. Members further 
noted that the punishment provided under section 304A is imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both, 
however, the punishment provided in the proposed law under clause 104(1) is 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. On this background, it was suggested that neither 
intention nor knowledge to cause death is present in the offence, therefore, 
enhancement of punishment from existing two years to seven years, may not be 
reasonable, hence the punishment provided under clause 104(1), BNS may 
accordingly be reduced. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.20.2  The Committee feels that the punishment provided under clause 
104(1) is high as compared to the provision for the same offence under section 
304A of IPC. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed 
punishment under clause 104(1) may be reduced from seven years to five 
years. 

 
31 
 
Suggestions 
3.20.3  The Committee was informed that currently hit and run cases resulting 
in death due to reckless and negligent driving are registered u/s 304A IPC, with 
maximum penalty of two years of imprisonment. The legal experts expressed that 
as per Delhi Road Crash Re port of 2021, there were 555 cases (46.01% of total 
cases) where the registration number of vehicles involved in crime were unknown, 
signifying hit and run cases. It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that 
the Supreme Court had in several cases observed on the inadequacy of law in view 
of increased vehicular accident. It was reasoned that to address this issue, the new 
provision has been introduced under clause 104(2), which was long overdue.  
3.20.4  The Committee understands that clause 104(2 ) has been introduced to 
cover the hit and run accidents and to ensure reporting of accident immediately. 
This is introduced with an aim to save the victim within the critical ‘Golden Hour’ 
a term introduced in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 in the year 2019. However, it is 
observed that the expression ‘hit and run’ has not been used in the Sanhita 
anywhere. It is unclear whether both the duties of not escaping from the scene of 
incident and reporting of the incident are to be fulfilled. The Sanhita  doesn’t 
contemplate specific situations where it may not be possible to fulfil both the 
duties. (Example: Perpetrator not having mobile phone or fear of violent assault 
from bystanders). It is also unclear whether the provision is limited to motor 
vehicle accidents only or not. There may be cases where the death of a victim is 
not immediate or the perpetrator is not present in the scene of incident. (Example: 
Falling of bridge, medical negligence). Further, it has also suggested that this 
clause violates Article 20 (3) of the Constitution.  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.20.5  The Committee is of the view that clause 104(2) may be against 
the Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India which says - ‘No person accused 
of an offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself’. But, the 
Supreme Court has widened the scope of  this immunity by interpreting the 
word ‘witness’ to include oral as well as documentary evidence so that no 
person can be compelled to be a witness to support a prosecution against 

 
32 
 
himself. Hence, further contemplation is required, if the Government still  
seeks to retain this new provision.  
3.20.6  The Committee recommends that if this provision has to be 
retained, the Government should limit the application of clause 104 (2) to 
motor vehicle accidents only. In addition to that, the expression ‘or fails’ 
should be replaced with ‘and fails’ to provide for easier prosecution and less 
harsh punishment to a perpetrator who fulfils either of the duties mentioned 
in clause 104 (2); and the time period within which the perpetrator has to 
report the incident shoul d be defined. In view of the above, the Committee 
recommends re-drafting this clause in consultation with the Ministry of Law 
& Justice. 
Clause 109 
3.21 This clause seeks to define organised crime to mean that continuing 
unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery, vehicle theft, extortion, land 
grabbing, contract killing, economic offences, cyber -crimes having severe 
consequences, trafficking in people, drugs etc., and punishment thereof. 
Suggestions 
3.21.1  The experts opined that the issue of ‘organised crime’ had not hitherto 
been specifically dealt with under the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Although certain 
States come up with laws like Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999 
(MCOCA); The Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti -social Activiti es (Prevention) 
Act, 1986 to deal with this issue, there was no Central law specifically on this 
subject. Until now, a host of Central legislations such as the Customs Act, 1962, 
the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, the Narcotics, Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, etc. were read with the relevant provisions of 
the IPC to deal with various facets of organised crime. Hence, there was a glaring 
need to have a provision specifically dealing with all aspects of organised crime 
with the scheme of the BNS.  
3.21.2  Experts were also of the opinion that the inclusion of this provision on 
‘organised crime’ in the BNS is very much laudable, however, certain terms in this 
provision such as ‘criminal organization’, lack a precise legal definition. Specific 

33 
phrases in clause 109 (5) penalize the act of harbouring, concealing, or attempting 
to do so for a person who “believes that his act will encourage or assist the 
commission of such a crime.” This phrasing is somewhat ambiguous and could 
potentially enc ompass harbouring or concealing someone who facilitates or aids 
the commission of organized crime. Therefore, it necessitates clarification. 
Moreover, it remains uncertain whether this provision covers foreign entities 
operating as criminal organizations from outside the territory of India. Further, 
there’s a lack of clarity regarding whether actual or constructive presence is 
required for individuals to act in concert for the purpose of committing the offence. 
3.21.3  Compared with the Maharashtra State la ws, MCOCA, clause 109(1) 
overall broadens the scope of organised crime. The main changes in clause 109 of 
BNS vis-a-vis MCOCA are: (i) Use of the expression 'acting in concert' in BNS 
which implies common intention or at least a common knowledge; (ii) Addition of 
corruption as a means to obtain benefit in BNS; (iii) Expanding the object by 
widening the definition of benefi t, much beyond pecuniary benefit; (iv) Unlawful 
activity expanded to cover all cognizable offences (instead of those punishable 
with 3 years or more as in MCOCA); and (v) Definition of organised crime 
syndicate has been broadened to include criminal organi sation also, though the 
minimum membership requirement for group has been increased from 2 to 3. 
However, the several terms like syndicate, gang, mafia, crime ring, gang 
criminality, racketeering and syndicated organised crime have been used but not 
defined anywhere in the Sanhita. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.21.4  The Committee observes that the existing laws were inadequate to 
tackle the menace of many serious offences like organised kidnapping, land 
grabbing, contract killing, extortion as also many major financial scams and 
large bank frauds. This will be a very effective addition in the substantive law. 
In this regard, the Committee recommends that the terms used like, gang, 
mafia, crime ring, gang criminality, racketeering, and serious offence may be 
defined; the term ‘criminal organization’ may also be defined clearly as it 
lacks a distinct definition, leaving uncertainty about the criteria for 
categorizing an organization as ‘criminal’ and any associated procedures for 
such classification.  

 
34 
 
3.21.5  As regards sub -clause (2), the Committee opines that there is no 
differentiation between the actual commission of an offence and an attempt to 
commit it. For purpose of introducing clarity,  the Committee recommends 
that the penal provision for attempt an d the commission of offence may be 
kept in separate clauses ; as regards sub -clause (3), the element of mens rea  
should be introduced; the expression ‘group of three or more persons’ in 
Explanation (ii) of clause 109 (1) may be changed to ‘group of two or m ore 
persons’ to widen the scope of this law; and special procedural provisions in 
respect of this offence should be provided in BNSS for effective application of 
this clause. In view of the above, the Committee recommends re -drafting this 
clause in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
Suggestions 
3.21.6  During the discussions in the Committee on this clause, it was pointed 
out that the words ‘knowingly that the said property is’ may be incorporated after 
the words ‘whoever, holds any property’ in sub -clause 6 of this section . It was 
reasoned out that ther e is a likely chance that a person who knowingly holds any 
property derived, or obtained from the commission of an organised crime or 
proceeds of any organised crime or which has been acquired through the organised 
crime syndicate funds may sell such property to a third person who for the purpose 
of this law has no knowledge of the fact that the property is obtained from the 
proceeds of an organised crime. In such a case, the third person in question shall 
attract sub-clause 6 of this clause and will be subject to punishment.  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.21.7  In view of the above deliberation, the Committee recommends 
that the expression ‘knowingly that the said property is’ should be 
incorporated after the words ‘Whoever, holds any property’ in the sub -clause 
6 of this clause in consultation with the Legislative Department to provide 
protection to the third person who may come to acquire the property from a 
person who knowingly held the property derived, or obtained from the 
commission of an organised crime. 
 

35 
Clause 110 
3.22 This clause seeks to define petty organised crime as any crime that causes 
general feelings of insecurity among citizens relating to theft of vehicle or theft 
from vehicle, domestic and business theft, trick theft, cargo crime, theft (attempt to 
theft, theft of personal property),etc., and punishment thereof. 
Suggestions 
3.22.1  The experts informed the Committee that some offences like 
organised snatching of any movable property, pick pocketing, theft from vehicles 
by trickery, card skimming, ATM theft create sense of insecurity among the 
citizen. Introduction of this new offence is commendable for inculcating sense of 
security. One particular issue which has been creating a lot of furore is the large 
scale paper leakage and other manipulations in public examinations. Organised 
gangs are involved in such incidents. The existing law being inadequate, recently 
some States have enacted special laws to curb unfair means in the exams.   
3.22.2  Clause 110 of the proposed BNS creates a new offence with no 
similar legislations. It penalises any crime that causes ‘general feelings of 
insecurity among citizens’ committed by organised criminal groups/ gangs 
including mobile organised crime groups. However, the term ‘general feelings of 
insecurity among citizens’ is too vague & ambiguous and needs to defined. 
Similarly, there are some more provisions which needs clarifications such as 
vehicle theft has appeared in both clauses 109 & 110, examination paper leak is not 
a serious offence, etc.  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.22.3  The Committee takes note of all the concerns raised and 
recommends that the Government should redraft this clause in consultation 
with the Legislative Department to address the issues.  
Clause 111 
3.23 This clause seeks to provide that a terrorist act shall mean using bombs, 
dynamite or other explosive substance to cause damage or loss due to damage or 
destruction of property or to cause extensive interference with, damage or 

 
36 
 
destruction to critical infrastructure, etc., with the intention to threaten the unity, 
integrity and security of India, to intimidate the general public or a segment 
thereof, or to disturb public order. 
Suggestions 
3.23.1  It was deliberated in the Committee that the BNS proposes to 
introduce the offence of ‘terrorist act’ in the general Law. Now, ordinary specified 
crimes may be considered ‘terrorist act’ if committed with particular intent and 
mode. Presently, the offences relating to terrorism are dealt in the special law 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA). Earlier such offences were 
dealt under the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA) 
and Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 (POTA). There was a pressing need for a 
specific provision relating to a terrorist act within the penal code and hence, clause 
111 of the BNS is a welcome introduction. However, certain phrases in this 
provision require re-wording or clarification. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.23.2  The Committee is of the view that – (i) The term ‘intimidation’ 
should be explained to settle the ambiguity in categorizing an act as a 
‘terrorist act’; (ii) The element of mens rea should be introduced in clause 
111(6); (iii) The expression ‘foreign count ry’ should be replaced with 
‘anywhere outside India’ to widen the scope of clause to cover all offenders 
located outside India; and (iv) The word ‘sovereignty’ should be added before 
the word ‘unity’ under clause 111(1). 
3.23.3  The Committee also recommen ds that a provision should also be 
made in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 to the effect that 
before registering a criminal case/ FIR under this clause, there has to be an 
approval by a senior police officer to decide whether the FIR be regist ered 
under UAPA or under the BNS. 
Clause 115 
3.24 This clause seeks to define voluntarily causing grievous hurt and punishment 
thereof. 

 
37 
 
Suggestions 
3.24.1  Domain expert had informed that the BNS has introduced a new 
provision against the crime of grievous hurt caused by mob without specifically 
using the term ’mob’. There are multiple instances where mobs cause grievous hurt 
to person(s) on grounds of religion and community but the said words are missing 
in clause 115(4). The expression 'acting in concert' is also missing in clause 115(4). 
The experts that appeared before the Committee also opined that clause 115(4) of 
the BNS, which addresses the aggravated form of grievous hurt inflicted by a mob, 
currently imposes the same punishment as that for grievous  hurt under clause 
115(2), even though the penalty should ideally be higher in the former case. 
Moreover, clause 114 of the BNS has made the definition of ‘grievous hurt’ more 
stringent by reducing the duration from twenty days as depicted in section 320 of 
IPC, 1860 to fifteen days.  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.24.2  The Committee feels that in order to cover crimes committed on 
grounds of community, it is essential to explicitly incorporate the word 
‘community’ in sub -clause 4 of this clause . It also feels that the expression 
'acting in concert' should also be included in the said sub-clause (4).  
Suggestions 
3.24.3  The Committee also discussed the memoranda submitted by various 
medical associations requesting to introduce provisions under clause 115 to 
penalise acts of violence against healthcare service personnel. It was submitted 
before the Committee that unlike in any other professions, the healthcare 
professionals are vulnerable to violent attacks by the relatives of patients, in cases 
where patie nts die during treatment. Such violent attacks against healthcare 
personnel are prevalent throughout the country and there is a need to provide some 
legal safeguards for the benefit of healthcare workers. 
3.24.4  The Home Ministry in its response submitted to the Committee that 
the general penal provisions are applicable to all and no distinction is made in the 
penal laws for any class of person. Everyone is equal in the eyes of law. The State 
is duty bound to protect life of all its citizens including doct ors and professionals 

38 
like media persons, advocate, bankers, charted accountants, etc. Making a special 
provision for doctors and other health care professionals may give rise to similar 
demands from other professionals like media persons, advocate, bankers, charted 
accountants, etc. Further, the Home Ministry also informed the Committee that the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has a proposal to introduce a ‘Medical 
Professionals Act’ to provide safeguards to healthcare workers against violent 
attacks, and that the Ministry of Home Affairs would take update from the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare on the same. 
Observations/Recommendations 
3.24.5  After considering the concerns of the healthcare personnel, the 
Committee opines that the Government may consider introducing 
appropriate legal safeguards for healthcare workers. 
Clause 130 
3.25  This clause seeks to provide punishment for assault or crimi nal force 
to deter public servant from discharge of his duty. 
Suggestions 
3.25.1  Some Members of the Committee submitted that section 353 under 
IPC which corresponds to clause 130 of BNS is widely misused by the public 
servants in the name of deterrence. As the political demonstrations are the soul of 
democracy and there are instances in the past when political leaders were harassed 
and falsely convicted for offences under this section of IPC while demonstrating, 
therefore, it was suggested that the punishment under this clause may be reduced.  
Observations/Recommendations 
3.25.2  The Committee agrees with the submission made before it and 
recommends that the punishment provided under clause 130 may be reduced 
from two years to one year.  
Clause 150 
3.26 This clause seeks to provide for acts endangering sovereignty unity and 
integrity of India and punishment thereof. 

 
39 
 
Suggestions 
3.26.1  The Committee deliberated on this clause very extensively. It was 
noted that the most prominent aspect of the BNS is the complete repeal of the 
sedition law. However, the provisions within the sedition law that are suggested for 
removal are somehow retained in clause 150 in mild form addressing actions that 
jeopardize the sovereignty, unity, and integrity of India. 
3.26.2  Under the existing sedition law, section 124A of the IPC, individuals 
found guilty of promoting discontent or disaffection towards the Government 
could face life imprisonment a nd a possible fine. This broadly covers various acts 
such as spoken or written words, signs, or gestures that express hatred or contempt 
towards the state or excite disaffection against it. The proposed clause 150 of the 
BNS, 2023 maintains concerns for na tional integrity and sovereignty but rephrases 
the offence. Instead of using “ sedition” the new clause  terms the act as 
“endangering sovereignty, unity, and integrity of India” 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.26.3  The Committee compliments the Government in deleting the term 
‘sedition’ from criminal law by rephrasing it without compromising the 
security of the state. The Committee finds it as a very progressive 
development. It is observed that in the Explanation part of clause , due to 
typological error the  sentence remains incomplete. The words ‘ do not 
constitute offence under this section’ may be added at the end.  
Clause 157 
3.27 This clause seeks to provide for abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a 
soldier, sailor or airman from his duty and punishment thereof. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.27.1  The Committee recommends the rearrangement of clause by 
replacing the words ‘ Air Force subject to the Acts referred to in section 165 of 
the Government of India’ with ‘Air Force of the Government of India subject to 
the Acts referred to in section 165’. 
 

 
40 
 
Clause 167 TO 175 
3.28 Clauses 167 to 175 in Chapter IX deals with the offences relating to 
Elections.  
Suggestions 
3.28.1  Some members of the Committee were of the view that the Chapter 
IX on ‘offences relating to elections’ is not required in the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita as the special Act i.e Representation of People Act, 1951, deals with them 
in detail and all provisions under t his Chapter IX may be incorporated suitably in 
the Representation of People Act, 1951. 
3.28.2  The Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that there is a basic 
difference between the Representation of People Act, 1951 and the proposed 
clauses under Chapter IX of BNS. The Representation of People Act applies only 
to Parliament and Legislative Assemblies elections whereas the offences listed 
under Chapter IX of BNS apply to all elections which include Municipal elections 
and Panchayat elections. If the Chapter IX is removed, then the State Governments 
will have to enact separate Laws to cover other elections. This shall lead to lack of 
uniformity in laws governing elections other than Parliamentary and Legislative 
Assembly elections.  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.28.3  In view of the above submission, the Committee agrees with the 
views of the Ministry and opines that the Chapter IX may continue to be a 
part of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita. 
Clause 198 
3.29 This clause seeks to provide for punishment for non- treatment of victim and 
punishment thereof. 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.29.1  The Committee notes a minor correction in this clause and 
recommends that the words ‘ section 449 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 

41 
Sanhita, 2023’ may be replaced with the words ‘ section 397 of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023’. 
Clause 272 
3.30 This clause seeks to provide for adulteration of food or drink intended for 
sale and punishment thereof. 
Suggestions 
3.30.1  Domain experts submitted that the offence of adulterating food 
articles is very serious. It is a threat to public health safety. Consumption of 
adulterated food leads to adverse health consequences and can be fatal. There have 
also been numerous instances of adverse impact on public health due to food 
adulteration and therefore there is a need to enhance the punishment and the fine 
under this clause. It was also mentioned that most of the cases under the Prevention 
of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 are acquitt ed because of procedural lapses in 
sample collection, etc.  
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.30.2  In view of the serious health issues that can result from the 
consumption of adulterated food, the Committee observes that the offence of 
food adulteration affects the public at large and that the punishment provided 
for the offenders under this clause is inadequate. The Committee recommends 
that a minimum punishment of six months be provided for the offence under 
this clause along with a minimum fine of ₹25,000. 
Clause 273 
3.31 This clause seeks to provide for sale of noxious food or drink and 
punishment thereof. 
Suggestions 
3.31.1  Suggestion to increase the punishment and fine for offence under this 
clause was also discussed. Consumption of noxious food leads to adverse health 
consequences and can be fatal. There have also been numerous instances of 
adverse impact on public health due to consumption of noxious food.  

42 
Observations/ Recommendations 
3.31.2  In view of the serious health issues that can result from the sale of 
noxious food, the Committee observes that the offence has the potential to 
affect the public at large and that the punishment provided for the offenders 
under this clause is inadequate. The Committee recommends that a minimum 
punishment of six months be provided for the offence under this clause along 
with a minimum fine of ₹10,000. 
3.31.3  The Committee also undertook a detailed examination of the text 
of each clause and noted that the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita contains some 
typographical and grammatical errors. The Committee is of the view that 
even a single typographical or grammatical error in the Sanhita has the 
potential to be misinterpreted and diluting the intent of the provision. Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to rectify such typographical 
and grammatical errors. 
3.31.4  The Committee agrees with  the remaining clauses of the Sanhita 
without any changes. The Committee strongly believes that the newly 
introduced Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita would strengthen law and order and also 
focus on simplifying legal procedure so that ease of living is ensured to the 
common man. It shall also make the proposed law relevant to the 
contemporary situation and provide speedy justice to common man.
 
***** 

43 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
The Committee has taken note of the milestone initiative of the 
Government for bringing these legislations, which shall form the bedrock of 
our criminal justice administration. The Committee is of the view that the 
process of consultation undertaken has been exhaustive and comprehensive. 
The Committee appreciates the work done by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and the Ministry of Law & Justice in undertaking this mammoth task of 
drafting comprehensive amendments to the criminal laws and 4 years of 
intense discussions for making new laws that imbibe Indian thought process 
and the Indian soul. A comprehensive review of criminal justice system in our 
country was a need of the hour to bring it on par with the contemporary 
aspirations of the people.  Having taken a citizen-centric approach, these 
proposed laws serve as a reassurance to the Indian citizens. The Committee 
feels that these Bills are much -awaited and much-needed reforms as well as 
imperative for smooth and transparent functioning of our legal system.  
(Para 1.10) 
T he Committee observes that in Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India  
(2018) case, a five -judge bench of the Supreme Court unanimously held that 
section 377 of IPC is in violation of Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21 of the 
Constitution of India. Provisions of section 377, however, remain applicable in 
cases of non -consensual carnal intercourse with adults, all acts of carnal 
intercourse with minors, and acts of bestiality. However, now, in the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, no provision for non -consensual sexual 
offence against male, female, transgender and for bestiality has been made.  
(Para 1.16) 
T he Committee feels that to align with the objectives stated in the BNS’s 
Statement of Objects and Reasons, which inter-alia highlights the move 
towards gender-neutral offences, it is mandatory to reintroduce and retain the 
section 377 of th e IPC. The Committee therefore recommends the 
Government to include section 377 of IPC, in the proposed law. 
(Para 1.17) 

 
44 
 
 The Committee notes that the Supreme Court Bench headed by the then 
Chief Justice of India, in the Joseph Shine v. Union of India, 201 8 case struck 
down section 497 of IPC as it violated Articles 14, 15, and 21 of the 
Constitution. The Court held that this law was archaic, arbitrary and 
paternalistic and infringed upon a woman’s autonomy, dignity and privacy. 
The provisions under this section only penalised the married man, and 
reduced the married woman to be a property of her husband. In this regard, 
the Committee is of the view that the institution of marriage is considered 
sacred in Indian society and there is a need to safeguard its sanctit y. For the 
sake of protecting the institution of marriage, this section should be retained 
in the Sanhita by making it gender neutral. 
(Para 1.19) 
  The Committee after considering the submissions regarding the death 
penalty has understood that the reason for a passionate argument against 
death penalty is that the judicial system can be fallible and to prevent an 
innocent person from being wrongly sentenced to death. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the matter may be left for the Government to 
consider.  
(Para 2.12) 
 The Committee notes the wording of Article 348 of the Constitution of 
India which says that language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the 
High Courts, as well as for acts, bills and other legal documents shall be in 
English language. The Committee finds that as the text of the Sanhita is in 
English, it does not violate the provisions of Article 348 of the Constitution. 
The Committee is satisfied with the response of the Ministry and holds that 
the name given to the proposed l egislation is not in violation of Article 348 of 
the Constitution of India. 
(Para 3.2.2) 
 The Committee lauds the efforts of the Government in logically 
reorganising the Chapter on ‘General Explanations’ in IPC containing 
sections from 6 to 52A into clause  2 on ‘definitions’ and clause 3 on ‘general 

 
45 
 
explanations’ under Chapter I of BNS. Sub -clauses in ‘definitions’ have been 
alphabetically arranged which is not the case in IPC. The deleting of the 
expressions like British, Queen, etc., is also a welcome ste p in the direction of 
legal decolonisation.  
(Para 3.3.4) 
 The Committee notes the widening of the ‘gender’ definition in the BNS. 
Considering the fact that the population of transgender persons is 4,87,803 (as 
per the Census 2011), the Committee appreciat es that the scope of gender 
under clause 2(9) has been expanded by the Government to make it more 
inclusive. This change gives effect to the rights of transgender persons 
recognised by the Supreme Court in the Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India 
case, 2018.  
(Para 3.3.5) 
 The Committee also notes that the word ‘document’ mentioned in 
clause 2(7) may be defined in consonance with the definition of the word 
‘document’ in clause 2(c) of the Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends th at the words ‘and includes electronic and digital 
records’ may be suitably incorporated in the existing definition proposed in 
the BNS.  
(Para 3.3.6) 
 The Committee notes that the BNS proposes to change the definition of 
imprisonment for life, defining it as imprisonment for the remainder of a 
person’s natural life. The corresponding section 53 of the IPC provides only 
for the punishment of life imprisonment simpliciter though in certain offences 
of sexual nature, imprisonment for the remainder of a person’ s natural life 
has been mentioned. The Courts have interpreted imprisonment for life 
simpliciter to mean ‘whole life sentence’.  The Committee recommends that 
suitable amendments may be made in consultation with the Ministry of Law 
& Justice to make clause 4(b) more comprehensive. 
(Para 3.4.2) 

 
46 
 
 The Committee notes that the introduction of ‘Community Service’ 
under clause 4(f) of the BNS is a welcome step. This is a very commendable 
effort and a reformatory approach to tackle the delinquent.  Its introduction 
as a punishment was appreciated by all stakeholders as it shall not only 
reduce the burden on the prison infrastructure by reducing the number of 
prison inmates but also improve the management of prisons in the country. 
However, the term and nature of ‘community service’ has not been specified.  
(Para 3.4.5) 
 In this regard, the Committee observes that Community Service 
represents a form of unpaid work that offenders might be obligated to 
undertake as an alternative to incarceration. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the term and nature  of ‘community service’ should be 
specified and suitably defined.  
(Para 3.4.6) 
 The Committee also recommends that while inserting definition of the 
phrase ‘Community Service’ in the proposed law, a provision may also be 
made with regard to making a person responsible to supervise the punishment 
given in the form of community service.  
(Para 3.4.7) 
 The Committee after careful consideration notes that there is a 
discrepancy between clause 5 of BNS and clause 475 of BNSS with regard to 
commutation of death and life imprisonment sentences. The Committee 
recommends that clauses 5(a) and 5(b) of BNS may be changed to bring it in 
conformity with clauses 475(a) and 475(b) of BNSS respectively.   
(Para 3.5.1) 
 The Committee observes that in Indian Penal Code, the term a person 
of unsound mind carried a restricted interpretation as per judicial precedents 
and was available as a defence for the accused. The Committee is of the view 
that mere medical insanity cannot be a ground for acquittal of the accused 
and legal i nsanity is required to be proved for claiming a valid defence. 

47 
However, the term mental illness is too wide in its import in comparison to 
unsound mind, as it appears to include even mood swings or voluntary 
intoxication within its ambit.  
(Para 3.6.3) 
The Committee is also of the view that such a frivolous claim if 
recognised as a valid defence, will spell doom for the prosecution as all 
defences will be claimed under this provision, thereby defeating the very 
purpose of this Sanhita. The Committee accord ingly recommends that the the 
word ‘mental illness’ in this Sanhita may be changed to ‘unsound mind’ 
wherever it occurs, as the present one can create problems during the trial 
stage as an accused person can simply show that he was under the influence of 
alcohol or drugs during the time of the commission of crime and he cannot be 
prosecuted even if he has committed the crime without intoxication. 
(Para 3.6.4) 
The Committee notes a minor correction and recommends that the 
word ‘unless’ may be replaced with the word ‘provided’. This change will 
make sure that the onus is on the accused to prove that he/she was intoxicated. 
(Para 3.7.1) 
The Committee appreciates that the Government has introduced a new 
clause 48 in the proposed Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita to allow prosecution of a 
person located in foreign country who abets the commission of any act in 
India which would constitute an offence if committed in India. The Supreme 
Court of India in the year 2008 had opi ned that the Parliament may come out 
with an appropriate legislation in this regard. The Committee feels that 
addition of this provision has given effect to the opinion of the Supreme 
Court. Prior to this proposed provision, there was no law to prosecute a  
person located outside India and who abets the commission of an offence in 
India. However, the Committee contemplates that execution of sentence 
outside territorial jurisdiction of the country would still be strictly governed 
by the international treaties. It is pertinent that clause 356 of BNSS - ‘Inquiry 
trial or judgment in absentia of proclaimed offender’ and clause 112 of BNSS 

 
48 
 
– ‘letter of request to competent authority for investigation in a country or 
place outside India’ are put to use with serious ness in order to bring the 
offenders to justice under Section 48 of BNS. 
(Para 3.8.3) 
 The Committee has noted that Supreme Court had read down the 
section 375 of IPC as far as the age of sexual consent for married women is 
concerned and had also raised th e same to 18 years in conformity with 
POCSO Act. The Committee now appreciates that the proposed Sanhita has 
raised the age of sexual consent for married women provided under Exception 
2 of this clause from 15 to 18 years. It gives legislative effect to th e Supreme 
Court judgement in Independent Thought v. Union of India case (2017). 
(Para 3.9.1) 
 The Committee notes minor modifications in this clause and 
recommends deletion of the words “or by person in authority” from the 
marginal heading of clause and de letion of the word ‘own’ in the first line of 
this clause as it is redundant. 
(Para 3.10.1) 
 The Committee has noted minor typographical error which needs 
correction and recommends replacing the word “marring” in the Explanation 
to clause 69 with “marrying ”. The Committee also recommends addition of 
the words “or marital status” after the words “suppressing identity” in the 
Explanation part of this clause, for the reason that there are plethora of cases 
that have been decided by the judiciary wherein the ac cused has deceived 
multiple women into marrying him or having sexual intercourse with him, 
without revealing that he is already married. Hence, ideally, concealing one’s 
marital status should also constitute “deceitful means”. 
(Para 3.11.1) 
 The Committee welcomes the changes introduced in this clause vis -à-vis 
relevant sections of IPC. The removal of age-based qualifiers to consider gang 
rape of any minor woman as an aggravated offence is in line with the position 

49 
under Protection of Children from Sexual O ffences ( POCSO). Further, the 
minimum sentence for gang rape of a minor woman under the Sanhita which 
is ‘whole life sentence’ is greater than the minimum sentence under POCSO 
which is regular imprisonment for 20 years.  
(Para 3.12.2) 
The Committee agrees  with the opinion expressed by the experts and 
recommends that the word ‘minor’ in clause 72(2)(c) may be replaced with 
the word ‘child’. 
(Para 3.13.2) 
The Committee lauds the efforts of the Government in introducing 
gender neutrality wherever possible and in bringing all the offences 
committed on women and children under one chapter and in giving them 
precedence. As mentioned in the Statement of Objects,  it shows a citizen 
centric approach.  
(Para 3.15.2) 
The Committee notes that clause 93 regarding hiring, employing or 
engaging a child to commit an offence is a very serious form of offence, which 
was, so far, not taken note of, even by the Courts and th e Legislatures. The 
Committee lauds the efforts of the Government in introducing this new 
provision. 
(Para 3.16.1) 
The Committee agrees with the suggestion provided by the Ministry in 
this regard and recommends that the word ‘child’ may be defined as ‘a person 
below the age of 18 years’ and included in the definition clause of the Sanhita. 
(Para 3.17.2) 
The Committee notes that the Sanhita includes a new provision for 
offence under clause 101(2) in line with the Supreme Court of India 
recommendation in Te hsin S Poonawalla v. Union of India case (2018). The 
issue regarding provision of an alternate punishment of seven years 

 
50 
 
imprisonment to an accused under clause 101(2), was debated in detail in the 
Committee. The Committee recommends to the Government that  the 
punishment of 7 years from the clause may be deleted. It is also recommended 
that opinion of learned Attorney General and Solicitor General of the country 
may be sought in this regard.  
(Para 3.18.2) 
 The Committee compliments the Government for providing a legislative 
effect to the judicial pronouncement of a five -judge bench of the Supreme 
Court of India in Mithu v. State of Punjab case (1983), thereby closing the 
arbitrary distinction between persons committing murder and persons 
undergoing life imprisonment who committed murder. 
(Para 3.19.2)
 
 The Committee feels that the punishment provided under clause 104(1) 
is high as compared to the provision for the same offence under section 304A 
of IPC. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed punishment 
under clause 104(1) may be reduced from seven years to five years. 
(Para 3.20.2 ) 
The Committee is of the view that clause 104(2) may be against the 
Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India which says - ‘No person accused of 
an offence shall b e compelled to be a witness against himself’. But, the 
Supreme Court has widened the scope of this immunity by interpreting the 
word ‘witness’ to include oral as well as documentary evidence so that no 
person can be compelled to be a witness to support a p rosecution against 
himself. Hence, further contemplation is required, if the Government still 
seeks to retain this new provision.  
(Para 3.20.5 ) 
 The Committee recommends that if this provision has to be retained, 
the Government should limit the application of clause 104 (2) to motor vehicle 
accidents only. In addition to that, the expression ‘or fails’ should be replaced 
with ‘and fails’ to provide for easier prosecution and less harsh punishment to 

51 
a perpetrator who fulfils either of the duties mentioned in clause 104 (2); and 
the time period within which the perpetrator has to report the incident should 
be defined. In view of the above, the Committee recommends re -drafting this 
clause in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
(Para 3.20.6) 
The Committee observes that the existing laws were inadequate to 
tackle the menace of many serious offences like organised kidnapping, land 
grabbing, contract killing, extortion as also many major financial scams and 
large bank frauds. This will be a very effective addition in the substantive law. 
In this regard, the Committee recommends that the terms used like, gang, 
mafia, crime ring, gang criminality, racketeering, and serious offence may be 
defined; the term ‘criminal organization’ may also be defined clearly as it 
lacks a distinct definition, leaving uncertainty about the criteria for 
categorizing an organization as ‘criminal’ and any associated procedures for 
such classification.  
(Para 3.21.4 ) 
As regards sub -clause (2), the Committee opines that there is no 
differentiation between the actual commission of an offence and an attempt to 
commit it. For purpose of introducing clarity, the Committee re commends 
that the penal provision for attempt and the commission of offence may be 
kept in separate clauses; as regards sub -clause (3), the element of mens rea  
should be introduced; the expression ‘group of three or more persons’ in 
Explanation (ii) of clause 109 (1) may be changed to ‘group of two or more 
persons’ to widen the scope of this law; and special procedural provisions in 
respect of this offence should be provided in BNSS for effective application of 
this clause. In view of the above, the Committ ee recommends re-drafting this 
clause in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
(Para 3.21.5) 
In view of the above deliberation, the Committee recommends that the 
expression ‘knowingly that the said property is’ should be incorporated after 
the words ‘Whoever, holds any property’ in the sub-clause 6 of this clause in 

 
52 
 
consultation with the Legislative Department to provide protection to the 
third person who may come to acquire the property from a person who 
knowingly held the property derived, or obtained from the commission of an 
organised crime. 
(Para 3.21.7) 
The Committee takes note of all the con cerns raised and recommends 
that the Government should redraft this clause in consultation with the 
Legislative Department to address the issues.  
(Para 3.22.3 ) 
 The Committee is of the view that – (i) The term ‘intimidation’ should 
be explained to settle  the ambiguity in categorizing an act as a ‘terrorist act’; 
(ii) The element of mens rea should be introduced in clause 111(6); (iii) The 
expression ‘foreign country’ should be replaced with ‘anywhere outside India’ 
to widen the scope of clause to cover al l offenders located outside India; and 
(iv) The word ‘sovereignty’ should be added before the word ‘unity’ under 
clause 111(1). 
(Para 3.23.2) 
 The Committee also recommends that a provision should also be made 
in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 to the effect that before 
registering a criminal case/ FIR under this clause, there has to be an approval 
by a senior police officer to decide whether the FIR be registered under UAPA 
or under the BNS. 
(Para 3.23.3) 
 The Committee feels that in order to cover crimes committed on 
grounds of community, it is essential to explicitly incorporate the word 
‘community’ in sub -clause 4 of this clause. It also feels that the expression 
'acting in concert' should also be included in the said sub-clause (4).  
(Para 3.24.2) 

53 
After considering the concerns of the healthcare personnel, the 
Committee opines that the Government may consider introducing 
appropriate legal safeguards for healthcare workers. 
(Para 3.24.5 ) 
The Committee agrees with the submission made before it and 
recommends that the punishment provided under clause 130 may be reduced 
from two years to one year.  
(Para 3.25.2 ) 
The Committee compliments the Government in deleting the term 
‘sedition’ from criminal law by rephrasing it without compromising the  
security of the state. The Committee finds it as a very progressive 
development. It is observed that in the Explanation part of clause, due to 
typological error the sentence remains incomplete. The words ‘ do not 
constitute offence under this section’ may be added at the end.  
(Para 3.26.3 ) 
The Committee recommends the rearrangement of clause by replacing 
the words ‘ Air Force subject to the Acts referred to in section 165 of the 
Government of India’ with ‘Air Force of the Government of India subject to the 
Acts referred to in section 165’. 
(Para 3.27.1) 
In view of the above submission, the Committee agrees with the views of 
the Ministry and opines that the Chapter IX may continue to be a part of 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita. 
(Para 3.28.3 ) 
The Committee notes a minor correction in this clause and recommends 
that the words ‘section 449 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023’  
may be replaced with the words ‘ section 397 of the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023’. 
(Para 3.29.1) 

54 
In view of the serious health issues that can result from the consumption 
of adulterated food, the Committee observes that the offence of food 
adulteration affects the public at large and that  the punishment provided for 
the offenders under this clause is inadequate. The Committee recommends 
that a minimum punishment of six months be provided for the offence under 
this clause along with a minimum fine of ₹25,000. 
(Para 3.30.2 ) 
In view of the serious health issues that can result from the sale of 
noxious food, the Committee observes that the offence has the potential to 
affect the public at large and that the punishment provided for the offenders 
under this clause is inadequate. The Committee recommends that a minimum 
punishment of six months be provided for the offence under this clause along 
with a minimum fine of ₹10,000. 
(Para 3.31.2) 
The Committee also undertook a detailed examination of the text of 
each clause and noted that the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita contains some 
typographical and grammatical errors. The Committee is of the view that 
even a single typographical or grammatical error in the Sanhita has the 
potential to be misinterpreted and diluting the intent of the provision. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to rectify such typographical 
and grammatical errors. 
(Para 3.31.3) 
The Committee agrees with the remaining clauses of the Sanhita 
without any changes. The Committee strongly believes that the newly 
introduced Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita would strengthen law and order and also 
focus on simplifying legal procedure so that ease of living is ensured to the 
common man. It shall also make the proposed law relevant to the 
contemporary situation and provide speedy justice to common man. 
(Para 3.31.4) 

55 
NOTES OF DISSENT 

DISSENT NOTE ON THE PROPOSED (1) BHARATIYA NYAYA 
SANHITA BILL, 2023 ('BN'), (2) BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA 
SANHITA BILL, 2023 ('BNSS') AND (3) THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA 
BILL, 2023 ('BSB') 
Without any prior intimation and consultation, the Modi Government 
introduced three news Bills on August 11th, 2023 in the Lok Sabha, namely; 
s. 
No 
EXISTING ACT PROPOSED ACT TO REPLACE THE 
EXISTING ACT 
1. Indian Penal Code, 1860 - 511 
Sections (Including Amendments 
and Additions) 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) 
- 356 total S ections, 174 Se ctions
changed, 8 new Sections added and
22 Sections repealed
2. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 - 
528 Sections (Including 
Amendments and Additions) 
Bharatiya    Nagarik   Suraksha 
Sanhita (BNSS) - 533 total 
Sections, 160 Section s changed, 9 
New Sections and 9 Sections 
repealed 
3. Indian   Evidence   Act,  1872  - 185 
Sections (Including Amendments 
and 
Bharatiya  Sakshya  (BSB) - 170 
total S ections. 23 Se ctions 
changed, 1 new Section added, and 
5 Sections repealed. 
j    Additions) 
The three captioned criminal law Bills cannot be supported in good conscience. 
***1. 
I. The following key issues arise from a reading of the Draft Bills;
1. The Law is vastly the same. Only renumbered and re-arranged; - Far
from being novel, or an intuitive re-evaluation of legal provisions, practices
and offences, the bills are significantly identical in both language and content
to the Acts tha t t hey seek to replace. The proposed bills have largely
reproduced the laws as they exist presently. Arguably, the biggest "change"
has been the renumbering of Sections. This exercise, experts opine, would be
responsible for large scale confusion resulting in unnecessary delay in the
functioning of courts and the policing agencies.
1 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya 
Sabha 

Furthermore, changing  the positionin g of th e provi sions within the 
statues does not make a law mo re effective or better in any way. ***. 
2. HM's Speech in the Parliament  dated 11.0 8. 2023 - The Hon'bl e
HM himself highlighted the substantive changes in his speech on th e
floor of Parliament (dated 2023).
The sum total of these changes which the HM himself has chosen to 
highlight is 25. Even by the most verbose of standards, these could have 
been introduced to the existing law through a simple five page amendment 
bill. There was thus no need to carry out such a comprehensive and 
unnecessary reform for merely 12 substantive amendments (by the HM's 
own examples). In fact, even in the statements put out by the Government, 
it is these examples that are being reiterated. ***2. Even the statement of 
objects and reasons appended to the Bills fails to provide a satisfact ory 
justification. 
3. Imposition of Hindi - Parliament represents all of us. Not just the Hindi
Speakers. Using language which is deliberately exclusionary for the tit le
cannot be justified especially when a Hindi version of the Bill is always
published officially and simultaneously. The usage of sanskritised Hindi
in these bills goes against the spirit of Article 348 of the Indian
Constitution which states that the text of all Bills introduced in Parliament
must be in English, a necessary requirement for a country as diverse as
India.
4. Essentially Colonial - While the Government has hailed the Bills as a
move towards shedding the colonial nature of criminal laws, the Bills
still retain  the colonial spirit of the current laws. For example, most
punishments for offences under the IPC have been retained. Further,
punishments for some offences have been made harsher and the death
penalty has been added  for at least four new crimes such as mob
lynching, organised crime, terrorism and rape of a minor. The removal
of law on sedition was a mere symbolic  gesture as it is replaced by a
Clause 150 BNS which is much more tyrannical and colonial in its
essence. Ultimately, there has been no shift towards a rehabilitative
approach to criminal laws. The proposed law retains the  retributive
nature of the colonial laws. In other words, aside from empty rhetoric
about shedding the colonial spirit there is no clear illustration of how
2 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya 
Sabha 

the Bills seek to actually do so. 
 
5. Poorly Drafted Laws - The version of the Bills that have been released to 
the public is rife with substantive errors that alter the very meaning of the 
law to the extent of rendering the law absurd and otiose. For example, 
Clause 23 of 'The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill ' states "Nothing is an 
offence which is done by a  person who, at the tim e of  doing  it, is , by 
reason   of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that 
he is doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law; unless that the thing 
which intoxicated  him was administered to  him without his knowledge or 
against his will." In other words, the law exempts offences committed by 
persons who are under a voluntary state of intoxication and at the same 
time punishes acts that are done in an involuntary state of intoxication. 
Such serious infirmities is clear evidence of lack of research and a proper 
consultation process. 
 
6. Lack of Public Consultation - The manner, timing and secrecy v.rith 
which the exercise has been carried out reeks of legislative mala fides. Law 
making, especially on a subject of such wide-ranging importance, has to 
be on  done in the full light of day with the widest possible consultation 
amongst stakeholders. The Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy 2014 
expressly prescribes a thirty -day consultation period with the 
public at large before it may be cleared by Cabinet for 
introduction in Parliament. This consultation, done through a 
sharing of the draft in the public domain, must be accompanied by 
(i) justifications for its enactment, (ii) financial  implications and (iii) 
estimation of the  laws' impact.  Finally, comments received 
through the consultation must be published on the  website of the 
nodal ministry. In this case, a committee was constituted, its members 
and mandate shielded from public scrutiny, and its recommendations not 
even subject to peer-review, were taken as gospel. No justification is given 
for why such a large-scale reform was effected to make changes  to a 
handful of sections, by the Home Ministers own statement in Parliament. 
***3. 
7. Enhances the Union Government's policing powers without any checks 
and balances - The changes that have been made to the existing laws also 
enhance the coercive powers of State and its instrumentalities which allow 
for the exercise of its powers at a hitherto unknown scale at which  these 
powers can be exercised by the State. For example, the laws in general have 
                                                      
3 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya 
Sabha 

expanded the scope of police's power without introducing measures to keep 
its activities in check. From the data of the Government, provided as a 
response to Unstarred Question No. 1459 for 26.07.2022 raised in 
parliament, one can see that 4484 persons were victims of Custodial Deaths 
in India between 20 2 0 -20 2 2 . While the Bill seeks to enhance the time 
for which a person can be kept in police custody, there exists no protective 
measures to provide safety to the accused persons under police custody 
which is bound to adversely affect the safety of detainees. 

Page 1 of 7 
 
Dissent note by N R Elango to the report no.24 6 of the Department 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on The 
Bharathya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
 
 
Re; The necessity of repealing The Indian Penal Code, 1860 is not 
made clear. 
 
 I state that the three repealing bills namely, The Bharatya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023, The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and The 
Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 were introduced in the Lok Sabha and 
referred to this committee. The statement of objects and  reasons of the 
bill at paragraph 4, it is stated that the Indian Penal Code, 1860 is being 
repealed to streamline provisions relating to offences and penalties and 
to deal effectively with the offences of organized crime and terrorist 
activities. It is al so stated that the fines and punishments for various 
offences have been suitably enhanced. It is also stated at para 5 that the 
“notes on clauses explain the various provisions of the bill ”. But none of 
the notes on clauses is explaining anything, but they  are mere repetition 
of the clauses. It is not made clear why punishment of several sections 
was increased, the reasons behind such increased punishment and the 
rational of it are not explained in the notes on clauses. It seems randomly 
punishments are increased for few offences without assigning any reason. 
 
 But for rearranging the sections, enhancing punishments without 
reasons and omitting sections 124A, 377 and 497 IPC, no new definition, 
explanation is given in the new bill. Such an exercise of merely  
rearranging the section will lead to lot of confusion to understand what is 
the new section for the offences vis -a-vis Indian Penal Code, 1860. This 

Page 2 of 7 
 
will take at least 5 – 10 years for the lawyers and the judges  to correlate 
them. The difficulties of the investigating agency will be much more and 
we cannot expect every constable to carry a comparative chart of Indian 
Penal Code and The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita.  
  Hence, I suggest that the arrangement of sections should be 
maintained as in IPC,1860 and the amendments can be brought to the 
sections wherever it is required, instead of repealing the entire Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 and enacting The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
  
The draft report at page 4 para 1.10, it is stated as follows : 
“The Committee appreciates the work done by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Law & Justice in 
undertaking this mammoth task of drafting comprehensive 
amendments to the criminal laws and 4 years of intense 
discussions for making new laws that imbibe Indian  thought 
process and the Indian soul. A comprehensive review of 
criminal justice system in our country was a need of the hour 
to bring it on par with the contemporary aspirations of the 
people. Having taken a citizen -centric approach, these 
proposed laws serve as a reassurance to the Indian citizens. 
The Committee feels that these Bills are much- awaited and 
much-needed reforms as well as imperative for smooth and 
transparent functioning of our legal system.” 
 
I find no new clause that imbibe Indian thought process and the Indian 
soul. This bill is also not having any citizen centric approach. I am of the 
view that there is no provision introduced, no new definition of the offences 
is given except adding or deleting some words in the existing provisions, 
adding new offences, which are already punishable under special 

Page 3 of 7 
 
enactments, enhancing the punishment of few offences without any 
rationale. This bill achieves nothing. 
 
Re. Clause (1) The Bill is named in Hindi. 
 
 In fact, during the discussions, it was informed that it was not a Hindi 
name but a Sanskrit name. It was suggested that the naming of the bill in 
Hindi/Sanskrit is not violating Art.348 of the Constitution of India. It was 
stated that though the name is in Hindi/Sanskrit it is transliterated in 
English. The observations of the committee that “the text of Sanhita is in 
English, it does not violate the provisions of Art.348” is unacceptable. 
Such observation is incorrect, illegal and violative of the Constitution of 
India. This exercise of the Government amounts to grossly violating the 
linguistic feeling of the Indians. I see every reason to denote this exercise, 
as an attempt to impose Hindi on non -Hindi speaking Indians. Already a 
lot of discontent is brewing in the ground because of naming these bills in 
Hindi/Sanskrit. I appeal the government to desist from naming these bills 
in Hindi and name it as the Indian Penal Code, 2023  and not The 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
 
  
 I state that in most of the definition clauses the word ‘denotes’ is 
sought to be amended as ‘means’. The word ‘denotes’ is having wider 
meaning than that of ‘means’. Lot of confusion will prevail if the word 
‘denotes’ is replaced with ‘means’. In a penal statute while defining the 
words it is always better to have a wider meaning than that of a narrower 
meaning. Hence, in all those definitions where the word ‘denotes’ is 
replaced with ‘means’, the word ‘denotes’ shall be retained. 
 

Page 4 of 7 
 
Re. Clause (102) The Judgement of the Supreme Court in Mithu vs State 
of Punjab is to the effect that there is no intelligible differentia in sentencing 
a person only with death sentence under section 303 of IPC. Though in 
the present attempt for clause 102 of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, an 
alternate sentence to the death is provided, n amely imprisonment for life 
which means imprisonment for the remainder of the person’s life, this also 
will fall foul of the judgement in Mithu vs State of Punjab. In my opinion 
clause 102 is to be omitted.  
 
 
Re. Clause (109, 110) In addition to the recom mendations of the 
committee, I am of the view that since “Organised crime” is now sought to 
be introduced in the general law . The views of the State where Special 
Acts for organized crime is enacted and effectively implemented have to 
be consulted in this regard. Otherwise, those states will lose the 
opportunity of enforcing their special enactment for organized crimes, as 
they will be falling under the ‘occupied field’ of this Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita. Then, those states may be compelled to reenact those acts and 
to get the assent of the President of India. 
 
Re. Clause (111) Most of the offences defined under this clause are 
already defined and punishable under Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 
1967. UAPA, 1967 is a Special Enactment, it is having a special procedure 
with regard to investigation, bail etc. If the same provisions are 
incorporated in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, it will cause lot of confusion 
in the matter of registration  of a case, investigation, inquiry and trial of a 
particular offence. I apprehend that the offenders who fall under both the 
enactments will attempt to escape the rigor of UAPA, 1967. Even the 
recommendation at paragraph 3.23.3 is to the effect that an approval by 

Page 5 of 7 
 
a senior police officer, whether an FIR be registered under t he UAPA or 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita is required. This itself shows that there is an 
overlapping between UAPA and Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita and such 
overlapping will cause confusions. How a Police officer, though he is a 
senior officer can decide under whi ch enactment a person is to be 
prosecuted. This is to be decided by the court. 
 
 
Re. (115) The suggestions of the committee with respect to clause 101, 
that it recommends to the Government that the punishment of 7 years be 
deleted and also the opinion of the Attorney General and Solicitor General 
of the country may be sought in this regard, is equally applicable to this 
clause. So, in my opinion, the advice of the Attorney General and Solicitor 
General is also to be taken for this clause as well.  
 
 
In my o pinion clause 45 defines abetment of a thing, which reads as 
follows: 
 
Abetment of a thing is according to the bill is by 3 methods: 
a) Instigation 
b) Conspiracy and 
c) Intentionally aiding 
 
This definition is same as that of section 107 of Indian Penal Code, 1860. 
It may be noted that the Indian Penal Code was enacted in 1860 and 
section 120 A and 120 B of Indian Penal Code, which fall under Chapter 
– VA of the Indian Penal Code, were inserted only through Act.8 of 1913. 
It can be seen from 1860 to 1913, the offenc e of conspiracy was not an 
independent offence and classified only as an abetment. However, after 

Page 6 of 7 
 
introduction of Chapter – VA in 1913, necessary amendments were not 
brought in section 107 of Indian Penal Code to delete an act of conspiracy 
as a part of abetment. Prosecuting a person as a conspirator under 
section 61 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita is different from prosecution a 
person as an abettor through conspiracy under section 45 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita. If a person is prosecuted as an abettor t hrough 
conspiracy, the prosecution will have two disadvantages: 
1) A conspiracy is an independent offence. Such offence can be 
independently tried and is punishable. Whereas a person termed as 
an abettor through conspiracy, he cannot be prosecuted 
independently for such offence. 
2) If a person is charged for conspiracy under clause 61 Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, Clause 8 of Bhartiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 which is 
similar to section 10 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  can be 
pressed into service by the prosec ution. But if he is prosecuted as 
an abettor through conspiracy, it will be very difficult for the 
prosecution to take advantage of clause 8 of the Bhartiya Sakshya 
Bill, 2023 which is sec 10 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872.  
 
Hence, I am of the opinion that clause 45 of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 
should be amended by omitting sub clause b of clause 45.  
 
 
 I am of the opinion that explanation 5 to clause 46 is to be omitted. 
Explanation 5 is self – contradictory. It says it is not necessary for the 
commission of offence of abetment by conspiracy that the abettor should 
concert the offence with the person who commits it . In the next 
sentence it says that it is sufficient if he engages in the conspiracy. The 
word ‘concert’ means, “acting together pursuant to an agreement, whether 

Page 7 of 7 
 
formal or informal”. The word conspiracy also denotes agreement to 
commit a crime. In both the words, agreement is the basic element. 
Agreement to commit an offence is not alone a conspiracy, agreement to 
do a legal act through illegal means is also conspiracy. Hence, this 
explanation is self-contradictory. So, in my opinion explanation 5 to clause 
46 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita will cause more confusion and hence 
the same need to be omitted.   
 
 
 

 
 
DISSENT  ON 
CRIMINA L 
LA W BILLS  
 
 
DRA  FT REPORT OF PA RLIA  MENTA  RY 
STA NDING COMMITTEE ON HOME A 
FFA IRS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D E R E K O ’ B R I E N 

 
 
 
General statutes of criminal law are here for the ages. They will affect the 
lives of the whole populati on of India including the economically weaker 
Sections and the marginalized. General statutes of criminal law have to be 
crafted with utmost care, it is imperative to scrutinize and dissent when 
necessary. The following is an examination of the Criminal La w Bills, 
aiming to shed light on their potential ramifications and stimulate critical 
discussion. In an effort to ensure that the principles of justice and fairness 
remain at the heart of our legal system, this dissent seeks to address 
concerns, ensure due process is followed, spark debate, and advocate for a 
more equitable and balanced approach to the new criminal legislations under 
consideration of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs. 

INDEX 
 
 
 
 
 
Particulars Page 
No. 
1. Methodology and Procedure of this Committee in Drafting 
these Reports 
1 
2. Demerits of the Draft Report 
9 
3. Annexure A- Intervention- Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs (Part I) 
23 
4. Annexure B- Intervention- Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs (Part II) 
38 
5. Annexure C - Letter to Chairman Dated 19 August 2023 
58 
6. Annexure D - Letter to Chairman Dated 11 September 2023 
59 
7. Annexure E - Letter to Chairman Dated 13 September 2023 
61 
8. Annexure F - Letter to Chairman Dated 14 September 2023 
64 
9. Annexure G - Letter to Chairman Dated 22 September 2023 
67 
10.  Annexure H - Letter to Chairman Dated 27 September 2023 
68 
11. Annexure I - Letter to Chairman Dated 3 October 2023 
74 
12.  Annexure J - Letter to Chairman Dated 23 October 2023 
76 
13. Annexure K - Letter to Chairman Dated 30 October 2023 
81 

4  
A. METHODOLOGY AND PROCEDURE OF THIS COMMITTEE 
IN DRAFTING THESE REPORTS 
 
 
 
I. NO NEED FOR NEW BILLS WHICH ARE 93% COPY PASTE 
LEGISLATION 
The fact that approximately 93% of the existing Crimi nal Law remains 
unaltered, 18 out of 22 chapters have been copy pasted in these new bills 
implies that the pre-existing legislation could have been effortlessly 
modified to incorporate these specific changes. It appears that there was no 
requirement for an  entirely new legislative framework, mostly for the 
purpose of renumbering  and reorganizing the existing legal provisions. 
***. Suspicion is generated whether the effort is in vain and malafide. 
II. *** COMMITTEE PROCEDURE AND AVOIDING QUALITY 
STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION 
I would like to highlight the glaring gaps in the methodology of drafting 
this report. The current process lacked inclusivity in stakeholder 
consultations required for legislation of such magnitude. ***. Many of 
the people called to testify had strong leanings or were associated with the 
ruling dispensation. Multiple verbal and written requests made by the 
undersigned to invite experts and practitioners to testify before this 
committee were, unfortunately, ***. (See Annexure- E, F, G, H, J) 
Also, a broader spectrum of opinions, especially from those directly 
impacted, must be sought to ensure a comprehensive understanding and 
representation of diverse perspectives.  *** Yet again, important 
legislation is being *** and imposed. 
In 2020 , the Ministry of Home Affairs established a committee led by Prof. 
Ranbir Singh , the former Vice Chancellor of the National Law University, 
                                                      
*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

5  
Delhi, to undertake a comprehensive review of the three codes of criminal law. 
However, it is essential to note tha t this committee was marked by a striking 
lack of diversity. All its members were male, and what's more, they shared not 
only a common gender but also a similar social identity, professional 
background, and experience. 
 
Regrettably, the committee lacked re presentation from various marginalized 
groups, including women, Dalits, religious minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ 
individuals, and those with disabilities. The absence of such diverse 
perspectives is a significant concern, particularly when addressing matters of 
such magnitude and societal impact. 
In a country as diverse as India, where a wide range of perspectives, interests, 
and concerns need to be addressed, diverse and extensive stakeholder 
consultation is essential to ensure that laws are fair, effective, and capable of 
addressing the complex and multifaceted challenges facing the nation. It not 
only enhances the quality of legislation but also promotes a more inclusive and 
accountable democratic process.***1. 
 
Lakhs of stakeholders including judges, lawyer s, students, paralegals, will 
have to relearn the laws. Relearning new laws can disrupt established legal 
practices  and  procedures, potentially  causing  confusion  and delays  in the  
legal system. Significant resources may be required to update educatio nal 
materials, provide training, and ensure stakeholders are adequately prepared to 
work with the new laws. Relearning new laws can be a complex and resource -
intensive process that has a significant impact on the legal community, 
potentially affecting the delivery of legal services and the consistency of legal 
decisions. 
In any case, the government has only sought inputs after the introduction 
of this bill. By seeking input before introducing a bill, the government 
can involve a broader range of perspective s, including those of experts, 
                                                      
1 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

6  
affected communities, and the general public. This would have ensured 
that diverse voices are considered in the lawmaking process, promoting 
inclusivity and democratic values. 
I strongly recommended some consultations due to their critical 
importance. (Please refer Annexure A) 
III. NAMES OF THESE BILLS SHOULD BE IN ENGLISH AS WELL 
AS HINDI. 
The names of these Bills being in Hindi is not suitable for the whole of 
the country. This can not only be called Hindi imposition but is also 
unconstitutional. Article 348 of the Constitution mandates that English 
language be used in Acts and Bills. It reads- 
"348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts 
and for Acts, Bills, etc 
… 
 
(b) the authoritative texts 
 
(i) of all Bill s to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either 
House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a 
State, 
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all 
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and 
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye laws issued under this 
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a 
State, shall be in the English language.” 
But the report still considers it to be constitutional. In fact it even goes on to 
propose use of Hindi in more places by saying- “The Committee recommends 
that the word "Act" in the first proviso may be replaced with "Adhiniyam" as is 
already used in preceding portions of the Bill.” This goes against the letter and 

7  
spirit of Article 348 of the Constitution. 
 
Funnily enough, the report of the committee in Hindi only came a night before 
the adoption. 
Suggestion: NAMES SHOULD BE IN ENGLISH AS WELL AS HINDI. When 
translated into English, the titles of these bills would be: the Indian Justice 
Code, 2023, the Indian Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023 and the Indian 
Evidence Bill, 2023. If the new law is titled the Indian Citizen’s Protection 
Code, 2023. It will reflect the idea of a procedural shield for citizens against 
the State in the criminal process. 
Use of these laws in local languages is also essential to enhance understanding 
and engagement, ensuring that information is accessible to a broader audience 
and fostering a deeper connection with the con tent, thereby promoting 
effective communication and inclusivity. 
IV. LACK OF DISCUSSION AMONGST MEMBERS OF THE 
COMMITTEE AND LIMITING THE MEANINGFUL 
PARTICIPATION OF THE OPPOSITION. 
It is clear that a consultation process unfolded, with ***. The urgency to 
conclude discussions on bills that could significantly alter our nation's 
safety and law and order regulations raises concerns about the democratic 
and informed nature of the decision -making process. General statutes of 
criminal law are here for the ages. General statutes of criminal law will 
affect the lives of the poor. General statutes of criminal law have to be 
crafted with utmost care. 
Furthermore, ***2. As a result, meetings were scheduled during the 
festive season and when members had prior constitu ency engagements, 
programs and events. ***. Allowing the opposition only a meager hour to 
scrutinize and critique these bills is far from an exhaustive exercise in 
                                                      
2 2*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

8 
scrutiny, which is  vital to ensuring that such consequential legislation is 
thoroughly examined and rigorously debated. 
V. ***3 TO ADOPT REPORT RIDICULES LEGISLATIVE
SCRUTINY- ONLY A STUNT BEFORE ELECTION 2024.
***.
***
Given the far -reaching consequences associated with these bills, they 
necessitate a meticulous examination of every provision. Basic drafting errors 
require close scrutiny, and various aspects, including the rationale behind 
specific provisions and their potential impact on the public, demand thorough 
examination and extensive discussion. Hasty passage of these bills may result 
in unintended consequences and contribute to public dissatisfaction. 
The urgency with which these bills are being pushed through stands in stark 
contrast to the deliberative process observed by the same Home Affairs 
Committee in discussing Police Training, Modernization, and Reforms. It is 
worth noting that the committee, initially constituted in September 2020 and 
later reconstituted in September 2021, took approximately three years to 
deliberate on that subject, underscoring the importance of careful 
consideration and comprehensive evaluation in the legislative process. 
*** 
3*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

9  
VI. A RESULT OF RUSHING AND ***- NUMEROUS 
DRAFTING ERRORS 
It is imperative to emphasize the presence of basic drafting errors within 
these bills, as these errors can have a profound impact on the 
interpretation and implementation of the proposed laws. Correcting 
these errors is not just a m atter of procedural correctness; it is crucial 
for ensuring the clarity and effectiveness of the legislation. 
My colleagues Shri N. R. Elango and P. Chidambaram have diligently 
pointed out a multitude of drafting errors , underscoring the need for 
thorough revisions. However, the rushed nature of this legislation has 
left limited room for addressing these critical concerns. 
Furthermore, it is regrettable that the committee did not allow for more 
extensive consultations, ***4. The absence of such deliberation  and 
due process further compounds the risk of perpetuating these drafting 
errors, ultimately diminishing the quality and efficacy of the proposed 
laws. 
VII. ABSENCE OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT 
 
The manner in which this legislative process has been conducted raises 
legitimate concerns about lack of transparent and honest legislative 
intent. Crafting laws, especially those bearing such extensive 
significance, should ideally be carried out with utmost transparency 
and inclusive consultation among all concerned parties. 
The Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy of 2014, which is designed to ensure 
a fair and open process, mandates a thirty -day consultation period with the 
general public before a law can be approved by the Cabinet for introduction 
in Parliament. This consulta tion process, which involves sharing the draft 
with the public, must be accompanied by (i) explanations for its  enactment, 
                                                      
4*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

10  
(ii) financial considerations, and (iii) an evaluation of the law's potential 
impact. Moreover, the comments received during the consultation should be 
made available on the ministry's website. 
 
In the present case, however, a committee was formed with its members and 
objectives ***5. There exists a notable absence of a clear and compelling 
rationale for why such a substantial reform w as undertaken, especially 
considering that, according to the Home Minister's own statement in 
Parliament, the primary objective appeared  to involve alterations to a few 
specific Sections of the law. This lack of transparency and insufficient 
justification raises questions about the intentions behind the legislative  
process. 
In addition to these concerns, while these bills claim to be decolonised, the 
retention of certain provisions contradicts this narrative. A more 
comprehensive effort towards decolonisati on is needed to truly reflect the 
evolving needs of our society. There are many concerns still arising from 
these Bills and I will once again point out some of the major concerns. 
                                                      
5 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Raj ya Sabha 

11  
B. DEMERITS OF THE DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
 
 
PENAL CODE (BNS) 
I. Clause 5 Commutation of a sentence 
The clause gives the executive the powers to commute an offender’s sentence 
punishment for any other punishment. Allowing the executive to commute 
sentences can blur the separation of powers in a government. It gives the 
executive branch, which is responsible for enforcing the law, a role in altering 
or mitigating the legal punishments determined by  the judiciary. This could 
potentially lead to an imbalance of power and an infringement on the 
judiciary's independence. Executive decisions might be  swayed by electoral 
or popularity concerns rather than solely focusing on justice and the merits of 
individual cases. 
Commutations can be seen as undermining the authority and decisions of the 
judiciary. It may give the impression that the executive branc h can override 
or second -guess the judiciary's determinations, eroding trust in the legal 
system. 
II. Clause 11 Solitary Confinement 
This clause should be reconsidered as solitary confinement is inhumane. 
Research has shown that solitary confinement is not an effective tool for 
deterrence or rehabilitation. It does not reduce recidivism or promote positive 
behaviour change; instead, it can increase aggression and antisocial 
behaviour. It has been shown to have serious detrimental effects on 
individuals' mental and physical well-being, and it raises ethical and human 
rights concerns. The characterization of solitary confinement as a brutal type 
of incarceration by the Supreme Court of India in the case of Kishore Singh 
Ravinder Dev v. State of Rajasthan highlights the court's recognition of the 
severe and adverse effects of solitary confinement on individuals. 

12  
 
III. Clause 69 - Promise to Marry 
Relationships and decisions about marriage are deeply personal matters that 
should be left to the individuals involved, subje ct to only some basic 
safeguards that may be consensually instituted by the society Criminalizing a 
Promise to Marry can be seen as an undue intrusion into individuals' Right to 
Privacy and autonomy. Determining whether a promise to marry has been 
made can be subjective and challenging to prove. Intentions can change over 
time, and proving that a promise was genuinely made with the intention to 
marry can be difficult. 
Defining what constitutes a legally binding Promise to Marry can be vague 
and open to interpretation. This lack of clarity can lead to inconsistencies in 
enforcement and judgments. 
Criminalizing a Promise to Marry can be viewed as an unwarranted intrusion 
into the fundamental Right to Privacy and personal autonomy, which are 
cherished principles in a democratic society. In this context, a more nuanced 
and rights-based approach to addressing matters related to promises to marry 
would be both pragmatic and respectful of individual freedoms and choices. 
IV. Kidnapping and begging-Clause 137 
The clause should exclude the exception of lawful guardian of such child. 
Even guardians who wrongfully push children into begging should be 
rigorously punished. Excluding the exception of lawful guardians in a clause 
punishing those who wrongfully push children into  begging is essential to 
safeguard the rights and well -being of vulnerable children. It sends a strong 
message that all individuals, regardless of their legal relationship with the 
child, will be held accountable for such harmful actions, acting as a powerful 
deterrent against child exploitation. This approach prioritizes the child's best 
interests, prevents potential legal loopholes, and aligns with international 
human  rights  standards,  fostering  a  child-centered  and  protective   legal 

13  
framework that leaves no room for evading responsibility in cases of child 
exploitation. 
V. Sedition law- Clause 150 
I would like to include a passage from the report. “The Committee 
compliments the Government in deleting the term ‘sedition’ from criminal 
law by rephrasi ng it without compromising the security of the state. The 
Committee finds it as a very progressive development.” 
The Report acknowledges the fact that the Sedition law has just been 
paraphrased and retained. The 22nd Law Commission suggested that sedition 
should be well defined. The Union government decided to do the opposite of 
that. The provision in the new bill gives it such a broad definition that it can 
encompass any act in the name of endangering the unity and integrity of India. 
It leaves a lot of room for discretion which is the opposite of what was advised 
by the law commission. Clause 150 talks about Acts endangering sovereignty, 
unity and integrity of India. Sedition gets a sinister backfoot entry in the 
proposed legal regime. This broad definitio n could potentially infringe on 
individuals' rights to free expression and peaceful dissent. 
The broad and vaguely worded sedition provisions can create a chilling effect 
on free speech and peaceful protest. Individuals may self -censor their 
opinions and c riticisms, fearing legal consequences, which can undermine 
democratic values and civil liberties. 
Our concerns are rooted in the potential for misuse and abuse of the redefined 
sedition law. Such broad and discretionary provisions can be employed to 
stifle legitimate dissent and criticism, limiting freedom of expression and 
potentially infringing on individuals' rights. 
VI. The problem with not defining community service. 
The introduction of Community Service ‘under clause 4(f) of the BNS is a 
welcome step. In criminal justice systems that emphasize rehabilitation, 
community service provides an opportunity for offenders to make amends for 

14  
their actions and demonstrate their commitment to positive change. It can help 
them develop a sense of responsibility and contribute positively to society and 
aligns with the principles of restorative justice. But the same is nothing 
without giving a proper definition to it. A clear definition will outline the 
objectives and goals of Community Service, ensuring that both offenders and 
those responsible for overseeing its execution understand the intended 
outcomes. It will specify the nature and scope of the service, such as the types 
of activities, the duration, and the target beneficiaries. 
VII. Clarity in definition of life sentence 
The current definition of "imprisonment for life" within the BNS is not 
explicitly clear. It appears to be using the term "imprisonment for the 
remainder of a person's natural life." However, in the Indian Penal Code 
(IPC), Section 53, the term "imprisonment for life" is used without specifying 
whether it means "imprisonment for the remainder of a person's natural life" 
or if it is equivalent to a "whole life sentence." 
There needs to be clarity about whether the convicts are expected to remain 
in prison for the entirety of their natural life or are eligible for release. The 
proposed definition of "imprisonment for life" in the BNS is not explicitly 
clear, and it differs from how "imprisonment for life" is generally understood 
in the context of the Indian Penal Code. To avoid confusion and ensure legal 
clarity, the definition in the BNS be aligned with the understanding that 
"imprisonment for life" means a "whole life sentence" unless otherwise 
specified. This would help in harmonizing the definitions and interpretations 
across different legal contexts in India. 
VIII. Offences Relating to Elections 
One of the general patterns in contemporary India’s criminal law is that 
offences that are particularly difficult to regulate and especially elaborate in 
their organisation internally while having a large-scale impact on society are 
addressed by ‘special statutes’. These special statutes while being harsh    in 

15  
punishment are rigorous in the procedural safeguards, they offer the accused. 
The emphasis being that there are checks and balances present in the quest of 
the state to prosecute and the efforts of the accused to defend herself. Any 
detraction from the procedural protections that general criminal law offers, 
will have checks in place in these special statutes. Off ences related to 
elections should be on Representation of People Act. Similarly with UAPA, 
the special legislation should remain and amended if need be. But it should 
not be subsumed in the IPC. 
IX. Clause 264- Defamation 
There should be a limitation on filing cases for defamation. Imposing a time 
limitation on defamation claims helps protect the fundamental principle of 
free speech. Without such limitations, individuals or organizations could 
potentially bring defamation claims many years after an alleged defa matory 
statement was made. This could have a chilling effect on free expression and 
public discourse, as people may become reluctant to express their opinions or 
engage in critical discussions for fear of facing legal action at any time in the 
future. 
X. Clause 282- Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded 
vessel 
Looking at the gravity of the offence, punishment should be increased that 
from 6 months to 3 years. 
XI. Clause 277- Fouling water of public spring or reservoir. 
Looking at the gravity of the offence, punishment should be increased. 
XII. Clause 275- Sale of adulterated drugs. 
Looking at the gravity of the offence, punishment should be increased. 
XIII. Clause 275 and 276- Sale of adulterated drugs. 
Looking at the gravity of the offence, punishment should be increased. 

16  
XIV. 104(1)- Death by negligence 
In medical negligence cases, the standard of care expected of healthcare 
professionals is crucial. Punishment should be based on whether the 
healthcare provider's actions or decisions deviated from the accepted 
standard of care within the medical community. Not all adverse outcomes 
in medicine are the result of negligence. Hence the punishment should be 
reduced from 7 years to 5 years 
XV. Clause 213- Refusing to sign statement 
Requiring individuals to sign stateme nts under the threat of 
imprisonment or fines  can be seen as coercive and may result in 
individuals signing statements against their will. This can undermine the 
voluntariness of the statement and potentially lead to false or coerced 
confessions. Hence this provision should be reconsidered. 
Criminal Procedure- 
BNSS 
 
XVI. Impact on the Digital Ecosystem- BNSS 
Clause 94 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, which 
deals with powers to summon for evidence, explicitly includes 
summoning of “digital evidenc e,” and covers any electronic 
communication such as messages, call recordings, and emails, as well 
as electronic communication devices such as mobile phones, laptops, 
cameras, and any other electronic device that may be specified by the 
government through notification in the future.  A court also has the 
right to order search and seizure of such evidence for various reasons, 
including if the person in possession of the evidence is not expected 
to produce the same. 
A mobile device or a laptop contains a lot of information which might 
not be relevant to the case because electronic devices in today's age 
contain all information pertinent to an individual's general existence. 
So, there’s a question about the invasion of the Right to Privacy 

17  
because of the scope of information that’s in these devices. Secondly, 
the collection of such devices might also go against the Right against  
self-incrimination. 
XVII. Non-Inclusion of trans-women in definition of rape- BNS 
The Sanhita also leaves the question of inclusivity answered as the 
provision of rape is strictly limited to a woman and does not include a 
transgender woman. The Transgender Persons Act, 2019 only 
recognizes ‘sexual abuse’ for which the maximum punishment is two 
years. The law on rape should also bring transgender  woman within 
its purview. 
XVIII. Different punishments for murder depending on the number of 
people convicted.- BNS 
As per Clause 101 of the BNS, when a man commits murder, 
punishment is life  imprisonment or death. No other option. But if a 
group of 5+ men acting in concert commits murder on grounds 
mentioned in this clause, there is an option to give a punishment of 
7+ years imprisonment. 
XIX. Report suggests criminalizing adultery- BNS 
 
The Supreme Court found that Section 497 acknowledged the Right to 
Privacy as a  fundamental right. The court held that the state should not 
interfere in the private matters of consenting adults and that their 
choices in matters of personal relationships should be protected. 
Moreover, one of the factors that influenced the decriminali zation of 
adultery in India was that there were already civil remedies available for 
addressing adultery, and it was also considered grounds for divorce 
under Indian family laws. The Report  insists on including a gender-
neutral provision criminalizing adultery even after the Supreme Court 
has already decriminalized it. 
 

18  
XX. Expansion of powers granted to the Police- BNSS 
 
Clause 172 of the BNSS seeks to expand the powers of the police while 
taking preventive action. The police officer “ may detain or remove any 
person resisting, refusing, ignoring or disregarding to conform to any 
direction” under Chapter XII. The Indian Criminal Justice System is 
based on a due -process model, but giving the Police such wide and 
discretionary powers during preventive action is ess entially pushing us 
towards a crime- control model. ***. 
XXI. Expansion of Police powers- BNSS 
 
Clause 187 (2) and 187 (3) of the BNSS on ‘Procedure when 
investigation cannot be completed in twenty four hours.’ 
The extension of the duration for which a detainee can be held in police 
custody beyond 15 days contradicts the Supreme Court's ruling in CBI 
v. Anupam  J. Kulkarni, (1992) 3 SCC 141, which deemed police 
custody beyond this period impermissible. By el ongating the detention 
period under police custody, the new laws expose detainees to potential 
threats, abuse, or coercion by the police. The protection of judicial 
custody, where police require the Magistrate's permission to interrogate a 
suspect, has been entirely disregarded and nullified by the new laws. 
Another telling signature o f intensifying police raj is  the name of 
reforms! 
 
XXII. Clause      43(3)      on   ‘Arrest       how       made.’       -       
BNSS     In the case of Prem Shanker Shukla v. Delhi 
Administration (1980) 3 SCC 526, the Supreme Court 
unequivocally s tated that employing handcuffs is abhorrent to 
human dignity and infringes upon Article 21 of the Indian 
Constitution. However, this clause seeks to exert punitive control 
and is highly indicative of a ‘crime -control model’ than a ‘due -
process one.’ 

19 
Bringing legislation without proper scrutiny is making a ***6 and 
the integrity of these institutions are of utmost importance for 
democratic functioning. Hence, I strongly oppose these Bills. 
XXIII. Reconsideration of Death penalty
The following is a glimpse of the statistics  about the individuals
that get sentenced to death penalty (Source: Project 39A)
1. Economic Background
Based on national statistics, it can be observed that 74.1% of
individuals on death row in India come from economically
disadvantaged backgrounds, as determined by their occupation and
land ownership status. This highlights how the death penalty
disproportionately affects the marginalized and disadvantaged in
society. Abolishing the death penalty can be seen as a step toward
rectifying this social injustice.
2. Educational Background
Among those sentenced to death, 23% had never attended school, while an
additional 9.6% had minimal attendance and did not even complete their
primary education. It is evident that these groups are disproportionately
affected by t he provision of death penalty. Abolishing capital punishment
can help mitigate this disparity, promote social equity, and protect the rights
of minority and marginalized communities.
3. Socio-economic Background
A significant majority, or 76% (279 individuals), of those sentenced to death
in India belong to backward classes and religious minority groups.
Death penalty is more than just a form of punishment. Aforementioned data
makes it imperative that these aspects are incorporated in our purview. The
6 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

20  
high pr evalence of socioeconomic vulnerability and limited education 
among death row prisoners raises concerns about the potential for wrongful 
convictions. It emphasizes the importance of ensuring a fair and just legal 
system to prevent innocent individuals from facing the ultimate punishment. 
In its 262nd Report from August 2015, the Law Commission of India 
recommended the abolition of the death penalty for all crimes, with the 
exception of cases related to terrorism and acts of war. 
Abolition of death penalty h as not been considered in this report. Such 
abolition carries several merits that resonate with principles of justice, 
human rights, and the advancement of society. Foremost, it eliminates the 
risk of executing innocent individuals, as errors in the criminal justice system 
can have irreversible consequences. Abolition also upholds the fundamental 
Right to Life, recognizing that every individual, regardless of their actions, 
possesses inherent dignity. Moreover, it aligns with the evolving global 
consensus  that  values  restorative  justice  over  retribution,  focusing    on 

21  
rehabilitation and the potential for redemption. Abolishing the death penalty 
allows the criminal justice system to focus on rehabilitation and reintegration 
of offenders into society,  rather than permanently ending their lives. This 
approach aligns with principles of restorative justice and offers a chance for 
individuals to reform and make amends for their actions. Many countries like 
Canada, Australia, United Kingdom, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South 
Africa have already done so because of the fact that it can lead to a more 
humane and enlightened approach to addressing crime and it is disappointing 
to see a lack of concrete suggestions on the same by the Committee. 
The increasing scepticism of the Supreme Court in death row trials is 
indicative of the fact that this requires institutional redressal. There is a stark 
contrast between the trial courts and the Supreme Court, as there have been 
a significant number of acquittals of death row prisoners. When a large-scale 
institutional reform is required, the death penalty provision should be looked 
at in context and reconsidered accordingly. 
In conclusion, the issue of the death penalty is one that merits careful 
reconsideration in Indi a and across the globe. The statistics highlighting 
socioeconomic disparities and the disproportionate impact on marginalized 
groups, along with the potential for wrongful convictions, underscore the 
need for a more just and equitable criminal justice syst em. It is essential to 
engage in open and informed discussions on this matter to ensure that our 
legal systems reflect the principles of justice, fairness, and compassion that 
underpin the values of a modern, progressive society. In sum, broad -based 
social discussions are warranted on the subject. 
XXIV. Accused's Right to File for Discharge 
 
Unlike Section 227 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), Clause 250(1) 
of  the  BNSS  expressly  acknowledges  the  accused's  right  to  file       an 

22  
application for disc harge. It also sets a sixty -day time limit for filing this 
application from the date of committal to the Sessions Court. While this 
timeline may seem like a step toward reducing trial delays, it overlooks 
systemic challenges in our pre -trial processes. Acc used individuals often 
lack timely access to their case papers and may not have legal representation 
during this stage. Moreover, there can be a significant delay between the 
Magistrate's committal of the case to the Sessions Court and its assignment 
to a Sessions Judge. This gap affects the production of the accused and the 
receipt of necessary records. When courts consider whether to grant 
discharge or frame charges, they must evaluate whether there exists a "strong 
suspicion" supported by material that t he accused committed the offense. 
Addressing issues related to the timely provision of case papers and ensuring 
early access to legal representation is crucial for making this opportunity to 
file for discharge meaningful. 
XXV. Pre-trial Incarceration 
 
The challenge of challenging forensic reports under Clause 329 is further 
complicated by Clause 330, which mirrors Section 294 of the CrPC. It 
eliminates the requirement of formal proof for documents whose 
genuineness is uncontested by the opposing party. Clause 330(1) necessitates 
that parties admit or deny the genuineness of documents within thirty days 
of their supply, with the possibility of extending this time limit at the 
Magistrate's discretion upon providing reasons. Notably, a new proviso in 
Clause 330(1) states that an expert cannot be summoned to appear before the 
court unless their report is disputed by a party. This proviso applies to all 
experts, unlike Clause 329. Clause 330, like Section 294 of the CrPC, applies 
to the pre -trial stage of criminal proc eedings, where parties have the 
opportunity to challenge the genuineness of documents relied upon by the 
opposing party, ensuring the documents are free from forgery or fabrication. 

23  
However, there is a difference of opinion among courts regarding whether 
expert reports, such as medical or post -mortem reports, can be admitted as 
evidence without the testimony of the experts who prepared them, in cases 
where the genuineness of such reports remains unchallenged. 
XXVI. Police Custody vs. Judicial Custody 
 
Clause 187 of the BNSS retains the established timelines of sixty or ninety 
days and the concept of default bail, as found in the CrPC. However, unlike 
Section 167 of the CrPC, Clause 187(2) additionally allows for detention in 
custody, whether police or judicial, for a total of fifteen days, which can be 
imposed at any time during the initial forty or sixty days of the respective 
sixty or ninety-day period. Consistent with the CrPC, Clause 187(2) grants 
any magistrate the authority to authorize detention, regardless  of their 
jurisdiction to try the case. In contrast, Clause 187(3) requires a jurisdictional 
Magistrate. Furthermore, Clause 187(3) permits detention in custody to be 
authorized beyond the fifteen-day period, without the stipulation that it must 
be "otherwise than in police custody," implying that police custody can also 
be used during this extended period. The legislation extends police/judicial 
custody from 15 to 90 days. This would put tremendous pressure and mental 
torture on the accused. 
XXVII. Removal of References to Metropolitan Magistrates and Assistant 
Sessions Judge 
All references to the posts and powers of Metropolitan Magistrates and 
Assistant Sessions Judges have been eliminated from the BNSS. 
XXVIII. Clause 254 
 
Clause 254 outlines the process for taking evi dence in support of the 
prosecution. It mandates that on the specified date, the Judge must proceed 

24  
to collect all evidence presented by the prosecution. Notably, this clause 
allows the recording of a witness's testimony through audio-video electronic 
means under sub -Section (1). Sub -Section (2) of Clause 254 permits the 
deposition of evidence of any police officer or public servant through audio- 
video electronic means. 
This restructured format should make the information more organized and 
accessible. If you have any specific changes or further details to add, please 
let me know. 
XXIX. Clause 254 - Concerns and Open Court Requirement 
 
While Clause 254 delineates the process for taking evidence in support of the 
prosecution, it introduces a provision that may raise concerns.   Sub-Section 
(1) of Clause 254 permits the recording of a witness's testimony through 
audio-video electronic means. This allowance for remote testimony recording 
might give rise to issues related to transparency, fairness, and the fundamental 
principle of an "open court." An open court system provides transparency and 
public scrutiny, allowing for a fair and impartial trial. Recording evidence 
through audio -video electronic means could potentially undermine this 
principle by limiting public a ccess to the trial process and raising questions 
about the integrity of the proceedings. It's essential to strike a balance between 
leveraging technology for efficiency and ensuring the preservation of 
fundamental legal principles, such as open court proce edings, to maintain 
public trust in the justice system. 

25  
DEREK O’BRIEN INTERVENTION- PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
PART I 
 
 
 
General statutes of criminal law are here for the ages. General statutes of 
criminal law will affect the lives of the poor. General statutes of criminal law 
have to be crafted with utmost care. No rushing through. Let every one of us 
on this committee commit ourselves to these. 
When translated into english, the titles of these bills would be: the Indian 
Justice Code, 2023, the Indian Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023 and the Indian 
Evidence Bill, 2023. The three bills have since been referred to us on the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
If the new law is titled the Indian Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023, it will 
reflect the idea of a procedural shield for citizens against the State in the 
criminal process. 
 Negatives:
1. Authorises detention in police custody upto 90 -day for offences punishable 
with death, life imprisonment and imprisonment for a term not less than 10 
years.Also authorises police custody for upto 60 days for offences where 
imprisonment is less than the above mentioned offences. This dilutes the 
Right to life, health (physical and mental) and fair trial. 
2. Enables trial in absentia if the judge finds the att endance of the accused in 
court not necessary “in the interests of justice” or if the accused “persistently” 
disturbs proceedings in court. 

26  
Where did this law come from? 
 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs in 2020, constituted a committee headed by 
Prof. Ranbir  Singh, former Vice Chancellor of National Law University, 
Delhi to review the three codes of criminal law.
 The committee was constituted of only men. Moreover, they were from similar 
social identity as well as professional background and experience.
 There were no women, Dalits, religious minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ persons, 
or persons with disabilities on the Committee.
 The committee has hardly any full time members unlike previous committees 
that had been assigned reforms of such magnitude.

27  
1. METHODOLOGY 
 
 
 
A. Contents from letter to Chairman of Home Affairs Committee: 
I. First, considering the significance of these three Bills, it is imperative that 
multiple bipartisan discussions are held at length. It is my earnest request that 
members of this committee are n ot rushed and are given multiple 
opportunities to express themselves. Choice of domain experts, choice of 
witnesses from across disciplines and the methodology used must always take 
into consideration the "sense of the house". In the spirit of federalism, it is 
imperative that the committee must also travel to multiple states to meet 
stakeholders. Sir, please create an atmosphere for scrutiny, debate and 
detailed discussion. This will embellish the quality of our output as a 
committee. 
II. Second, the minutes of the meetings must be recorded with due diligence and 
provide a true reflection of the proceedings. Key points raised  by members 
must reflect in the minutes. (Verbatim records are not a substitute for minutes.) 
For example, in the meeting that was held on 24 August 2023, Dayanidhi 
Maran (DMK) had submitted a letter stating objections on how the titles of the 
said bills are in Hindi. The submission of this letter making multiple points, 
the summary of its contents, and his intervention  does not reflect  all in the 
minutes of the meeting. Recording of such views is an integral part  of the 
democratic process. Please ensure this is done for future meetings. III.Third, 
considering that the Special Session of the Parliament has  been called from 18 
September to 22 September 2023, the Members have  made multiple 
commitments in their constituencies and other parts of their  State including 
programs and meetings immediately (one week) after the session. This  is a 
request to schedule the next committee meeting at least one week after the 
session concludes. 

28  
 
 
B. Who should the standing committee consult? What is the time frame? 
 
 
 
Consultations to be done 
 
1. Senior  practitioners  of  criminal  law who  have domain knowledge 
accumulated over decades of litigation practice and expertise in the area. 
 
2. Bar Council of all states in India. 
(At least 23 state bar councils) 
(30 days) 
 
3. The judges of the Supreme Court and high courts. 
 
(Supreme Court - Chief Justice and 33 other Judges appointed by the 
President of India. High  Court- Working Strength of at least 785 judges 
across 25 high courts) 
(6 months) 
 
4. The Bar Council of India Supreme Court Bar associations 
(At least 20 office bearers ) 
(20 days) 

29  
 
5. Members of parliament, legislative assemblies, and local councils 
play a role in passing laws. Their input can help ensure that proposed 
reforms align with legislative goals. 
(Lok Sabha - 539 members + 
Rajya Sabha- 238 members + 
State legislative assemblies) 
(6 months) 
 
6. International Organisations: Collaboration with international 
bodies like the United Nations and regional human rights organisations can 
help align reforms with international standards and best practices. (100 
days) 
 
7. Media: Journalists and media organisations can play a  role in 
raising public awareness about the need for criminal justice reform and can 
provide insights into public sentiment. (100 days) 
 
8. Ethnic and Religious Leaders: Considering the diverse cultural 
and religious landscape of India, involving leaders from various 
communities can help ensure that reforms are sensitive to different 
perspectives. (50 days) 

30  
 
9. Experts on Juvenile Justice: Specialists in juvenile  justice can 
provide insights into how reforms could better address the needs and rights 
of young offenders. (5 days) 
 
10. Experts on Cybercrime and Technology:  Given the     rise of 
cybercrime, involving experts in technology and cyber law is crucial when 
considering reforms in this domain. (5 days) 
 
11. Prison Officials and Reform Advocates:   Individuals working 
within the prison system and advocates for prison reform can contribute 
perspectives on conditions, rehabilitation, and the treatment of inmates. 
(1319 prisons in the country and their officials) (4 months) 
 
12. Inclusive Consultation from the general public including women, 
Dalits, religious minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ persons, or persons with 
disabilities etc. (1 month) 
 
13. Governors, chief ministers of states, lieutenant   governors and 
administrators of Union territories. (60-70 officials approx.) (1 month) 
 
14. Legal Scholars and academic institutes (5 days) 
 
15. Law  Enforcement  Agencies:  Representatives  from  police 
departments can offer insights into issues related to investigation, evidence 
collection, and law enforcement procedures. (10 days) 

31  
 
16. Human  Rights  Organizations:  NGOs  and advocacy groups 
focused on human rights can provide critical perspectives on how proposed 
reforms might impact human rights, due process, and individual freedoms. 
(5 days) 
 
A total of 1.5 years 
 
C. Domain Experts who must be invited as witnesses 
 
I.U.U.Lalit 
 
He was designated Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court in April 2004. He 
aided the Court as an amicus curiae in many important matters pertaining to 
forests, vehicular pollution and pollution of the Yamuna ri ver. In 2011, he 
was appointed as the Special Public Prosecutor in the 2G Spectrum scam 
case. He also served as the 49th Chief Justice of India. 
II. Madan Lokur 
 
He  was  appointed  as  Additional  Solicitor   General   of   India   in   
1998. Functioned as Ch ief Justice of Gauhati High Court from 2010 to 
2011, and Chief  Justice  of  High  Court  of  Andhra  Pradesh  from  2011 
to 2012. Has vast experience in Civil, Criminal, Constitutional, Revenue 
and Service laws. 
III. Fali Nariman 
 
Fali Sam Nariman is an Indian jurist. He is a senior advocate to the Supreme 
Court of India since 1971 and was the President of the Bar Association of 
India from 1991 to 2010. 

32  
IV. Menaka Guruswamy Sr Adv: 
 
Menaka Guruswamy is a senior advocate at the Supreme Court of India. She 
is known for having played a significant role in many landmark cases before 
the Supreme Court, including the Section 377 case, the bureaucratic reforms 
case, the Agustawestland bribery case, the Salwa Judum case, and the Right 
to Education case. 
V. Mr Sidharth Luthra, Sr Adv: 
 
Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court. He was appointed the Additional 
Solicitor General of the Supreme Court from 2012 -2014, during which he 
represented Union and State Governments in matters such as fundamental 
rights, environment laws, electora l reform, criminal law, juvenile rights, 
education and policy issues. Mr Luthra also appeared as the Special Public 
Prosecutor for the State of NCT of Delhi in the Nirbhaya gang-rape case. 
VI. Mr Hariharan, Sr. Adv. 
 
Hariharan N enrolled at the Delhi Bar in 1987 and over the last 34 years, has 
cemented a presence on the Criminal side of legal practice. For contributions 
to the practice and development of Criminal Law, he was designated as a 
Senior Advocate by the Delhi High Court in 2013. 
VII. Ms Rebecca John, Sr. Adv. 
 
Rebecca Mammen John has been practising exclusively on the criminal side 
in the Supreme Court of India, High Court of Delhi and in the Trial Courts 
of Delhi for more than three decades. She has conducted a wide range of 
criminal trials and argued appe als dealing with offences under the Indian 
Penal Code, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, Prevention of Corruption 
Act and other special statutes.Sriram Panchu 

33  
VIII. Sylendra Babu 
IX. Amit Desai 
X. Rajeev Dhavan 
XI. Siddharth Dave 
XII. Adit Pujari 
XIII. Aditya Sondhi 
XIV. Vrinda Grover 
XV. Professor Faizan Mustafa 
 
II. INPUT NOTE - REFORMING CRIMINAL LAW: Menaka 
Guruswamy 
 
You might ask why? Because when you have been detained, being questioned 
and are surrounded by police officers – it’s the Code of Criminal Procedure 
that protects you, limits your detention period in police custody, enables you 
to access a lawyer, who in turn can push for bail and even ask for quashing of 
the FIR or Chargesheet against you. Therefore, I particularly like that 
Welcome reforms: 
 
There’s plenty of welcome refor m to our existing criminal procedure. Some 
of it draws on the technological innovations that have made it into our 
everyday life. For instance, the entire life of a new case, commencing from 
the FIR (first information report) leading to a case diary on its  way to a 
chargesheet and culminating in a judgment is now to be maintained online – 
via digitized recordkeeping. This will make immensely safer the record of the 
case proceedings and enable quicker access when necessary. Significantly, 
when our homes are searched and seizure affected on items found, then such 
proceedings must be accompanied by mandatory video recording. This is a 
hugely important reform since this is protection against planting of evidence 
and can be used by the defense to contest alleged seizures. 

34  
The Protection Code also provides for the registration of a ‘Zero FIR’. This 
kind of FIR is registered when a police station receives a complaint regarding 
an alleged offence committed in the jurisdiction of another police station. 
Here, the original police station registers the FIR and then transfers it to the 
relevant police station for further investigation. 
The Protection Code now makes it mandatory for a forensic expert to visit the 
crime scene and collect forensic evidence for information r elating to an 
offence that is punishable by imprisonment for at least seven years. 
Continuing pandemic-era change, the Protection Code allows trials, inquiries 
and proceedings including examination and recording of evidence to be 
conducted by an electronic  or online mode. This makes it infinitely more 
convenient for accused and witnesses to participate in and complete these 
requirements of the processes of a trial. 
Another welcome reform pertains to the grant of sanction to prosecute a 
public servant. The Protection Code now provides that the decision to grant 
or reject sanction to prosecute a public servant must be reached by the 
government within 120 days of receiving the request. If the government fails 
to do so, sanction shall be deemed to be accorded. A dditionally, no sanction 
shall be required in cases involving public servants when accused of sexual 
offences or trafficking of human beings. More reform comes in the form of  
a provision that mandates that no person can be arrested without prior 
permission of an officer of the minimum rank of a Deputy Superintendent of 
Police for offences punishable with less than three years imprisonment if the 
accused is above the age of sixty years. 
Areas of concern 
 
The most dangerous part of the Protection Code is tha t it permits the 
magistrate to authorize detention in police custody for a period beyond   the 

35  
current 15-day limit, extending up to ninety days. Such detention extending 
to ninety days is for offences punishable with death, life imprisonment and 
imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years. The Protection Code 
enables detention in police custody beyond the current 15 -day mandate and 
up to sixty days for ‘any other offence’ (with imprisonment terms less than 
the ninety -day detention offences). This i s a constitutionally burdensome 
provision that will impinge on the rights of an accused. Spending ninety days 
with the police having unimpeded access to an accused is debilitating from 
the point of view of rights to life, health (including mental well -being) and 
fair trial. At present for any period beyond the 15-day limit for police custody 
means that the judge can have the accused detained in judicial custody or 
order other custodial arrangements. 
While there are many reforms that should be welcomed in th e Protection 
Code, 2023- all of that will be rendered meaningless if an accused can be 
detained to long periods of time in police custody – three months of 
uninterrupted police custody will render any accused extremely vulnerable to 
coercion and intimidation. This move must be thought afresh, and members 
of the parliamentary committee must ask themselves – what if that accused 
was me? 
III. UNDOING CRIMINAL LAW: MAKING HARSH SPECIAL 
STATUTES THE NORM: Menaka Guruswamy 
 
One of the general patterns in contemporary  India’s criminal law is that 
offences that are particularly difficult to regulate and especially elaborate in 
their organisation internally while having a large-scale impact on society are 
addressed by ‘special statutes’. These special statutes while bein g harsh in 
punishment are rigorous in the procedural safeguards they offer the accused. 
The emphasis being that there are checks and balances present in the quest of 

36  
the state to prosecute and the efforts of the accused to defend herself. Any 
detraction from the procedural protections that general criminal law offers, 
will have checks in place in these special statutes. This general pattern has 
been deviated from with the introduction on 11.8.2023 of three bills in the 
Lok Sabha by the Central Government. These bills are intended to 
dramatically change criminal law. 
The BNS, 2023 to replace the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the BNSS, 2023 to 
replace the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 
2023 to replace the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 have been tabled in the lower 
house of parliament. 
This law reform effort by the State is at odds with established legislative 
practice of having separate and distinct harsh ‘special statutes’ with 
procedural checks and balances. This current effort shows  that special 
laws are being absorbed into general criminal law – without any of the 
necessary procedural safeguards. This will make it impossible for the 
accused to defend herself and will bring within the criminal process many 
innocent people, for whom the process will be punishment and for which very 
few convictions will be returned. This is a particularly worrying effort – for 
the purpose of criminal law is not to persecute, but to prosecute ably while 
affording the accused a fair chance to prove their innocence. 
Let me give you one example. Special legislation includes statutes like the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) and the Maharashtra 
Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999 (MCOCA, models of which are 
applicable in other states). Both statutes are illustrations of special legislation 
intended to combat alleged offences that are elaborate in how they are planned 
and fulfilled. While the punishments are harsh, both attempt to have some 
balance in the form of the procedural safeguards they o ffer. PMLA law has 
many deficiencies. 

37 
Now let's come to ‘organised crime’. Provisions that have been introduced 
into general criminal law statute like the BNS, 2023. . At present, organized 
crime is principally dealt by the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 
1999 (MCOCA), which is applicable in both Maharashtra and the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi. Other states have their own versions of MCOCA. 
However, the BNS brings it into general criminal law by having provisions 
that define and punish organized crime within this statute. 
The BNS brings organized crime within Chapter VI of the Code that pertains 
to ‘offences affecting the human body.’ In the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the 
equivalent chapter that pertains to ‘offences against the body’ included classic 
criminal offences like murder and culpable homicide not amounting to 
murder. Within this classical framework is introduced the rather elaborate 
offence of ‘organised crime syndicates.’ Per the BNS, an organized crime 
syndicate means ‘a criminal organization or group of three or more persons, 
who acting singly or collectively in concert, as a syndicate, gang, mafia or 
crime ring indulging in commission of one or more serious offences or are 
involved in gang criminality, racketeering and syndicated organized crime’. 
BNS provides that a definition of ‘organized crime’ as being ‘any continuing 
unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery, land grabbing, contract 
killing, economic offences, drug or human trafficking, weapons or 
prostitution either as a member of an organized crime syndicate or on behalf 
of such syndicate, by use of violence, threat of violence, intimidation, 
coercion, corruption or related activities or other unlawful means to obtain 
direct or indirect material benefit including a financial benefit shall constitute 
organized crime’. 
Also included within this fold are economic offences which includes criminal 
breach of trust, forgery, counterfeiting of currency and valuable securities, 
financial scams, running Ponzi schemes, mass marketing fraud or multi-level 

38  
marketing schemes with a view to defraud people at large for obtaining the 
monetary benefits or large -scale organized betting, any forms, offences of 
money laundering and hawala transactions. 
It’s like the drafters thought of a ll the possible offences that can exist when 
three or more accused are involved and stuffed them into one unwieldy 
definition and pasted them into the bill. It is vague, poorly worded, and 
unwieldy. Everything that definitions should not be. While the punishment is 
stringent - for anyone ‘who conspires or organizes the commission of an 
organized crime’ shall be punishable with imprisonment for a minimum of 
five years to life in prison. There are no safeguards that criminal law affords, 
at present. 
MCOCA has procedural safeguards that prevent abuse of such a ‘special law 
with stringent and deterrent provisions’ as per its statement of objects. For 
instance, Section 23 presently provides that no information about the 
commission of an offence of organized crime  shall be recorded by a police 
officer without the prior approval of an officer below the rank of Assistant 
Commissioner of Police (ACP). Further, no investigation shall be carried out 
by a police officer below the rank of ACP. No ‘Special Court’ shall tak e 
cognizance of any offence under this Act without the sanction of a police 
officer of the rank of ACP and above. 
MCOCA also has ‘Special Courts’ that are staffed by judges specially 
appointed by Government with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the 
Delhi High Court. Such a judge should have had experience as an Assistant 
Sessions or Sessions court judge previously. Importantly, authorization for 
interception of wire, electronic or oral communication shall be allowed only 
after an officer not below the rank of Deputy Commissioner of Police, who is 
supervising the investigation of organised crime, submits an application to 
the Competent Authority. A Review committee consisting of the    Principal 

39  
Secretary of Delhi, Law Secretary and Home Secretary shall review orders of 
the Competent Authority. 
In essence, MCOCA an example of a special statute intended to combat an 
elaborate offence (organized crime), balances the stringency of not only the 
punishment it mandates, but also the invasion of privacy by wi re taps to 
further enhance the investigation along with procedural safeguards. Great 
care has been taken by the legislature in the constitution of ‘special courts’, 
and the qualifications in terms of prior experience of the judges who will hear 
such cases. All of this is absent in the reforms that are proposed. What is being 
weakened are principals of criminal law – and it is the general public that will 
suffer by way of lack of procedural protections and absence of checks and 
balances. The right of fair tr ial and rule of law are also the casualties in the 
process. 

40  
DEREK O’BRIEN INTERVENTION- PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
PART-II 
 
SOME OTHER ISSUES WITH THESE BILLS 
 
 
 
I. No reasoning as to the requirement of a new legislation. The old act could 
easily have been amended to include these changes. 
II. Name of these Bills is in Hindi 
 This name being in Hindi is not suitable for the whole of the country. 
 Firstly, it is unconstitutional. Article 348 of the Constitution mandates that 
English language be used in Acts and Bills. 
"348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and 
for Acts, Bills, etc 
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until 
Parliament by law otherwise provides 
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court, 
 
(b) the authoritative texts 
 
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either 
House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a 
State, 
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all 
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and 

41  
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye laws issued under this 
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a 
State, shall be in the English language. 
 
 This constitutes as Hindi imposition. 
 NAMES IN ENGLISH AS WELL AS HINDI. When translated into English, 
the titles of these bills would be: the Indian Justice Code, 2023, the Indian 
Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023 and the Indian Evidence Bill, 2023. 
 If the new law is titled the Indian Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023. It will 
reflect the idea of a procedural shield for citizens against the State in the 
criminal process. 
SPECIFIC INPUTS ON BNS 2023 (Penal Code) 
 
III. Sedition law 
 
In the new Bill, sedition has NOT been removed, it has been altered. 
 
Section 124A (The old sedition law) is part of the IPC. Its use had been kept 
in abeyance following a Supreme Court order in May 2022. The court had 
given the government time to re -look the sedition law. This was in lieu of 
several advocates urging the apex court to strike down sedition as an offence 
in any form. 
***7 claimed that sedition has been removed from the list of offences. What 
happened in fact was its reintroduction in a more draconian manner which 
can even encroach on the right to protest. 
Though the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill does not explicitly have a Section 
124A in it, it has Section 150. This proposed provision in the new Bill avoids 
using the term ‘sedition’, but descr ibes the offence as “endangering 
sovereignty, unity and integrity of India”. 
                                                      
7*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

42  
The 22nd Law Commission suggested that sedition should be well defined. 
The Union government decided to do the opposite of that. The provision in 
the new bill gives it a very bro ad definition. The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023 Section 150 talks about Acts endangering sovereignty, unity and 
integrity of India. It reads- 
“Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic communication or by use 
of financial mean, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite, secession or 
armed rebellion or subversive activities, or encourages feelings of separatist 
activities or endangers sovereignty or unity and integrity of India; or indulges 
in or commits any such act shall be punished with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable 
to fine” 
This makes it so broad that it can encompass any act in the name of 
endangering the unity and integrity of India. It leaves a lot of room for 
discretion which is the opposite of what was advised by the law commission. 
IV. Definition of Terrorist 
 
Section 111 (6) (a) of the BNS says that a “terrorist” refers to any person 
who “develop s, manufactures, possesses, acquires, transports, supplies or 
uses weapons, explosives, or releases nuclear, radiological or other 
dangerous substance, or cause fire, floods or explosions.” - The addition of 
‘floods’ is ambiguous and bizarre. Moreover these definitions continue to be 
so vague that it ends up giving the police unreasonably wide powers of arrest. 
V. Section 69 - Promise to Marry- 
 
Subjectivity and Intent: Determining whether a promise to marry has been 
made can be subjective and challenging to prove. Intentions can change over 

43  
time, and proving that a promise was genuinely made with the intention to 
marry can be difficult. 
Privacy and Autonomy: Critics argue that relationships and decisions about 
marriage are deeply personal matters that should be left to the individuals 
involved. Criminalising a promise to marry can be seen as an undue intrusion 
into individuals' private lives and autonomy. 
Lack of Clear Parameters: Defining what constitutes a legally binding 
promise to marry can be vague and open to interpretation. This lack of clarity 
can lead to inconsistencies in enforcement and judgments. 
Cultural and Social Dynamics: In many cultures, pre -marital relationships 
and commitments are complex and can involve various factors beyond just 
legal obligations. Criminalising such promises might not take into account 
cultural or social norms. 
Enforcement Challenges: Proving the existence of a promise to marry, 
especially if it was made verbally and without any evidence, can present 
significant challenges in terms of evidence collection and enforcement. 
Gender Dynamics: Depending on how the law is applied, there is a risk that 
such laws could disproportionately affect certain genders or reinforce 
harmful gender stereotypes. 
SPECIFIC INPUTS ON BNSS 2023 (CRIMINAL PROCEDURE) 
 
I. The recently introduced Procedure Bill allows the possibility of 
requesting a 90-day police custody period for crimes that carry a sentence 
of ten years or more. This situation could potentially lead to significant 
infringements on human rights, particularly if these cases result in a not-guilty 
verdict. 

44  
The Bill permits the magistrate to authorise detention in police custody for a 
period beyond the current 15-day limit, extending up to 90 days. 
 90-day police custody - for crimes that carry a sentence of ten years or more
 60-day police custody - for “any other offence” with imprisonment terms 
less than the 90-day detention offences
This could lead to: 
 
Violation of Human Rights: Increasing the period of police custody without 
proper safeguards could lead to human rights violations, including the risk of 
torture, coerced confessions, and abuse of detainees. This is particularly 
concerning given the history of custodial violence and abuse in India. 
Denial of Legal Rights: Extending police custody could potentially lead to a 
denial of basic legal rights, such as the right to a speedy trial and the right to 
consult with legal counsel. Prolonged detention without proper oversight can 
undermine due process. 
Overburdened Judicial System: According to the Prison Statistics India 2020 
report, three in four prisoners in our country’s jails are under trial. This is the 
highest share of undertrial detainees in prison since 1995. Of these, 49% of 
the prisoners are between 18 and 30 years of age. Consider ing that a 
staggering percentage of such prisoners have spent over a year in prison 
awaiting trial, these inmates suffer due to our overwhelmingly slow legal 
process. The very judicial system that is intended to redress and deliver justice 
pushes them towa rd greater injustice since courts might face challenges in 
timely adjudicating cases, leading to potential delays in the delivery of justice. 
Risk of False Confessions: Prolonged custody can increase the risk of 
suspects giving false confessions due to pressure, intimidation, or exhaustion. 
This can lead to wrongful convictions and miscarriages of justice. 

45  
Impact on Marginalised Communities: Lengthening the period of police 
custody might disproportionately affect marginalised communities and 
individuals who may not have access to legal representation or resources to 
challenge their detention. 
Data also shows that two in three prisoners under trial belong to the SC, ST 
and OBC communities. Two in five of inmates from this category were 
educated below grade X and more than a quarter were illiterate. 
Erosion of Trust in Law Enforcement: Instances of abuse, torture, or 
mishandling of suspects during extended custody periods could further erode 
public trust in law enforcement agencies. 
II. Clause 356 of the BNSS enab les trial in absentia if the judge is satisfied 
that “personal attendance of the accused before the Court is not necessary 
in the interests of justice” or if the accused “persistently disturbs the 
proceedings in Court.” This gives the Judge wide discretionary powers to 
abuse this provision and not give the accused a fair hearing. 
III. Addition of provisions that are demeaning and against human dignity- 
 
The CrPC has no provision of handcuffs. In D.K. Basu versus State of West 
Bengal (1996), the Supreme Court set guidelines on rights of accused while 
being arrested or in custody. As per the guidelines, handcuffing violates all 
standards of decency. Handcuffing is the last resort and should not be 
followed as a custom. 
The BNSS, in Section 43(3), explicitly states that: “The police officer may, 
keeping in view the nature and gravity of the offence, use handcuff while 
effecting the arrest of a person who is a habitual, repeat offender who 
escaped from custody, who has committed offence of organised crime, 
offence of terrorist act, drug related crime, or offence of illegal possession 
of arms and ammunition, murder, rape, acid attack, counterfeiting of  coins 

46  
and currency notes, human trafficking, sexual offences against children, 
offences against the State, including acts endangering sovereignty, unity and 
integrity of India or economic offences.” 
IV. Expansion of powers granted to the Police- 
 
Section 172 of the BNSS seeks to expand the powers of the police while 
taking preventive action. The police officer “ may detain or  remove any 
person resisting, refusing, ignoring or disregarding to conform to any 
direction” under Chapter XII. The Indian Criminal Justice System is based 
on a due-process model, but giving the Police such wide and discretionary 
powers during preventive action is essentially pushing us towards a crime - 
control model. 
SPECIFIC INPUTS ON BSB 2023 (EVIDENCE ACT) 
 
I. Section 19: 
 
The provision in Indian Evidence Act 1872 which was similar to Section 19 
of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill was Section 21. Section 21(1) referred to Section 
32 of Indian Evidence Act 1872 (Cases in which statement of relevant fact 
by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant). However, 
Section 19(1) of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill 2023 instead of referring Section 26, 
which is replicat ion of Section 32 of Indian Evidence Act 1872, makes a 
reference to sub-Section (2) of Section 23 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, which 
deals with confession to a police officer. It has no relevance in this Section. 
Instead, reference should have been made to S ection 26 itself (just like 
Section 32 of Indian Evidence Act) or maybe Section 26(2) of Bharatiya 
Sakshya Bill. 

47  
The same discrepancy can be found in the illustrations (b) and (c) of this 
Section. Instead of referring to Section 23(2), it should have made a reference 
to Section 26(2) of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill. 
II. Section 36: 
 
There is an error in this Section. This Section was Section 42 in the Indian 
Evidence Act 1872, and the words used in Section 42 were “other than those 
mentioned in Section 41”. Section 41 of Indian Evidence Act 1872 was 
dealing with “Relevancy of certain judgements in probate, etc, jurisdiction.” 
However, Section 36 of Bharatiya Sakshya bill states “other than those 
mentioned in Section 31.” Section 31 has no relevance here as it talks about 
“Relevancy of statement as to fact of public nature contained in certain Acts 
or notifications” while Section 35 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill discusses 
“Relevancy of certain judgements in probate, etc., jurisdiction” and is similar 
to the Section 41 of Indian Evidence Act 1872. 
III. Section 50 of BSB: 
 
This Section was Section 55 in the Indian Evidence Act 1872, and the words 
used in explanation of Section 55 were “except as provided in Section 54”. 
Section 54 of Indian Evidence Act 1872 was “Previous bad char acter not 
relevant, except in reply”. However, Section 59 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill is 
“Proof of documents by Primary evidence” and Section 49 of Bharatiya 
Sakshya Bill is about “Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply” 
and it is Section 49 which is similar to Section 54 of the Indian Evidence Act 
1872. Use of words “Section 59” here seems erroneous, and it has no 
relevance in Section 50 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill. 

48  
IV. Section 62 of BSB: 
 
As per it, the manner of proving electronic evidence is mentioned in Section 
65B and Section 65B discusses the admissibility of electronic records. In 
other words, how an electronic record can be made admissible before the 
court of law is mentioned in Section 65B. It mentions certain requirements 
which must be fulf illed and then only electronic evidence can be made 
admissible. 
It is Section 63 (Admissibility of electronic records) of Bhartiya Sakshya Bill 
which replaces Section 65B (Admissibility of electronic records) of Indian 
Evidence Act 1872 and not Section 59 (Proof of documents by primary 
evidence.) Mentioning Section 59 in Section 62 appears to be a discrepancy 
because now the definition of document as per Section of Bhartiya Sakshya 
Bill 2023 includes “electronic and digital records.” Hence, they can be 
admitted as primary evidence under Section 59. But Section 62 of Bhartiya 
Sakshya Bill 2023 is a special provision for the succeeding Section 63, which 
talks about the manner which is to be followed (“may be proved in 
accordance with”) for proving electronic e vidence. It is Section 63 of 
Bhartiya Sakshya Bill 2023 which has provisions discussing in detail the 
manner for proving electronic evidence and not Section 59. 
If Section 62 is to be considered correct, then there is no point of having 
Section 63 because if all electronic records may be proved in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 59, then what is the purpose of having Section 
63 altogether? Hence, this seems to be a discrepancy which may be rectified 
by replacing Section 59 with Section 63 in Secti on 62 of the Bhartiya 
Sakshya Bill 2023. 
 
 
 

49  
V. Section 81 of BSB: 
This provision was Section 81A in the Indian Evidence Act 1872, and there 
was no explanation in this Section. However, Section 90A (Presumption as 
to electronic records five year old) of Indian  Evidence Act 1872 (which is 
now Section 93 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill) had an explanation which was 
made applicable to Section 81A. The same explanation has now been 
removed from Section 93 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill and now added in 
Section 81 and it has b een made applicable to Section 93 of Bharatiya 
Sakshya Bill. Some words in the explanation have been changed from “and 
under the care of the person with whom, they naturally be;” to “and looked 
after by the person with whom such document is required to be kept;”. 
The explanation in Section 81 has incorrectly been made applicable to 
Section 96 (Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous 
document). It has no application there as there is no reference to any 
electronic record or custody of documents. 
VI. Section 93 BSB 
 
It has been mentioned in this Section that “Explanation to Section 84 shall 
also apply to this Section.” Section 84, however, has no explanation. 
Section 93 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill was Section 90A of Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872. Section 90A of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is reproduced. 
VII. Section 81 BSB 
 
Now, Section 81A of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 had no explanation but 
Section 81 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill has an explanation, which is being 
made applicable to Section 96 (Exclusion of evidence t o explain or amend 
ambiguous document) of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill. This seems to be erroneous 
on two counts, firstly, explanation of Section 81 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill 
is specifically stating that its explanation is applicable to Section 96, whereas 

50  
Section 96 has no relevance here. Section 81 needs to be rectified by 
replacing the word Section 96 with “Section 93.” Secondly, it is the 
explanation of Section 81 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill which needs to be made 
applicable here and not that of Section 84, which has no explanation at all. 
VIII.Section 108 BSB 
 
There is an error in illustration (c) of Section 108. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023 has replaced Section 325 with Section 115 and Section 335 with 
Section 120. These changes should be made in the first part o f illustration 
(c). 
SOME OTHER ISSUES WORTH CONSIDERING? 
 
I. The provision legalising marital rape has been retained. 
 
The colonial laws did not recognise men and women as equals and merged 
the identity of women with their husbands. Under Section 375 of the I ndian 
penal code deals with the offence of rape provides for an exception - ‘Sexual 
intercourse by man with his own wife, the wife not being under 15 years of 
age, is not rape.’ The Report of the 42nd Report of the Law Commission 
(1971) suggested removal of this exception. The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill does 
not make any significant changes to the ‘colonial’ Indian Evidence Act, even 
though the Law Commission report of 2003 had suggested so many changes 
in the form of amendment and substitution of provisions. 
II.Section 112 of Evidence Act speaks about 'Birth during marriage 
conclusive proof of legitimacy except in certain cases'. It reads as follows: 
"The fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid 
marriage between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty 
days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, shall be 
conclusive proof that he is the legitimate child of that man, unless it can be 

51  
shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other at any 
time when he could have been begotten." One must notice that there was no 
DNA paternity test at the time when this legal presumption got introduced in 
1872. Why is that this bill which is meant to decolonize the existing law, has 
made no changes to the provisio n, apart from simply renumbering it as 
Section 116? 
The Law Commission report had recommended an amendment to this 
Section: 
The fact that any child was born during the continuance of a valid marriage 
between its mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty days, (i) 
after the marriage was declared nullity, the mother remaining unmarried, or 
(ii) after the marriage was avoided by dissolution, the mother remaining 
unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that such person is the legitimate child 
of that man, unless (a) it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had 
no access to each other at any time when the child could have been begotten; 
or (b) it is conclusively established, by tests conducted at the expense of that 
man, namely, (i) medical tests,  that, at the relevant time, that man was 
impotent or sterile, and is not the father of the child; or (ii) blood tests 
conducted with the consent of that man and his wife and in the case of the 
child, by permission of the Court, that that man is not the father of the child; 
or (iii) DNA genetic printing tests conducted with the consent of that man 
and in the case of the child, by permission of the Court, that that man is not 
the father of the child. 
III.Absence of provision similar to Section 377 IPC in the Bha ratiya Nyaya 
Sanhita- The Supreme Court in Navtej Singh Johar case had struck down 
Section 377 IPC but only to the extent it criminalizes consensual sex. 
However, Section 377 IPC can still be invoked when there is a non - 
consensual sex/rape of a man by another man. A woman can also initiate 

52 
proceedings against her husband for unnatural sex under Section 377 IPC. 
If, as per the Nyaya Sanhita, these acts are not offences, it means that the 
victims of sodomy, buggery etc. will have no remedy available under i t. So 
if a man is 'raped' by another man, what is his remedy? 
IV. Non-Inclusion of trans-women in definition of rape
The Sanhita also leaves the question of inclusivity answered as the provision 
of rape is strictly limited to a woman and does not include a transgender 
woman. The Transgender Persons Act, 2019 only recognizes ‘sexual abuse’ 
for which the maximum punishment is two years. The law on rape should 
also bring transgender woman within its purview. 
V.Impact on the Digital Ecosystem - Section 94 of the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 which deals with powers to summon for evidence,
explicitly includes summoning of “digital evidence,” and covers any
electronic communication such as messages, call recordings, and emails, as
well as electronic commu nication devices such as mobile phones, laptops,
cameras, and any other electronic device that may be specified by the
government through notification in the future. A court also has the right to
order search and seizure of such evidence for various reason s, including if
the person in possession of the evidence is not expected to produce the same.
A mobile device or a laptop contains a lot of information which might not be
relevant to the case because electronic devices in today's age contain all
information pertinent to an individual's general existence. So, there’s a
question about the invasion of the right to privacy because of the scope of
information that’s in these devices. And the second thing is that collection
of such devices might also go against the right to protect yourself from self- 
incrimination. And now with it being codified in law, it just makes it easier

53  
for the law enforcement and for courts to justify whatever collection that 
they’re doing. 
VI.Basic Drafting and Spelling Errors 
There is no Sec. 498A in BNS. But BNSS mentions it as so in the index. It 
should have been Section 84 instead. Explanation to Section 150 BNS ( 
which modifies S124A IPC ) does not make any sense. It is incomplete. 
VIII.Illogical provisions - As per Section 101 of the BNS, when a man commits 
murder, punishment is life imprisonment or death. No other option. But if a 
group of 5+ men acting in concert commits murder on grounds mentioned in 
this clause, there is an option to give a punishment of 7+ years imprisonment. 
IX. The provisions display an astounding ignorance of the law. For instance, as 
per S. 262. (1), the accused may prefer an application for discharge within a 
period of sixty days from the date of framing of charges. 
X. No congruence between the three bills. For in stance, the definition of 
"Document" in the Sakshya Bill and under Nyaya Sanhita. Nyaya Sanhita 
doesn't include electronic and digital records as Document while the 
amended Sakshya Bill does. 
XI.In Sessions Trial court can frame charge even when accused is  present by 
electronic means u/s 251(2) BNSS but same has NOT been provided in 
Magistrate triable case u/s 263 BNSS. 

54  
INPUTS FROM DOMAIN EXPERTS 
 
 
 
I. Siddharth Luthra- Summary on ‘It’s Still Colonial’ 
 
 
 
 The existing Penal Code, which originated in 1860, i s still in use in 34 
countries.
 It has seen only minor amendments in India previously, such as the inclusion 
of laws related to sedition, cruelty to women, dowry death, and some 
deletions over the years.
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) - The New Penal Code: 
 
 Notable additions include the concept of community service, but it excludes 
the inclusion of open prisons.
 New offences like fake news terrorism, organised crime, and corruption have 
been added.
 However, it does not repeal the existing special laws that cover these offences.
 
Inconsistencies Between Codes 
 
 While terrorism, organised crime, and corruption are addressed in the new 
Penal Code, the corresponding amendments needed in the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Sanhita (Evidence Code) are lacking.
 This omission creates inconsistencies and gaps in the legal framework.
 
Enhancement of Sentences: 
 
 The new Codes enhance sentences for acts of rashness and negligence leading 
to death.

55  
 This change has implications for medical professionals, potentially increasing 
their legal exposure.
Punishment for Mob Lynching 
 
 The new Codes introduce punishment for mob lynching as a distinct offense.
 However, the severity of punishment for mob lynching does not align with 
that for murder or intentional culpable homicide.
Reorganization and Reduction of Provisions 
 
 The new Codes reorganize provisions and reduce the number of Sections.
 This effort includes compiling definitions and updating illustrations while 
grouping similar provisions.
 However, these changes do not fundamentally alter the core of the 1860 Penal 
Code.
Sedition Repealed and Reintroduced: 
 
 Sedition (Section 124A IPC) has been repealed but reintroduced as Section 
150 in the new Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS).
 The new provision requires an intention similar to sedition, raising concerns 
about freedom of speech and possible misuse against dissent.
 Questions arise about the necessity of retaining a relic from the era of 
monarchs in a democratic republic.
Right to Life and Liberty (Article 21): 
 
● Article 21, protecting the right to l ife and liberty, is crucial in safeguarding 
individuals against state action. 
● The 1973 Criminal Procedure Code (CPC) contains provisions related to 
arrest, the right to seek bail, and procedural safeguards, putting Article 21 into 
action. 

56  
● The new law, Bha ratiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS), introduces 
reforms like video conference trials and e -filing of FIRs but falls short in 
providing adequate protection to detainees. 
Plea Bargaining and Custody Period: 
 
 The plea bargaining chapter remains untouched i n BNSS and is limited to 
sentence bargaining, missing an opportunity to allow pleading guilty to a 
lesser offence.
 BNSS increases police options to seek custody (PC) for 40/60 days, which 
curtails the right to bail.
 This contradicts the goal of breaking fr om the colonial past and hampers 
BNSS's objective of improving forensic and scientific investigations for 
quicker and better-quality results.
 The government should have considered reducing the 15 -day PC period, as 
even colonial -era rules frowned upon it an d discouraged obtaining 
confessions.
New Evidence Law (Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam): 
 
 The new evidence law updates digital and electronic evidence provisions and 
incorporates principles developed by courts.
 It Indianizes illustrations but doesn't bring substantial changes.
 
Disappointment with New Laws: 
 
 The introduction of three new laws was expected to bring significant 
improvements but reiterated existing colonial-era laws.
 These new laws emphasise increased criminalization, harsher sentences, and 
expanded police powers, which don't align with the nation's constitutional 
objectives.




57  
The Need for Comprehensive Legal Reform: 
 Instead of piecemeal changes, an actual break from the colonial past should 
involve compiling and rationalizing central laws into substantive codes for a 
more efficient criminal justice system.
 This reform should consider rationalisation and decriminalisation, 
introducing new criminal laws where necessary, regulating arrest powers, 
implementing bail and sentencing guidelines, and ensu ring alignment with 
fundamental rights and victims' rights.
Presumption of Innocence and Fair Trial: 
 
 A break from the colonial legacy should strengthen the presumption of 
innocence and the right to a fair trial for the accused while protecting victims' 
participatory rights.
Urgency for Deep Review 
 
 The hope lies with the Standing Committee responsible for reviewing these 
proposed legislations, recognising that criminal law significantly impacts 
everyone's daily lives.
 A thorough study is needed to ensure t hese laws align with the nation's 
constitutional principles, especially the paramount right to life and liberty 
established in 1950.

58  
II. Inputs from Justice Madan B Lokur: ‘Is this a Necessary 
Overhauling?’ 
 
 Fails to address implementation concerns. 
 IPC: 150 years and is still in existence in some form or other in about 30 
countries. Evidence Act is 140 years old, CrPC is 50 years old since its 
revision in 1973. 
 Proposed laws do not address the important issue of judicious 
implementation by police and prosecu tion. Eg: Broadening rather than 
curtailing of sedition laws has led to further misuse. 
 ***8. 
 No redressal in case of errant officials where *** is unjustified. 
 In case of Zero FIR, issues with its implementation persist. Eg: The events 
recorded in the horrific video ***. 
 The legislation extends police/judicial custody from 15 to 90 days. This 
would put tremendous pressure and mental torture on the accused. 
 Purpose of the laws is to expedite justice delivery system. This cannot be 
done when appointments of judges to high courts and local courts take  
years. 
9. WHY THE RUSH ON THIS REFORM? ELECTION 2024? 
 
***  
The law you are passing will stay for 100 years. Let each one of us rise above 
narrow partisan interests. Let us create laws to better the lives of our children 
and our childrens’ children. 
We are all for reform. Who can be against reform. But in the name of reform 
let us not become more repressive than the colonisers. 
While there is an undeniable need to reform colonial era criminal framework, 
                                                      
8 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

59  
the current criminal law bills are more draconian than the colonisers law - 
treating citizens worse than ‘native subjects’ of the Raj. 

58 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE - C 
 
 
 
 
MP/2023/20 
 
19 August, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon’ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Subject: Request to reschedule the meeting for discussion on Criminal Law Bills in 
September. 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
Further to my conversation with you on the telephone this morning, I write to you concerning  notice 
(LAFEAS-HAl2011/1/2023-Comm Sec (HA) -RSS) dated 18 August 2023. The Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023; the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and the Bharatiya Sakshya  Bill, 2023, 
as introduced in Lok Sabha have been referred to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs for examination and report.  I  have just received the news  that the 
meeting of the committee with respe ct to this is scheduled on the 24, 25 and 26 of August 2023. 
That’s a few days away. 
 
The notice given to us on the 16 th  August stated that a meeting will be held on 24 th  August 11 AM   
to adopt the draft report on Prison - Condition, Infrastructure and R eforms. In accordance with that 
and the fact that monsoon session recently ended, the Members have made multiple commitments   
in their constituency and other parts of their State including programs and  meetings. 
 
Sir, this is too short a notice (a few days only) for discussion of a Bill with implications of this 
magnitude. 
 
Please revise the dates and schedule it in the month of September, considering that many members  
of the committee are present for these  meetings. 
 
Awaiting a response on the same at the earliest. 
Sincerely, 
Derek O’Brien 
 
P.S. May I suggest you reschedule after the tour. Thank you  again 


59 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE- D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MP/2023/28 
 
11 September, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon’ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs  
 
Subject: Concerns regarding discussion on Criminal Law Bills and suggestions for 
way forward. 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
The first four meetings on this subject have been held. I am looking forward to attending 
more meetings (5 th and 6 th  meetings) on 12 and 13 Se ptember. These are my observations  
and suggestions. 
First, considering the significance of these three Bills, it is imperative that multiple  
bipartisan discussions are held at length. It is my earnest request that members of this 
committee are not rushed  and are given multiple opportunities to express  themselves.  
Choice of domain experts, choice of witnesses from across disciplines and the methodology 
used must always take into consideration the "sense of the house". In the spirit  of  
federalism, it is  imperative that the committee must also travel to multiple states to meet 
stakeholders. Sir, please create an atmosphere for scrutiny, debate and detailed discussion. 
This will embellish the quality of our output as a committee. 
Second, the minutes of the  meetings must be recorded with due diligence and provide a true 
reflection of the proceedings. Key points raised by members must reflect in the minutes. 
(Verbatim records are not a substitute for minutes.) 
 
 
Page 1 of 2 

60 
 
 
 
 
For example, in the meeting th at was held on 24 August 2023, Dayanidhi Maran (DMK)   
had submitted a letter stating objections on how the titles of the said bills are in Hindi. The 
submission of this letter making multiple points, the summary of its contents, and his 
intervention does not reflect at all in the minutes of the meeting. Recording of such views is 
an integral part of the democratic process. Please ensure this is done for future  meetings. 
Third, considering that the Special Session of the Parliament has been called from 18 
September to 22 September 2023, the Members have made multiple commitments in their 
constituencies and other parts of their State including programs and meetings immediately 
(one week) after the session. This is a request to schedule the next committee mee ting at  
least one week after the session concludes. 
I am sure that you will accept these concrete suggestions in the spirit that they have been 
made. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Derek O’Brien 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 2 


Page 1 of 3 
61 
ANNEXURE - E 
13 September, 2023 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on Home Affairs 
Subject: Suggested  consultation  methodology for the Criminal  Law  Bills. 
Respected  Chairperson, 
This is with regard to the consultation methodology suggested at the meeting held on 13.09.2023 to 
discuss the Criminal Law Bills. 
As mentioned during the meeting, general statutes of criminal law are for ages to come. These laws 
will affect the lives of the poor, and therefore must be crafted with utmost care. To that end, we are 
reproducing below for your careful consideration the organizations the Committee must consult with 
along with a projected timeline. 
Consultations to he done 
1. Senior practitioners of criminal law who have domain knowledge accumulated over decades
of litigation practice and expertise in the area.
2. Bar Council of all states in India.
(At least 23 state ba,J:councils)
(30 days)
3. The judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts.
(Supreme Court- Chief Justice and 33 other Judges appointed by the President oflndia. High Court­ 
Working Strength of at least 785 judges across 25 high    courts) 
(6 months) 

Page 2 of 3 
62 
4. The Bar Council of India Supreme Court Bar associations
(At least 20 office bearers) 
(20days) 
5. Members of parliament, legislative assemblies, and local councils play a role in passing laws.
Their input can help ensure that proposed reforms align with legislative goals. 
(Lok Sabha - 539 members + 
Rajya Sabha- 238 members + 
State legislative assemblies) 
(6 months) 
6. International Organizations: Collaboration with international bodies like the United Nations and
others can help align reforms with international  standards  and  best practices. (100  days) 
7. Media: Journalists and media organizations can play a role in raising public awareness about the
need for criminal justice reform and can provide insights  into public sentiment.    (100 days) 
8. Ethnic and Religious Leaders: Considering the diverse cultural and religious landscape of India,
involving leaders from various communities can help ensure that reforms are sensitive to different 
perspectives. (50 days) 
9. Experts on Juvenile Justice: Specialists in juvenile justice can provide insights into how reforms
could  better address the needs and rights of young offenders.  (5  days) 
10. Experts on Cybercrime and Technology: Given the rise of cybercrime, involving experts in
technology and cyber law is crucial when considering reforms in this domain. (5 days) 

Page 3 of 3 
63 
 
 
11. Prison Officials and Reform Advocates : Individuals working within the pr ison system and 
advocates for prison reform can contribute perspectives on conditions , rehabilitation, and the 
treatment of inmates. (1319 prisons in the country and their officials) (4 months) 
 
12. Inclusive Consultation from the general public including women, Dalits, religious minorities, 
adivasis, LGBTQ persons, or persons with disabilities etc. (1 month) 
 
13. Governors, chief ministers of states, lieutenant governors and administrators of Union territories. 
(60-70 officials approx.) (1 month) 
 
14. Legal Scholars and academic institutes (5 days) 
 
15. Law Enforcement Agencies: Representatives from police departments can offer insights into 
issues related to investigation, evidence collection, and law enforcement procedures. (10 days) 
 
16. Human Right s Organizations: NGOs and advocacy groups focused on human rights can provide 
critical perspectives on how proposed reforms might impact human rights, due process, and  
individual  freedoms.  (5 days) 
 
A total of 1.5 years 
 
 
 
We are sure that you will accept these concrete suggestions in the spirit that they have been made. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
P. Chidambaram Derek O'Brien 


Page 1 of 3 
64 
 
ANNEXURE - F 
 
14 September, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on Home Affairs 
 
Subject: Suggested  witnesses for consultation  on the Criminal  Law Bills. 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
Further to our letter dated September 13, 2023, and the interventions made during the 
Committee meeting held on the same day, we are reproducing below for your careful 
consideration the witnesses the Committee must call as experts for consultation. 
 
As mentioned during the meeting, general statutes of criminal law are for ages to come. These 
laws will affect the lives of the poor, and therefore must be crafted with utmost care. 
 
1. Former CJI U.U.Lalit 
 
He was designated Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court in April 2004. He aided the Court 
as an amicus curiae in many important matters pertaining to forests, vehicular pollution and 
pollution of the Yamuna river. In 2011, he was appointed as the Special Public Prosecutor 
in the 2G Spectrum scam case. He also served as the 49th Chief Justice of India. 
2. Justice Madan Lokur 
 
He was appointed as Additional Solicitor General of India in 1998 . Functioned as Chief 
Justice of Gauhati High Court from 2010 to 2011, and Chief Justice of High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh from 2011 to 2012. Has vast experience in Civil, Criminal, Constitutional, Revenue 
and Service laws. 

Page 2 of 3 
65 
 
3. Fali Nariman 
 
Fali Sam Nariman is an Indian jurist. He is a senior advocate to the Supreme Court of India 
since 1971 and was the President of the Bar Association of India from 1991 to 2010. 
4. Adv. Maneka Guruswamy 
 
Maneka Guruswamy is a senior advocate at the Supreme Court of India. She is known for 
having played a significant rol e in many landmark cases before the Supreme  Court,  
including the Section 377 case, the bureaucratic reforms case, the Agustawestland bribery 
case, the Salwa Judum  case, and the Right to Education   case. 
5. Sr. Adv. Sidharth Luthra: 
 
Advocate Sidarth Luthra is a Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court. He was appointed the 
Additional Solicitor General of the Supreme from 2012-2014, during which he represented 
Union and State Governments in matters such as fundamental rights , environment laws, 
electoral reform, criminal law, juvenile rights, education and policy issues. Mr Luthra also 
appeared as the Special Public Prosecutor for the State of NCT of Delhi in the Nirbhaya 
gang-rape case. 
6. Sr. Adv. Hariharan 
 
Hariharan N enrolled at the Delhi Bar in 1987 and over t he last 34 years, has cemented a 
presence on the Criminal side of legal practice. For contributions to the practice and 
development of Criminal Law, he was designated as a Senior Advocate by the Delhi High 
Court in 2013. 
7. Sr. Adv. Rebecca John 
 
Rebecca Mammen John has been practicing exclusively on the criminal side in the Supreme 
Court of India , High Court of Delhi and in the Trial Courts of Delhi for more than three 
decades. She has conducted a wide range of criminal trials and argued appeals dealing with 
offenses under the Indian Penal Code, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, Prevention of 
Corruption  Act and other  special statutes. 

Page 3 of 3 
66 
 
8. Dr. Sylendra Babu 
9. Sr. Adv. Amit Desai 
10.Sr. Adv. Rajeev Dhavan 
11. Sr. Adv. Siddharth Dave 
12. Adit Pujari 
13. Sr. Adv. Aditya Sondhi 
14.N. Dinakar 
15.Justice R.Balasubramaniam 
16.Sr. Adv. Vrinda Grover 
17.Sr. Adv. Meenakshi Arora 
We are sure that you will accept these concrete suggestions in the spirit that they have been 
made. 
Sincerely, 
 
P. Chidambaram Derek O'Brien 


 
67 
 
 
 
D  EREK  O '  B   RI  E N 
Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha 
Leade,rAll India Trinamool Congress Parliamentary  Party, Rajya Sabha 
ANNEXURE - G 
 
 
MP/2023/33 
22 September 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
With reference to your letter D.O. No.-lMP/DLI/BL/RS/2023/397 dated 15th September 
2023 please note the following: 
 
1. The stakeholders that you wrote to, comprise a very small part of the list of 
stakeholders we suggested. As mentioned  during the meeting, these statutes of 
criminal law are for ages to come. These laws will affect the lives of the poor, and 
therefore must be crafted with utmost care. Hence, I reiterate what I said it the last 
letter. 
2. The minutes of the meeting, although a summary, should provide a true reflection 
of the proceedings. The point that Mr Dayanidhi Maran made was a very important 
one. A summary must at least reflect the most important points made during the 
meeting in order to safeguard the health of the democratic process. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Derek O'Brien 


 
68 
 
 
 
 
D EREK  O '  B  RI  E N 
Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha 
Leade.rAll India Trinamool Congress Parliamentary  Party, Rajya Sabha 
ANNEXURE - H 
 
 
MP/2023/34 
27 September 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on Home Affairs 
 
Subject: Concerns regarding rushing the scrutiny of Criminal Law Bills. 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
I am writing to you regarding your letter IMP/DLI/BL/RS/2023/407 dated 23rd 
September 2023 and Commi ttee Notice LAFEAS-HA12011/2/2023- Comm Sec (HA)­ 
RSS dated 25th September 2023. I am once again compelled to express my concerns 
regarding the discussion on Criminal Laws under consideration in this Committee. The 
methodology of the deliberations leaves a  lot to be desired. Many issues are still 
unaddressed. 
One cannot ignore the ***9 and the rushed nature of this process of consideration of 
Bills. 
The Committee which recommended these reforms, Prof. Ranbir Singh Committee, was 
constituted of only men from similar social identities as well as professional backgrounds 
and experiences. This makes it even more important to consult a diverse group of 
stakeholders. It is imperative that we expand the pool of witnesses who come and present 
their views to the Committee. 
 
 
                                                      
9*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  


 
Leaving out important stakeholders from the conversation undermines the legitimacy of 
the process. It is our responsibility to ensure that any new law is well -reasoned, well­ 
informed, and thoroughly debated to prevent any unintended negative consequences. 
The Committee should reconsider the approach to this discussion and take the necessary 
steps to ensure that the Bill undergoes proper consultation and scrutiny. It is in the best 
interest of our democracy. 
I am enclosing once again for your peru sal a list of people who should be called as 
witnesses. They have impeccable credentials. The Committee will benefit from their wise 
counsel and insights. I once again urge you to invite those mentioned in the list (enclosed 
once again) to share their expert opinions in the future. 
Awaiting a response on the same at the earliest. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Derek O'Brien 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enclosed: As above 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 


Consultations to be done 
1. Senior  practitioners  of criminal  law who have domain  knowledge accumulated over
decades of litigation practice and expertise in the area.
2. Bar Council of all states in India.
(At least 23 state bar councils) 
3. The judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts.
(Supreme Court- Chief Justice and 33 other Judges appointed by the President of India. High 
Court- Working Strength  of at least 785 judges across 25 high   courts) 
4. The Bar Council of India Supreme Court Bar associations
(At least 20 office bearers) 
5. Members of parliament, legislative assemblies, and local councils play a role in passing
laws. Their input can help ensure that proposed  reforms align with legislative   goals.
(Lok Sabha - 539 members+ Rajya Sabha- 238 members+  State legislative assemblies) 
6. International Organizations: Collaboration with international bodies like the  United
Nations and others can help align reforms with international  standards and best    practices.
7. Media: Journalists and media organizations can play a role in raising public awareness
about the need for criminal justice reform and can provide insights into public sentiment.
8. Ethnic and Religious Leaders: Considering the diverse cultural and religious landscape of
India, involving  leaders from various communities  can help ensure that reforms are sensitive
to different  perspectives.
Page 1 of 4
70

Page 2 of 4 
71 
9. Experts on Juvenile Justice: Specialists in juvenile justice can provide insights into how
reforms could better address the needs and rights of young offenders.
10. Experts on Cybercrime and Technology: Given the rise of cybercrime, involving experts
in technology and cyber law is crucial when considering reforms in this domain.
11. Prison Officials and Reform Advocates: Individuals working within the prison system and
advocates for prison reform can contribute perspectives on conditions, rehabilitation, and the
treatment of inmates. (1319 prisons in the country and their officials)
12. Inclusive Consultation from the general public including women, Dalits, religious
minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ persons, or persons with disabilities etc.
13. Governors, chief ministers of states, lieutenant governors and administrators of Union
territories. (60-70 officials approx.)
14. Legal Scholars and academic institutes.
15. Law Enforcement Agencies: Representatives from police departments can offer insights
into issues related  to investigation, evidence  collection, and law enforcement  procedures.
16. Human Rights Organizations: NGOs and advocacy groups focused on human rights can
provide critical perspectives on h ow proposed reforms might impact human rights,  due
process,  and  individual freedoms.

Page 3 of 4 
72  
Additional  recommendations: 
l.  Former CJI U.U.Lalit 
He was designated Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court in April 2004. He 
aided the Court as an amicus curiae in many important matters pertaining to 
forests, vehicular pollution and pollution of the Yamuna river. In 2011, he was 
appointed as the Special Public Prosecutor in the 2G Spectrum scam case. He 
also served as the 49th Chief Justice of India. 
2. Justice Madan Lokur 
He was appointed as Additional Solicitor General of India in 1998 . Functioned 
as Chief Justice of Gauhati High Court from 2010 to 2011, and Chief Justice of 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh from 2011 to 2012. Has vast experience in Civil, 
Criminal, Constitutional, Revenue and Service laws. 
3. Fali Nariman 
Fali Sam Nariman is an Indian jurist. He is a senior advocate to the Supreme 
Court of India since 1971 and was the President of the Bar Association of India 
from  1991  to 2010. 
4. Adv. Menaka  Guruswamy 
Menaka Guruswamy is a senior advocate at the Supreme Court of India. She is 
known for having played a significant role in many landmark cases before the 
Supreme Court, including the Section 377 case, the bureaucratic reforms case, 
the Agustawestland bribery ca se, the Salwa Judum case, and the Right to 
Education case. 
5. Sr. Adv. Sidharth Luthra: 
Advocate Sidarth Luthra is a Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court. He was 
appointed the Additional Solicitor General of the Supreme from 2012 -2014, 
during which he represented Union and State Governments in matters such as 
fundamental rights, environment laws, electoral reform, criminal law, juvenile 
rights, education and policy issues. Mr Luthra also appeared as the Special 
Public Prosecutor for the State ofNCT of Delhi in the Nirbhaya gang-rape case. 

6. Sr. Adv. Hariharan
Hariharan N enrolled at the Delhi Bar in 1987 and over the last 34 years, has 
cemented a presence on the Criminal side of legal practice . For contributions to 
the practice and development of Criminal Law , he was designated as a Senior 
Advocate  by the Delhi High Court in  2013. 
7. Sr. Adv. Rebecca John
Rebecca Mammen John has been practicing exclusively on the criminal side in 
the Supreme Court of India, High Court of Delhi and in the Trial Courts of Delhi 
for more than three decades. She has conducted a wide range of criminal trials 
and argued appeals dealing with offenses under the Indian Penal Code, Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, Prevention of Corruption Act and other special 
statutes. 
8. Dr. Sylendra Babu
9. Sr. Adv. Amit Desai
10. Sr. Adv. Rajeev Dhavan
11. Sr. Adv. Siddharth Dave
12. Adit Pujari
13. Sr. Adv. Aditya Sondhi
14. N. Dinakar
15. Justice R.Balasubramaniam
16. Sr. Adv. Vrinda Grover
17. Sr. Adv. Meenakshi Arora
Page 4 of 4
73 

 
 
 
DEREK O'BRIEN 
Member of Parliament. Rajya Sabha 
Leade,r All India Trinamool Congress Parliamentary  Party, Rajya Sabha 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
 
MP/2023/35 
3 October 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
I am writ ing to you regarding the Notice  [LAFEAS-HA12011/2/2023-  Comm  Sec  
(HA)- RSS] from the Committee dated 25th September 2023 calling for a clause -by­ 
clause discussion on the Criminal Law Bills. 
First, ***10 and the rushed nature of this process of consider ation of Bills. The 
Committee which recommended these reforms, Prof. Ranbir Singh Committee, was 
constituted of only men from similar social identities as well as professional backgrounds 
and experiences. Leaving out important stakeholders from the convers ation undermines 
the legitimacy of the process. It is our responsibility to ensure that any new law is well -
reasoned, well­ informed,  and thoroughly debated to prevent any unintended negative  
consequences. 
Second, it is imperative that every member of the committee contributes to the discussion 
for a comprehensive deliberation. Only some members have voiced their opinions. The 
members who have spoken haven't been able to express their views. Proceeding to 
clause-by-clause amendments would be premature and c ounterproductive. A fruitful 
discussion requires the active participation of all committee members so that diverse 
perspectives are considered before making informed decisions. The essence of a 
committee lies in collaborative efforts, and only through the thoughtful contributions of 
each member can we achieve the purpose and effectiveness of our committee 
deliberations. 
 
 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 74 
                                                      
10*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 


 
 
Considering the significance of these three Bills, it is imperative that multiple bipartisan 
discussions are held at length. I earnestly request that members of this committee are not 
rushed and are given multiple opportunities to express themselves. 
Due to the above-mentioned reasons, a clause-by-clause discussion is out of question till 
we thoooughly consult the stakeh olders and members are given ample opportunity to 
express their views on the same. I request that the consultation process is not rushed and 
more time be granted for discussions and stakeholder consultations. Please consider 
pushing the date of the clause-by-clause amendment discussion. 
Awaiting a response on the same at the earliest. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Derek O'Brien 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
75 

76  
 
ANNEXURE - J 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MP/2023/42 
23 October 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon’ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs  
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
With reference to Home Affairs Committee Notice LAFEAS -HA12011/2/2023- Comm Sec 
(HA)- RSS dated 20 October 2023 regarding the consideration and adoption of draft Reports 
on Criminal Law Bills on 27 Octo ber 2023. In my earlier letters to you, I have flagged the 
undue haste and ***11 of these Bills without due diligence and meaningful scrutiny by this 
Committee. In the last few months this has become a trend. 
*** adoption of such an important report will h ave negative implications and will turn out 
counterproductive. Hastily rushing through the process is not doing justice   to this important 
proposed legislation. 
Allow me to elucidate. 
1. The Draft reports were only sent about 8.30 pm on 21 October 202 3. Which leaves only 5 
days to read and analyse the three reports. This is too short a notice for discussion of a  Bill 
with implications of this magnitude. There are so many drafting errors pointed out by my 
colleagues Shri N. R. Elango and Shri P. Chidambaram. 
 
2. *** and rush in the nature of this process of consideration of Bills. The laws that are being 
examined are going to last over 100 years and such a hasty adoption of the reports without 
consultation of stakeholders would be premature and counterprodu ctive. I am enclosing 
once again for your perusal a list of people who should be called as witnesses. They have 
impeccable credentials. The Committee will benefit from their wise counsel and insi ghts. I 
once again urge you to invite those mentioned in the  list (enclosed once again) to share 
their expert opinions in   the future. 
 
Page 1 of 2 
                                                      
11*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

77  
 
3. Members of this Committee have made multiple commitments in their constituencies 
during the festive season. In Bengal, much is lined up on 27 and 28 October. The Uni ted 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has included 
Kolkata’s famous Durga Puja in its Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity list (ICH). 
The carnival is on the 27 October and Lakshmi Pujo is on the 28 October, for which t he 
preparations start at least a day in advance. ***12 
Respected Chairperson, I humbly urge you not to hurriedly rush through this legislation. We 
will be doing a grave disservice to a large section of the population, especially those who are 
marginalised o r economically challenged. This consultative process needs us to rise above 
narrow partisan interest or short term electoral stunts. Kindly assess all this in the interest of 
140 crore Indians who look up to Parliament to legislate with  wisdom. 
Awaiting a response on the same at the earliest. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Derek O’Brien 
Leader, AITC Parliamentary Party, Rajya Sabha  
 
 
Enclosed: As Above 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 2 
                                                      
12 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 


78  
Consultations to be done 
 
1. Senior practitioners of criminal law who have domain knowledge accumulated over 
decades of litigation practice and expertise in the area. 
2. Bar Council of all states in India.  (At least 23 state bar   councils) 
3. The judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. 
 
(Supreme Court- Chief Justice and 33 other Judges appointed by the President of India. 
High Court- Working Strength of at least 785 judges across 25 high  courts) 
 
4. The Bar Council of India Supreme Court Bar associations (At least 20 office 
bearers) 
5. Members of parliament, legislative assemblies, and local councils play a role in 
passing laws. Their input can help ensure  that proposed reforms align with legislative 
goals. 
 
(Lok Sabha - 539 members + Rajya Sabha- 238 members + State legislative assemblies) 
 
6. International Organizations: Collaboration with international bodies like the  
United Nations and others can help ali gn reforms with international standards and best 
practices. 
7. Media: Journalists and media organizations can play a role in raising public 
awareness about the need for criminal justice reform and can provide insights into public 
sentiment. 
8. Ethnic and Religio us Leaders: Considering the diverse cultural and religious 
landscape of India, involving leaders from various communities can help ensure that 
reforms are sensitive to different perspectives. 
9. Experts on Juvenile Justice: Specialists in juvenile justice can  provide insights into 
how reforms could better address the needs and rights of young  offenders. 
10. Experts on Cybercrime and Technology: Given the rise of cybercrime, involving 
experts in technology and cyber law is crucial when considering reforms in this domain. 
11. Prison Officials and Reform Advocates: Individuals working within the prison 
system and advocates for prison reform can contribute perspectives on conditions, 
rehabilitation, and the treatment of inmates. (1319 prisons in the country and their 
officials) 
12. Inclusive Consultation from the general public including women, Dalits, religious 
minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ persons, or persons with disabilities etc. 
13. Governors, chief ministers of states, lieutenant governors and administrators of 
Union territories. (60-70 officials approx.) 
14. Legal Scholars and academic institutes. 

79  
15. Law Enforcement Agencies: Representatives from police departments can offer 
insights into issues related to investigation, evidence collection, and law enforcement 
procedures. 
16. Human Rig hts Organizations: NGOs and advocacy groups focused on human 
rights can provide critical perspectives on how proposed reforms might impact human 
rights, due process, and individual freedoms. 
 
Additional  recommendations: 
 
1. Former CJI U.U.Lalit 
 
He was desig nated Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court in April 2004. He aided the 
Court as an amicus curiae in many important matters pertaining to forests, vehicular 
pollution and pollution of the Yamuna river. In 2011, he was appointed as the Special 
Public Prosecutor in the 2G Spectrum scam case. He also served as the 49th Chief Justice 
of India. 
 
2. Justice Madan Lokur 
 
He was appointed as Additional Solicitor General of India in 1998. Functioned as Chief 
Justice of Gauhati High Court from 2010 to 2011, and Chief Jus tice of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh from 2011 to 2012. Has vast experience in Civil, Criminal, 
Constitutional, Revenue and Service laws. 
 
3. Fali Nariman 
 
Fali Sam Nariman is an Indian jurist. He is a senior advocate to the Supreme Court of 
India since 1971 and was the President of the Bar Association of India from 1991 to 2010. 
 
4. Adv. Menaka Guruswamy 
 
Menaka Guruswamy is a senior advocate at the Supreme Court of India. She is known 
for having played a significant role in many landmark cases before the Suprem e Court, 
including the Section 377 case, the bureaucratic reforms case, the AgustaWestland bribery 
case, the Salwa Judum case, and the Right to Education case. 
 
5. Sr. Adv. Sidharth Luthra: 
 
Advocate Sidarth Luthra is a Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court. H e was appointed 
the Additional Solicitor General of the Supreme from 2012 -2014, during which he 
represented Union and State Governments in matters such as fundamental rights, 
environment laws, electoral reform, criminal law, juvenile rights, education and policy 
issues. Mr Luthra also appeared as the Special Public Prosecutor for the State of NCT of 
Delhi in the Nirbhaya gang-rape case. 

80 
6. Sr. Adv. Hariharan
Hariharan N enrolled at the Delhi Bar in 1987 and over the last 34 years, has cemented a
presence on the Criminal side of legal practice. For contributions to the practice and 
development of Criminal Law, he was designated as a Senior Advocate by the Delhi High 
Court in 2013. 
7. Sr. Adv. Rebecca John
Rebecca Mammen John has been practicing exclusively on th e criminal side in the
Supreme Court of India, High Court of Delhi and in the Trial Courts of Delhi for more 
than three decades. She has conducted a wide range of criminal trials and argued appeals 
dealing with offenses under the Indian Penal Code, Unlawful Activities (Prevention)  Act, 
Prevention of Corruption Act and other special 
statutes. 
8. Dr. Sylendra Babu
9. Sr. Adv. Amit Desai
10. Sr. Adv. Rajeev Dhavan
11. Sr. Adv. Siddharth Dave
12. Adit Pujari
13. Sr. Adv. Aditya Sondhi
14. N. Dinakar
15. Justice R.Balasubramaniam
16. Sr. Adv. Vrinda Grover
17. Sr. Adv. Meenakshi Arora

 
 
 
D  EREK   O  ' B RIEN 
Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha 
Leade,rAll India Trinamool Congress Parliamentary Party, Rajya Sabha 
 
ANNEXURE- K 
 
MP/2023/44 
30 October, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brij Lal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
I recently received a memorandum from the Indian Police Foundation, accompanied by their 
comprehensive clause-by-clause analysis of the recently proposed three Criminal Law bills. It is 
imperative that we pay heed to their views and engage them in the ongoing discussions, as inputs 
from domain experts are essential for bills of such profound significance. 
The Indian Police Foundation (IPF), renowned for its expertise in police reform and  policing 
standards, should be called upon to participate in the stakeholder consultation for these bills. IPF 
conducts comprehensive research, offers capacity building, and actively engages in policy 
advocacy, all centered around advancing policing standards and contributing to the enhancement 
of law enforcement practices. The foundation is overseen by a coalition of progressive police 
professionals and engaged citizen stakeholders, all of whom recognise the potential for positive 
transformation within the  Indian Police. Their board comprises eminent members, including 
active and retired police officers and civil servants. 
I strongly recommend that IPF be called for a consultation in early November. Their participation 
will provide invaluable  insights and ensure a thorough examination  of these   bills. 
 
Sincerely, 
Derek O'Brien 
 
 
P.S. We have hardly called any stakeholders to testify. Please refer to my earlier 
letters. For the sake of the millions of marginalised who these bills will affect, please  
do not rush this  bill. 
 
 
184 South Avenue , New Delhi-110011  • Phone : +91 11 23012585   • Fax  +9111 23795549 
E-mail : derek.ob@sansad.nic.in 81 


 
 

PPage 1 oof 3 
 
November 8, 2023 
To, 
Shri Brij Lal, 
Hon’ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject: Note of Dissent on Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and Bharatiya Nagrik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 
 
 
Respected  Chairperson, 
 
I write to express my strong dissent regarding the proposed bills, namely Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, currently under 
deliberation by the Departmentally Related Standing Committee on Home Affairs. My 
concerns are as follows: 
I. NO NEED FOR NEW BILLS WHICH ARE 93% COPY PASTE LEGISLATION 
The introduction of new legislation ***1 raises concerns about the efficient use of 
legislative resources. The bills mostly mirror existing criminal laws, making it 
more sensible to amend them instead. 
II. *** COMMITTEE  PROCEDURE AND AVOIDING QUALITY STAKEHOLDER 
CONSULTATION 
Moreover, the drafting process lacks inclusive stakeholder consultations, which are 
crucial for legislation of this magnitude. The committee responsible for reviewing 
these laws lacks diversity, excluding representation from marginalized groups. 
III. LIMITING THE MEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION OF THE OPPOSITION. 
 
The *** scheduling of discussions during the festive season, ***, restricts 
meaningful opposition participation. Adequate scrutiny and debate are 
indispensable for such consequential legislation. *** with far-reaching 
implications is insufficient and disconcerting. Rushed passage may result in 
unintended consequences and public dissatisfaction. 
 
IV. RESULT OF RUSHING AND ***- NUMEROUS DRAFTING ERRORS 
                                           
1 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

PPage 2 oof 3 
Basic drafting errors have been identified, necessitating comprehensive revisions. 
The hurried nature of the legislation leaves minimal room for addressing these 
concerns, imperilling the clarity and effectiveness 
These bills *** 2  for new legislation, inclusive stakeholder consultations, 
meaningful opposition participation, and transparency in the legislative 
process. Rushing their adoption may lead to unintended consequences and 
public dissatisfaction. *** and ensure that our legislative process is thorough, 
transparent, and representative of all stakeholders. 
V. NAMES OF THESE BILLS SHOULD BE IN ENGLISH AS WELL AS HINDI.
The bills in question have names in Hindi. This is seen as not just Hindi imposition 
but also unconstitutional, as Article 348 of the Constitution specifically mandates the 
use of the English language in Acts and Bills. However, a report maintains that the 
use of Hindi names for bills is constitutional and even suggests expanding the use of 
Hindi in these contexts, which seemingly contradicts the constitutional provision. 
VI. CRITIQUE OF SEDITION LAW-BNS
Regarding the Sedition Law, the report commends the government for rephrasing it 
while supposedly safeguarding state security. However, the law has been retained 
with a broader definition that can encompass a wide range of actions under the 
pretext of endangering India's unity and integrity. This expansion of the law provides 
authorities with significant discretion, contrary to the recommendation of the 22nd 
Law Commission, which called for a well-defined sedition law. The Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023, specifically Clause 150, deals with acts that endanger the sovereignty, 
unity, and integrity of India, indicating the broad scope of the revised sedition law. 
***. Simply delaying it by a day or a week won ’t solve our problem . ***. 
Pushing the committee's work forward hastily would be a severe detriment to the 
legislative process. What we truly need is an extension of no less than three months, 
making the new deadline March 2024 an absolute necessity. 
*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha

PPage 3 oof 3 
 
VII. DEATH PENALTY PROVISIONS 
 
The statistics provided by Project 39A reveal troubling disparities in the application 
of the death penalty in India, with a significant majority of death row inmates coming 
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds, lacking proper education, and 
belonging to marginalized communities. This data underscores the urgent need for 
re-evaluating the death penalty in the country. Such re-evaluation is a means to 
rectify these social injustices, prevent potential wrongful convictions, and promote 
principles of justice and human rights. A more humane approach to addressing 
crime, focusing on rehabilitation and reintegration, is necessary, as many other 
countries have already done. The disparities between trial courts and the Supreme 
Court, as well as the increasing scepticism surrounding death row trials, highlight the 
need for institutional reform in the criminal justice system. In sum, broad-based 
social discussions are warranted on the subject. 
 
VIII. 90-DAY POLICE CUSTODY 
The Bill permits the magistrate to authorise detention in police custody for a period 
beyond the current 15-day limit, extending up to 90 days. 
90-day police custody - for crimes that carry a sentence of ten years or more 
60-day police custody - for “any other offence” with imprisonment terms less than 
the 90-day detention offences 
Increasing the period of police custody without proper safeguards could lead to 
human rights violations, including the risk of torture, coerced confessions, and abuse 
of detainees. This is particularly concerning given the history of custodial violence 
and abuse in India. 
I firmly believe that these issues deserve our utmost attention and consideration. In 
hope that the principles of justice and constitution will prevail in shaping the future 
of our legislative endeavours, I express my dissent. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
D
(M
r
e
K
m
a
b
k
e
o
r
l
o
i 
f
G
P
h
a
o
rl
s
ia
h
m
D
en
a
t
s
, 
t
L
i
o
d
k
a
S
r
abha) 


DAYANIDHI MARAN 
Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha 
Chennai Central Constituency  
3, First Avenue, 
Boat Club, 
R.A. Puram, Chennai - 600 028. 
Ph : (044) 2437  1515 
E_mail : dmaranoffice@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
07.11.2023 
 
 
 
Dear Chairman, Vanakkam! 
 
Subject  Dissent  Note on Draft 246th Report on The  Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita Bill 2023, 247th report on The Bharatiya Nagarika 
Suraksha Sanhita Bill, 2023, 248th report on The Bharatiya 
Sakshaya  Bill, 2023 
 
Through my letters dt. 26.10.2023 & 23.08.2023 to the Chairman & members 
of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, I had 
apprised the Committee as to how the titles of The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill, 
2023; The Bharatiya Nagarika Suraksha Sanhita Bill, 2023 and The Bharatiya 
Sakshya Bill, 2023 are violative of Article 348 of the Constitution and that the clauses 
of these three Bills need extensive consultation with all the stakeholders such as the 
State Governments, Judges, Police Authorities, Bar Council of India, State Bar 
Councils, Advocate Association, Bar Associations, Senior Advocates, Advocates, 
Women Lawyers' Association, Eminent Jurists, Academicians etc. Furthermore, I  had 
submitted my objections highlighting that we have a golden opportunity in our  hands 
to conduct an effective exercise in bringing changes to our criminal justice delivery 
system as The Indian Penal Code, 1860, The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, The 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 were largely untouched before. While examining the above 
three Bills, it must be considered whether we can amend the existing Bills either by 
deleting or incorporating new provisions thereby bringing actual reforms to make the 
criminal justice delivery system more efficient and user friendly instead of thrusting 
old wine in a new bottle. 
 
However, I am deeply saddened by  the fact that ***1. There is no  specific 
reason stated so as to justify the non-consideration of the 
recommendationsIsuggestions made by the stakeholders. 
                                                      
1 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

DAYANIDHI MARAN 
Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha 
Chennai Central Constituency  
3, First Avenue, 
Boat Club, 
R.A. Puram, Chennai - 600 028. 
Ph : (044) 2437  1515 
E_mail : dmaranoffice@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
These Bills will further change the federal relationship and structure between 
the Union and the State. As you are aware, India is a Union of States - states which 
speak different languages i.e., languages other than Hindi. On the other hand, except 
for a few words, the body of these Bills is in English, but the title of the Bill is in 
Hindi which is violative of Article 348. The Article 348 of the Constitution puts a 
complete embargo on a Bill having any other language in its text other than English. 
Therefore, the titles of the Bills ought to be changed to their English translation. The 
usage of a Sanskrit / Hindi title and words in some clauses is imposition of Sanskrit (a 
language used by less than 10,000 people as per the 2011 census) and Hindi on non-
Hindi speaking states. I make it clear that we are not opposed to Hindi, but we are 
opposed to imposition of Hindi on non -Hindi speaking states. If these bills tum into 
Act's, the people in non -Hindi speaking states will find difficulty in pronouncing and 
handling these Acts. At the grass root level they will not be able to understand  the 
texture, character, tenor, and nature of the act if the title remains in Hindi and 
implementation will be very difficult including filing of FIR's. 
 
Therefore, I humbly request you to change the titles from Sanskrit / Hindi to 
English translations for  The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill, 2023; The Bharatiya 
Nagarika Suraksha Sanhita Bill, 2023 and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 and to 
consider revising the contents of the bills to bring about the much needed reforms in 
our laws, instead of the mere superficial attempt of this bill. 
 
Thanking you, 
Member,  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
To 
Shri. Brij Lal, 
The Hon'ble Chairman, 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
C-1/9, Pandara Park, 
New Delhi - 110 003 


DISSENT NOTE SUBMITTED BY P CHIDAMBARAM 
At the outset, I wish to register three fundamental obj ections to the three Bills: 
(i) Under Article 348 of the Constitution, all Acts shall be in the English language which is also
the language of the Supreme Court and the High Courts. Laws are, and will be, translated into
other Indian languages. It is therefore correct that the three Bills, first drafted in English, have
been translated into Hindi. In due course, the Bills will be translated into other Indian languages
and such translated Bills will be used in the proceeding before the Courts subordinate to the
High Courts. The name of the Bill must, therefore, be in English and translated into Hindi and
also translated into other Indian languages.  To have a Hindi only name to the Bill ·
irrespective of the language of the Bill is highly objectionable, unconstitutional, an affront to
the non-Hindi speaking people (e.g. Tamils, Gujaratis or Bengalis) and opposed to federalism.
(ii) The three Bills are largely a copy and paste of the existing Laws.  There was
absolutely no need to draft so -called new Bill s. All that the Bills have done is to make a few
amendments (some acceptable, some not acceptable), re-arrange the
sections of the existing Laws , and merge different sections into one section with
many sub-sections. This is a wasteful exercise that will have many undesirable
consequences. To locate a familiar section - e.g. Section 302 of  IPC, punishment
for murder - one has to search the Bill and find the equivalent Clause 101.
Hundreds of thousands of judges, lawyers, police officers -and even the general
public - will be put to enormous trouble and inconvenience without any benefit at all. They
will have to "re-learn" the laws which will take years before the new provisions are used
extensively. This seems to be an exercise in self-glorification rather than a scholarly exercise to
improve the laws.
(iii) ***1. Besides, State governments, Bar Associations, State and Central Police
organizations, the Indian Police Foundation, the National Law School Universities, judges of the
subordin ate judiciary who apply the laws every day, eminent retired judges of th e Supreme
Court and the High Courts, eminent senior advocates and legal scholars were not consulted at
the co nsideration stage by circulatin g the draft Bills and in viting t hem to comment. ***. We
strongly o bject to the process fo llowed on the grounds of in sufficiency, non­ inclusionary, non-
scholarly and lack of adequate time for consideration by the Members.
Bill to replace the Indian Penal Code (Bill No 121 of 2023) 
Part A 
1. The Indian Penal Code has 25 chapters (23+3) containing 511 sections.  Of these,
1 1*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya 
Sabha 


Chapters XIX, XXA and XXIII contain only one section each. Of the remaining 23 Chapters, as 
many as 18 Chapters have been copied and pasted in the new Bill. Chapter II of the IPC 
containing the definitions has been copied and pasted as one Section w ith many clauses. The 
Rep01i has acknowledged that, in terms of quantitative changes, 24 sect ions have been deleted 
and 22 sections have been added. Effectively, the new Bill is a copy and paste exercise of nearly 
90-95 per cent of the IPC, which is why I reject the Bill as a wasteful exercise that will cause
enormous inconvenience, with no benefit at all, to the hundreds of thousands of stakeholders
that I had referred to. The few "improvements" could have been easily incorporated with
amendments to the IPC.
2. The Statement of Objects and Reasons has nothing that could not have been done through a
few amendments to the IPC. The Notes on Clauses are amusing: they explain nothing. This part
is simply a summary of the text of the Clauses (which were, anyway, copied and pasted) and
adds nothing to our  understanding.
Part B 
3. Let me list my main objections to the Bill and the draft Report:
(i) Death penalty should be abolished. According to the data, the Supreme Court has affirmed
the death penalty in only 7 cases in the last 6 years. While the
imposition of the penalty itself causes distress and trauma, the wait before the sentence is set
aside or confirmed causes distress many times more. It has been established that death penalty is
no deterrent to serious crime.  An imprisonment for the remainder of natural life without parole
is, in fact, a more rigorous punishment and also opens a window of opportunity for the convict to
reform.
(ii) Adultery should not be a crime.  It is an offence against marriage which is a compact
between two persons; if the compact is broken, the aggrieved spouse may sue for divorce or civil
damages. To raise marriage to the level of a sacrament is outdated. In any event, a marriage
concerns only two persons and not society at large. The State has no business to enter into their
lives and punish the alleged wrongdoer.
(iii) Clause 5 is retrograde as well as unconstitutional. The abso lute power of the executive
government to commute a sentence of death or life imprisonment, without recording reasons, is
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. The same comment applies to Section 475 of Bill No.
122 of 2023 to replace The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The definition of "appropriate
government" is defective. If a matter is in the Concurrent List, the executive power of both the
Union and the State will extend to that matter and a question may arise who is the " appropriate
government". Hence in view of Article 73 and Article 162, the issue needs to be clarified.
(iv) Clause 11 should be deleted. ' Solitary confinement' as a punishment has no place in
modem criminal jurisprudence. It certainly does not aid in the reformation of a conv ict. It is
demeaning, humiliating and has the consequence of making a convict into a hardened criminal.


(v) Clause 72(3) is unconstitutional. It violates Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution . The Court
can restrict the right of the media to report the Court's proceedings in a particular case,
legislation cannot bar the media in all cases.
(vi) Clause 37 denies the right of private defence in certain circumstances where such right
ought to be available. For example, in a case where a public servant directs his subordinates to
strip and parade a person or to sexually assault a person, there may be no apprehension of death
or grievous hurt; nevertheless , the victim should have a right of private defence which is denied
by the Clause.
(vii) A provision to punish a parent or legal guardian who uses a child for the purposes  of
begging must be introduced in either Clause 93 or Clause 137.
(viii) The punishments for 'abetment' provided in Clauses 55(2) and 57 are excessive and will be
struck down on the principle of ' proportionality'.
(ix) In Clause 104(2), the words " or fails to report the incident to a Police officer or Magistrat e
soon after the incident" are violative of Article 20(3) of the Constitution and ought to be deleted.
(x) Clause 111 refers to the offence of ' terrorist act' and provides for punishment thereof. Th e
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 is a comprehensive law that has stood scrutiny by
Courts.  It has special provisions on sanction for prosecution, burden of proof, etc.  if there is
need, the special law, UAPA, can be amended. There is no need to displace that Act and include·
provisions in Bill No.121 of 2023.
(xi) Clause 213 is unconstitutional. A person can be compelled to sign a statement only when
he is legally bound to do so, not otherwise. The provision violates Article 20(3) of th e
Constitution.
(xii) In the clauses that deal with adulteration etc., the following changes are necessary:
> In Clauses 272, 273 and 274, mens rea must be provided by adding the word
" knowingly'' .
> In Clauses 275 and 276, the punishment for $ale of adulterated drugs must be
made more severe.
> In Clause 277, the pw1ishment for fouling water must be made more severe.
> In Clause 282, the punishment for carrying persons in unsafe or overloaded
vessel must be made more severe.
(xiii) Clause 354 deals with defamation. While ' defamation' may be retained as an offence, a
limitation period must be provided within which a person may be prosecuted. A limitation of
one year from the date of knowledge of the alleged defan1atory statement by the complainant
may be provided.
(xiv) Chapter IX on ' Offences relating to elections' may be deleted. The subject is and can be
adequately covered in the two Representation of People Acts of 1950 and 1951. So far as


municipal and panchayat elections are concerned, the State laws can - and presently do - deal 
with the subject. 
Part C 
4. I had pointed out substantive as well as minor drafting errors in several clauses of the Bill but
only some of them have been accepted.  Two important suggestions are:
(i) Both " imprisonment for life" and " imprisonment for the remainder of a person's natural life"
should be separately defined and used in appropriate sections.
(ii) "Community service" should be defined so that there is certainty in what may be awarded  by
a Court while sentencing a person to do "community service".


200 
MINUTES 

201 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The DRSC on Home Affairs met at 11:00 a.m. on Thursday, the 24th 
August, 2023 in Committee Room '2', PHA-Extension, New Delhi 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJ
YA SABHA 
1. S
hri Brij Lal - C
hairman
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
3. Dr. Anil Jain
4. S
hri Neeraj Shekhar
5. Shri Digvijaya Singh
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha
7. Shri Derek O’Brien
LOK S
ABHA 
8. S
hri Sanjay Bhatia
9. Shri Dilip Ghosh
10. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
11. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
12. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
13. Shri Ranjitsingh Naik Nimbalkar
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
15. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
17. Dr
. Satya Pal Singh
18. Smt. Geeta Viswanath Vanga
19. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav

202 
S
ECRETARIAT 
S
hri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
S
hri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i. S
hri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary
ii. Shri Satpal Chouhan, DG (Awards)
iii. Shri Sri Prakash, JS (Judicial)
 Representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. S
hri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee.... xxx∗ xxx xxx 
3. T
hereafter, the Chairman informed the Committee about the agenda of the
day. xxx  xxx  xxx
4. The
 next item the Committee took up was the three Bills namely - ‘The
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023’ which were introduced in Lok Sabha on
11
th August, 2023 and referred to th is Committee on 18 th August, 2023 by the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha
for examination and report. In this regard, the Chairman sought the cooperation of
the Members in completing the work within the allotted time of three months. He
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

203 
also informed that the Committee would have more meetings to discuss these Bills 
during the months of September and October, 2023.  
5. T
he Chairman further informed that he would write to the Members of the
Committee to give suggestions in respect of the Bills. Thereafter, the Committee
decided to invite written suggestions on the three bills from all the State
Governments. It also decided to hear the views Chief Secretaries, if they wish to
appear before the Committee. In this regard, the Committee authorised the
Chairman of the Committee to seek the permission of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha. Going further, the Chairman informed that the Home Secretary and his
team of officials were present to give a detailed presentation on the Bills.
(
On arrival of witnesses) 
6. T
he Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the
Ministry of Law & Justice and asked the Home Secretary to make his presentation
on the three Bills. Home Secretary started his presentation beginning with the ‘The
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023’ ...xxx ∗ xxx  xxx.
7. A
s regards ‘The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023’, Home Secretary informed
the Committee that amendments in the criminal laws are a continues process;
recommendations of various Law Commissions, Committees headed by Shri
Vishwanathan, Justice Malimath, Shri Madhav Menon etc., and reports of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs were
referred to in framing the newly introduced bill. The Government had consultation
with various stakeholders like Governor, Chief Ministers, Lt.
Governors/Administrators of States and Union Territories, Chief Justice of India,
Chief Justices of all High Courts, Bar Councils and Law Universities/Instituti ons,
Members of Parliament, Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) in
preparing the draft bills. MHA reviewed about 3200 suggestions received from the
stakeholders. He also explained about the problems in the present legal system
such as huge pendency of cases in courts, low conviction rate, overcrowding of
under trial prisoners, etc.
8. H
e explained the major changes brought in the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023 in comparison with the Indian Penal Code, 1860. Some of the major change s
tha
t can be  seen in the new bills are related to - offences abetted outside India,
unnatural sex, adultery, sedition, sexual intercourse by employing deceitful means,
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

204 
punishment for gang rape on a woman under 18 years of age, woman disrobing 
woman, hiring/employing/e ngaging a child for committing offence, procurement 
of child, mob lynching , murder by life -convict, hit and run, organised crime, petty 
organised crime or organised crime in general, terrorist act, grievous hurt resulting 
in persistent vegetative state or  in permanent disability, grievous hurt by a mob, 
importation of child, act endangering sovereignty unity and integrity of   India, 
counterfeit currency -notes, assaulting or obstructing public servant when 
suppressing riot, offences committed through electronic means along with other 
means, restraining exercise of lawful authority of public servant, offences against 
property-theft by first time convict, snatching, theft, offence of mischief to cause 
loss or damage to property, etc. 
9. x
xx∗ x xx xxx 
10. xx
x xxx xxx 
11. A
fter the presentation on the bills concluded, the Chairman and Members
raised some queries to which Home Secretary replied. On other queries, the
representatives from the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Law & Just ice
we
re asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within 3 days.
(
The witnesses then withdrew) 
12. A
 Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
13. T
he meeting was adjourned at 3:45 p.m.
∗ xxx     Relates to other matters 

205 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 a.m. on Friday, the 25 th August, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', PHA-E xtension, New Delhi 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA S
ABHA 
1. Shr
i Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
3. Shri N. R. Elango
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shri Digvijaya Singh
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SA
BHA 
9. Shr
i Sanjay Bhatia
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shri Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
13. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
14. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
15. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
16. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
17. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
18. Shri Ravneet Singh
19. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

206 
20. Smt Geetha Viswanath Vanga
21. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT 
S
hri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
S
hri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i. S
hri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary
ii. Shri Satpal Chouhan, DG Awards
iii. Shri Sri Prakash, JS (Judicial)
 Representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. S
hri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee and as per the agenda, instructed the Members to raise their queries and
seek clarifications regarding all the three Bills from the officials of the Ministry of
Home Affairs.
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3. T
he Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the
Ministry of Law & Justice and requested them to answer the queries and provide
clarifications that the Members are going to raise on the three Bills referred to the
Committee.
4. A
s regards, The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS), 2023, the Chairman of the
Committee raised queries on different clauses of the Bill which were inter alia
related to – unnatural sex, same sex marriage and blackmailing. The Members
raised queries on various clauses which were inter alia related to – the title of the

207 
Bill; general exceptions under Section 22; definition of mental illness; mob 
lynching; intent behind legislation, attempt to suicide; life imprisonment; 
culpable  homicide not amounting to murder etc. Besides, the Members 
appreciated the new initiatives in the Bill like ‘community services’; Section 93 
regarding hiring, employing or engaging a child to commit an offence; and deleting 
the corresponding Section in the new Bill that relate to the Section 377 in the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC). The Members also opined that, there are no 
substantial changes in the Bills except for rearrangement of Sections and Clauses.  
5. xxx ∗ x xx xxx 
6. xxx x
xx xxx 
7. T
he representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs replied to some queries.
On other queries, the representatives from the Ministry of Home Affairs and the
Ministry of Law & Justice were asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat
within 3 days.
(
The witnesses then withdrew) 
8. A
 Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
9. T
he meeting was adjourned at 2:56 p.m.
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

208 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 a.m. on Saturday, the 26 th August, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', PHA-E xtension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA S
ABHA 
1. Sh
ri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
3. Shri N. R. Elango
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shri Digvijaya Singh
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SA
BHA 
9. S
hri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
13. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
15. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
17. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
18. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav

209 
S
ECRETARIAT 
S
hri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
S
hri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i. S
hri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary
ii. Shri Satpal Chouhan, DG Awards
iii. Shri Sri Prakash, JS (Judicial)
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. S
hri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee and, as per the agenda, informed the Members that they may present
their views/comments on all the three Bills referred to the Committee.
(
On arrival of witnesses) 
3. T
he Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the Ministry of Law & Justice. He requested the Members to proceed with
presenting their views/comments and seek clarifications from the Ministry
officials, if required.
4. T
he Chairman raised questions related to various clauses of The Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita (BNS), 2023, which inter alia included – need for having higher
punishments in respect of the offences related to ‘food adulteration’; nee d fo r
pr
oviding ‘disability pension’ to victims who are permanently disabled under the

210 
clause related to ‘grievous hurt’. The Members also raised many queries related to 
various clauses of the Bill which inter alia included – replacement of some words 
present in the clauses of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) with alternate words in the 
corresponding clauses of the BNS leading to problems; the need to include 
malicious prosecution clauses in order to provide remedy to the accused; need for 
clarity in the Expla nation provided under Section 150 which appears incomplete; 
the definition of ‘terrorist activity’ under Section 111(1) providing wide discretion 
to police. A query was also raised regarding the status of global acceptance of the 
definition of ‘terrorism act’ as mentioned in the BNS.    
5
.  xxx∗  xxx  xxx 
6
.  xxx  xxx  xxx Besides, the Members generally appreciated 
the efforts of the Government in drafting the new laws to replace the existing laws 
of the colonial era completely; removal of clauses related to sedition in the BNS; 
removal of British references in the laws; xxx          xxx               xxx; 
incorporation of clauses in BNS related to organized crime and insurgency; and 
introduction of ‘community service’ as one of the punishments under BNS. The 
Members also opined that the new laws would ensure speedy justice; digitize the 
criminal justice system, and reduce the number of undertrial prisoners in jails.  
7. T
he officials from the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Law &
Justice replied to the queries raised and clarifications sought by the Chairman and
the Members. With regard to the queries that remained unanswered, the officials of
the Ministries were asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within 3
days.
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
8. A
 Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
9. T
he meeting was adjourned at 12:53 p.m.
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

211 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 p.m. o n Monday , the 11 th September, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', PHA-E xtension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA S
ABHA 
1. Sh
ri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Sujeet Kumar
7. Shri Derek O’ Brien
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh
11. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
13. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
15. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
17. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
18. Smt. Geetha Viswanath Vanga

212 
S
ECRETARIAT 
S
hri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
S
hri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. S
hri Praveen Sinha, Ex-Spl. Director, CBI
ii. Dr. Padmini Singh, JS, Department of Legal Affairs.
iii. Smt. Anupama Nilekar Chandra, ADG, BPR&D.
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. S
hri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri P. Chidambaram, who has been
nominated as the member of the Committee on 28 th August, 2023 and other
Members to the meeting of the Committee. He  informed the Members that the
Committee has invited three domain experts to hear their views on the three Bills,
namely, The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023; and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023.
 (On arrival of witness) 
3. The Chairman welcomed Shri Praveen Sinha, former Special Director, CBI
.
H
e asked him to present his views on  the implications that the three proposed laws
are going to have on the criminal justice system.

213 
4. Shri Praveen Sinha informed the Committee that he will present his views
on the “The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill, 2023” (BNS) and thereafter he made a
presentation on it.  He informed the Committee that in the new Bill the number of
Sections has been reduced from 511 to 356 and chapters fr om 23 to 19.  There are
102 Sections, where changes and enhancement of punishment and fines have been
made. A very large number of Sections have been rearranged, though these
changes will not result in sudden disruption of the system as there is continuity  i
n
the
 basic system of jurisprudence. The Bill has introduced community service as
punishment for the first time for six petty offences. However, the term and nature
of community service have not been specified. The Bill also proposes to change
the definition of imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder of person’s
natural life. He also informed the Committee about various new offences made in
BNS which inter -alia included provisions made in Clause 69 (sexual intercourse
by employing deceitful means); Clause 63, the age of consent for a married woma
n
ha
s been increased from 15 years to 18 years; Clause 70(2) (gang rape of a woman
under 18 years of ages); Clauses 75 and 76 have been made gender -neutral; Clause
93 (punishing a person who hires or employs or engages any person below the age
of 18 years to commit any offence); procuration of a child for sexual exploitation
has been made gender neutral; offence related to kidnapping or maiming a child
below 18 years of age for begging has been made the applicable for both the
genders; new provisions against the heinous crime of mob lynching without using
the term mob lynching in Clause 101(2); alternate punishments are provided for
mob lynching, one of them is imprisonment up to 7 years, since it is an  aggravate
d
f
orm of murder, the Committee may consider whether alternate form of
punishment is needed or not; Clause 102 addressed the issue of right to “sentence
hearing” by providing alternate punishments in comparison with old IPC;
punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder has been enhanced i
n
C
lause 103; Clause 104(2) deals with aggravated form of death by negligence to
cover the hit-and-run accident cases and its reporting; for the first time the offence
of organised crime has been bought in a central law, Clause 109; one more
important offence which has been added is the offence of terrorist act in Clause
111; punishment provided in Clause 115(4) needs to be enhanced, as it is worded
similar to murder by a group of five or more persons, only the words “community
and acting in concert” are missing; etc.
5. He also informed the Committee that the offence of sedition Section 124A in
IPC has been deleted and a new offence of acts endangering sovereignty, unity and
integrity of India has been introduced in Clause 150 of BNS . He apprised that al
l
the
 inchoate offences like abetment of crime, criminal conspiracy, attempt to
commission of crime, etc. have been brought under one Chapter-IV in BNS.

214 
6. Thereafter, he made some suggestions which inter -alia included that
provisions regarding commutation of death sentence or imprisonment for life, as
laid down under Clause 5 of the BNS may be a changed to bring it in conformity
with Clause 475 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (BNSS). He also
informed that due to the complete removal of Section 377 of IPC (Indian Penal
Code) from the BNS, need to be  reconsidered. The offence of adultery in Section
497 IPC has been deleted in the new Bill, he suggested that for the sake of
protecting the institution of marriage, this Secti on could be retained, making both
men and women equally culpable.
7. H
e also mentioned that 'unlawful activity' has been expanded to cover all
cognizable offences. The existing law is inadequate to tackle the menace of many
serious offences like organise d kidnapping, land grabbing, contract killing,
extortion as also many major financial scams and large Bank frauds. This will be a
very effective addition in the substantive law. However, the terms may be defined,
the penal provision for attempt and the com mission of offence may be kept in
separate clauses for purpose of clarity. The term 'serious offence' used in the
definition of ‘organised crime syndicate’ may be specified and to make this law
more effective, the commensurate changes are  required to be made in the
procedural law.
8. C
ertain Members also pointed out not to rush the Bills, enough time to be
provided for discussion. Then, Chairman replied that the Committee runs not on
one person’s convenience but on the convenience of the whole Committee. F urther
the
 Chairman and members also sought some clarifications and made some
suggestions which inter -alia included that deletion of section 377 of IPC; missing
of word religion in Clause 115; death caused by negligence; definition of grievious
hurt; organised crimes and States which are having special laws on organised
crimes further no special procedural corresponding provision for these offences in
the BNSS.; in organised crimes whether Central law or State law will prevail;
deletion of sedition;  sovereignty and integrity needs to be defined to avoid the
misuse of clause 195(1)(d), snatching and petty offences, etc. The witness replied
to the queries and on other queries, he was asked to furnish written replies to the
Secretariat within three days.
(Th
e witness then withdrew) 
9. x
xx∗ x xx xxx 
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

215 
10. xxx xxx xxx 
11. xxx xxx xxx 
12. xxx xxx xxx 
13. xxx xxx xxx 
 (The witness then withdrew) 
14. xxx∗ x xx xxx 
15. xxx xxx xxx 
16. xxx xxx xxx 
17. xxx xxx xxx 
(The witness then withdrew) 
 
 
18. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
20. The meeting then adjourned at 06:26 p.m.
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

216 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 12 th September, 2023 in 
Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA S
ABHA 
1. Sh
ri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri N. R. Elango
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
13. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
14. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
16. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
17. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
18. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
19. Shri Ravneet Singh
20. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

217 
SECRETARIAT 
S
hri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. S
hri Vikram Singh, Former Director General of Police.
ii. Prof. Naveen Chaudhary, National Forensic Sciences, University,
Gandhinagar, Gujarat.
iii. Ms. Sonia Mathur, Sr. Advocate.
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. S
hri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He informed the Members that the Committee will hear the views of
three domain experts Dr. Vikram Singh, former Director -General of Police, Prof.
Naveen Chaudhary, National Forensic Sciences University and Ms. Sonia Mathur,
Senior Advocate on the three Bills,  namely, The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill,
2023. He informed that due to some unavoidable reason, Shri Arun Kumar Mishra,
Chairperson, NHRC who was supposed to appear before the  Committee, is no
t
c
oming for today’s meeting.
(On arrival of witness) 
3. The Chairman welcomed Dr. Vikram Singh, former Director-General of
Police and asked him to present his views on  the implications that the three
proposed laws are going to have on the criminal justice system.

218 
4. Dr. Vikram Singh  made a presentation on “ The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita
Bill, 2023” (BNS). He informed BNS represents a modern approach to criminal
legislation by addressing the emerging forms of crime and ensuring a more
comprehensive legal framework to combat organized crime and related activities.
It incorporates the various guidelines of the Supreme Court and the
recommendations of the Law Commission. It is people friendly and encompasses
the aspirations and hope of the people. The Bill now includes offences related to
fraudulent matrimony, interfaith marriages on fraudulent assurances in Clause 69;
not only organised crime has been included for the first time but also a provision to
confiscate and attach the property in Clause 109. Again for the first time, terrorism
has been covered in the Bill in Clause 111 and he is of the opinion that any
confessions made before the rank of DSP or above, in terrorist cases or other cases
should be made admissible. The Bill has addressed not only murder through axes,
weapons, poisoning or jeharkhurrani but also the cyber and IT enabled murders. In
the new bill, Clause 150 addresses "acts endangering sovereignty, unity, and
integrity of India"; replaces the sedition clause; community servic e as a
punishment for minor offence; punishment for mob lynching; xxx
∗  xxx
xxx
5. x
xx xxx xxx 
6. xxx xxx xxx 
7. xxx xxx xxx He had also suggested that cyber bullying, 
cyber stalking, trolling, etc. needs to be incorporated in the BNS. 
8. As regards community service which has not been defined in the proposed
bills, he suggested State Governments can decide the norms and implementation of
social service part, apart from that, international practices of community services
could be explored. xxx  xxx  xxx
9. The  Chairman and Members suggested their views on some Clauses which
inter alia included selling of examination paper should not be categorized as petty
organised crime; And should be cover Clause 109; xxx     xxx      xxx
10. x
xx xxx xxx 
(The witness then withdrew) 
11. xxx xxx xxx 
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

219 
12. xxx xxx xxx
13. xxx∗ x xx xxx
14. x xx xxx xxx 
 (The witness then withdrew) 
15. The Chairman welcomed M s. Sonia Mathur, Sr. Advocate and requested
her to present her views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going
to have on the criminal justice system.
16. Ms. Sonia Mathur informed the Committee that she would mainly focus on
‘The Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023’ (BNS). She apprised about the various aspects
of the BNS relating to punishments, offences affecting human body, offences
against women and children, offences against State and offences against property.
She explained new additions in the BNS regarding these aspects which inter- alia
included Clause 4(f) – Community service has been added as a form of punishment
for petty offences by first time offenders; Clause 101(2) – murder by a group of
five or more persons, acting in concert to commit murder on the ground of race,
caste or community which is punishable with death, or with imprisonment for life
or with imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years; Clause 104(2) – deat
h
by
 any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, escaping from
scene of incident, failure to report incident, shall be punished with imprisonment of
10 years; Clause 109 –  organized crime; Clause 111 – intentionally engaging in an
action to threaten unity, integrity and security of India; Clause 224 – any attempt to
commit suicide with the intent to restrain public servant from discha rging hi s
of
ficial duty would only be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or
community service; Clause 69 – sexual intercourse by deceitful means would not
amount to rape but carry a punishment for 10 years; Clause 70 (2) – gang rape of a
woman; Clause 93- punishing a person who hires or employs or engages any
person below the age of 18 years to commit any offence; Clause 150 – acts
endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; Clause 301(2) – intending to
ta
ke dishonestly the movable property of someone without his knowledge is a new
addition in offence of theft; Clause 302(1) – snatching with a punishment for
Maximum 3 years.   She also informed about the Clause 194 which has been
modified, in Clause 194 – ‘Electronic communication’ has been included as a
mode of offence against public tranquillity. Publishing false information
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

220 
jeopardizing the sovereignty unity and integrity, or security of India is now been 
covered in Clause 195. 
17. The Chairman and Members raised some queries pertaining to Section 377
of
 IPC, Clause 22, Clause 69, Clause 101(2), Clause 104(2) and Clause 115(4) of
BNS and instances where investigation is to be conducted by DSP level Officer.
The witness replied to some of the queries and on others, she was asked to furnish
replies to the Secretariat within three days
.
 (
The witness then withdrew) 
 
18. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee
was kept.
19. The meeting then adjourned at 04.40 p.m.

221 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00  a.m. on Wednesday, the 13 th September, 2023 
in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. S hri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. S hri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Ja
 in
6. Shri Sujeet Kumar
7. S hri Derek O’ Brien
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. S
hri Digvijaya Singh
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri SanjayBhatia
12. Shri Dilip Ghosh
13. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
1
4. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
15. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
17. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
18. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
19. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

222 
20. Shri Ravneet Singh
21. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. S hri Jagdish Rana, Advocate
ii. S hri Anand Dey, Advocate
iii      D r. Pinky Anand, Sr. Advocate and Former Addl. Solicitor
       G eneral of India.   
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the  Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He  informed the Members that as per agenda, the Committee has
invited three domain experts i.e. Shri Jagdish Rana, Advocate; Shri Anand Dey,
Advocate; and Dr. Pinky Anand, Sr. Advocate and  former Addl. Solicitor Ge neral
of India  to hear their views on the three Bills, namely, The Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and The Bharatiya
Sakshya Bill, 2023.
3. B efore, calling the witness, the Chairman requested some Members of th e
C
ommittee to present their views on the proposed Bills who have requested to do
so.  One of the Committee members mentioned that general statutes of criminal
laws have to be crafted with utmost care and views of the experts from varied
fields may be heard while examining the three Criminal Laws Bills. He expressed
his views on the various aspects of the Bills. He mentioned that there are some
positive changes in the proposed Bills, however there are negative aspects too. He
is of the view that the title of the Bills could be in English. He had also pointed out

223 
that in the Committee constituted by the Ministry  of Home Affairs to review the 3 
Bills, there were no women, Dalits, Advasis, LGBTQ, Minorities, persons with 
disabilities. He had also commented that the special laws are being absorbed into 
general criminal law without necessary procedural safeguards.
He further mentioned that the Committee may call domain experts like Judges 
f
rom Supreme Court and High Courts, Bar Council of States, Supreme Cour t Bar 
Association, Senior practitioners of criminal law, legal scholars, experts in juvenile 
justice, prison officials and reform advocates, etc. The Committee could also hear 
the views of International organizations, ethnic and religious groups,
 regional 
human rights organizations and media.   He also provided names of the some 
domain experts who could be invited to appear before the Committee to express 
their views on the proposed Bills
(On arrival of witness)
 
4. xxx∗ x xx xxx
5. xxx x xx xxx 
6. xxx x xx xxx 
7. xxx x xx xxx 
8. xxx x xx xxx 
9. xxx x xx xxx 
10. xxx xxx xxx 
(The witness then withdrew)
11. T he Chairman welcomed Shri Anand Dey, Advocate and requested him  to
pr
esent his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to have
on the criminal justice system.
12. Shri Anand Dey informed the Chairman and Members of the Committee
tha
t these bills may form the foundation for Criminal Justice Administration and
would be imperative for smooth and transparent functioning of the democracy. He
informed that however, some corrections and changes are required in the proposed
Bills.
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

224 
13. Thereafter, he expressed his views on the various Clauses of ‘The Bhartiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023’ (BNS). He suggested some changes in this Bill which
interalia included that in Clause 2(7) the definition of the word ‘document’
mentioned in this Clause may be defined in consonance with the definition of the
word ‘document’ in Section 2(c) of the Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023; in the
heading of  Clause 63 ‘woman’ word may be replaced with the word ‘women’; in
Clause 65(1), no differentiation to be made of a child between sixteen years of age
and twelve years of age with regard to the offence of rape and death sentence may
also be incorporated in this Clause as the same has been provided in Clause 65 (2);
in Clause 76, minimum punishment of three years should be prescribed for
disseminating such image of a woman engaging in a private act;  in Clause 111 the
words ‘in any foreign country’ may be replaced with the words ‘anywhere outside
India’; in Clause 101 (1), an option with regard to the punishment under this
Clause i.e. ‘with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder of that
person’s natural life’, may also be incorporated/introduced in this Clause; in
Clause 173, provision for some punishment along with the fine may also be made
for commission of offence under this Clause; etc.
14. H
e also suggested changes in Clause 198, he informed that ‘Section 449’ of
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, (BNSS) has wrongly been
mentioned in this Clause. It should be replaced with the words ‘Section 397’ of the
BNSS. He also mentioned that in Clause 272, 273 and 278 which deals wit
h
a
dulteration of food and drink and sale of noxious food and drink etc., sentence
provided in these Clauses are not adequate/appropriate/enough, specifically,
considering the nature of the offence affecting public at large. He further suggeste
d
tha
t Section 377 of IPC may not be repealed in its entirety. A provision is required
to be made in this Sanhita to tackle the issue with regard to rape/sexual abuse of a
transgender. Further, law on rape has to modified which can go beyond the concept
of biological woman. He further informed the Committee that apart from the
above, the definition of words namely, Sovereignty of India, Social Structure, mob
lynching, hate speech and Community Service may also be incorporated in thi
s
S
anhita.
15. xx x ∗ x xx xxx
16. xx x xxx xxx 
17. T he Chairman and Members raised some queries like minimum punishment
to be included in clause 115;  difficult to prove "act in concert" in Clause
101;  debated on the point to include word "religion" in Clause 101; no need of
∗ xxx    Relates to other matters 

225 
chapters related to election in BNS, as Representation of People Act is there to 
address the issue; etc. The witness replied to the queries. With regard to additional 
information, the witness was asked to furnish written inputs to the Secretariat 
within 3 days.
(The witness then withdrew)
18. T
hereafter, the Chairman welcomed Dr. Pinky Anand, Sr. Advocate and
former Addl. Solicitor General of India and asked to make her presentation on the
proposed Bills.
19. S
he stated that the proposed three Bills will pave a way for decolonization,
modernization and revamping of Criminal justice system. xxx∗  xxx     xxx
20. xx
x xxx xxx
21. T hereafter she informed about the various aspects on BNS. She informed that
this Bill has repealed sedition law, added clauses on organized crime, terrorist act
has been incorporated as an offence in separate clause and provision of community
service as punishment. She suggested that a special provision for malicious
prosecution may be added in BNS. She also suggested for minor changes in Clause
23 and Clause 50. She recommended for defining activities in a more descriptive
sense under the heading organise d crime, narrowing the ambit of offence of petty
organized crime and defining the punishment of community service.
22. xx
x xxx xxx
23. xx x xxx xxx
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
24. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the  Committee was
kept.
25. The meeting was adjourned at 03:23 p.m.
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

226 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 03 :00 p.m. on  Friday, the 22 nd September, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman 
2. Shri Sujeet Kumar
3. Shri Derek O’ Brien 
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri Digvijaya Singh 
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
8. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
9. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
10. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
11. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
12. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
13. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
14. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
15. Shri Ravneet Singh 
16. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
17. Smt. Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
18. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 

227 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi, Chairman, Law Commission of India. 
ii. Dr. Adish C. Aggarwala, (Sr. Advocate), President, Supreme Court Bar
Association. 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Vinay Kumar Mishra, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 
ii. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 
2. A t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He  informed the Members that as per agenda, the Committee has
invited two domain experts to hear their views on th e three Bills, namely, The
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023;
and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023.
(On arrival of witness) 
3. T he Chairman welcomed Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi, Chairman, La w
C
ommission of India and requested him to present his views on the proposed Bills
and the implications they are going to have on the criminal justice system.
4. Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi informed the Committee that the proposed Bills a re
ne
ed of the hour and amendments of the existing criminal laws are required. He

228 
mentioned that he will present his views and suggestions on all the three Bills. 
xxx∗ xxx      xxx 
5. xxx xxx xxx 
6. Thereafter, he expressed his views on ‘The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023’
(BNS) and suggested changes in various Clauses of the Bill. He mentioned that
other than man and woman, transgender has been recognized as a gender in Clause
2(9) in the new Bill, however, rather than referencing its meaning to any other
legislation (Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019) as done in the
Explanation, a definition may be incorporated in the Bill. He was also of the
opinion that transgender includes ‘trans-women’ accordingly definition of
‘woman’ in Clause 2(35) may be altered.  In Clause 4(b), he suggested that it
should be worded as “Imprisonment for life", and hereinafter wherever it is
expressly specified, shall mean imprisonment for remainder of  a person’s natural
life. He informed that in Clause 4(f), there is provision for community service as a
punishment for minor offences in the Bill but it does not offer any explanation or
clarification about what constitutes ‘community service’, and theref ore, he
suggested that community service should be defined. In Clause 22, the phrase
“person of mental illness” should be replaced with the earlier phrase “person of
unsound mind” wherever it is referred in the Bill. He also suggested some minor
changes in some Clauses of the Bill which inter -alia included in Clause 67, the
phrase “or by person in authority” should be removed from the marginal heading;
in the Explanation of Clause 69, the word ‘marring’ should be replaced wit
h
‘
marrying’ and the words ‘or marital status’ be added after the words ‘suppressing
identity’; in Clause 72 which deals with disclosure   of identity of victim of certain
offences, the word ‘minor’ may be replaced with the word ‘child’; in Clause 78,
the word “modesty” may be replaced with any other suitable word. As regards
Section 377 of the IPC (Indian Penal Code) which deals with unnatural sex, he
suggested to reintroduce and retain the current Section 377 of the IPC in BNS, as it
would help safeguard individuals of all genders from non- consensual sexual
assault.
7. He informed that Clause 109 which deals with ‘organised crime’ is a
welcome change in this Bill, however,   sub-clause (5) needs clarification to rule
out ambiguity.  Further, he suggested that in Clause 110 which deals with petty
organised crime, the words “causes general feelings of insecurity” are too vague
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

229 
and ambiguous, it requires re -drafting to eliminate the  ambiguity that currently 
exists. He mentioned that the BNS seeks to penalize mob lynching as an offence by 
categorizing it as a form of murder. He suggested that mob lynching needs to be 
explicitly recognized as a distinct offence, and a legal definition for the term 
‘lynching’ should be included in the proposed Bill. Clause 115(4) which addresses 
the aggravated form of grievous hurt inflicted by a mob, currently imposes the 
same punishment as that for grievous hurt under Clause 115(2), even though the 
penalty should ideally be higher in Clause 115(4).  Moreover, Clause 114 of the 
BNS has made the definition of ‘grievous hurt’ more stringent by reducing the 
duration from twenty days to fifteen days. In addition to the above, there is a need 
for clarification regarding the term ‘acting in concert’ as it is used for the first time. 
He also suggested that certain terminology such as ‘escaping from the scene of the 
offence’ and ‘failure to report to the police officer or magistrate’ used in Clause 
104 requires reevaluation as these terms are highly subjective and can be misused. 
 
8. He mentioned that Clause 111 which deals with offence of terrorist act is a
welcome step in the Bill, however, certain phrases such as ‘intimidation, ‘critical
infrastructure’, ‘proceeds of terrorism’  in this provision require re -wording or
clarification. He suggested that in the Explanation of Clause 150, after the words
‘the activities referred to in this section’ the words ‘do not constitute an offence
under this section’ should be added. In Clause 157, he suggested to replace the
words “Air Force subject to the Acts referred to in section 165 of the Government
of India” with “Air Force of the Government of India subject to the Acts referred
to in section 165”.  In Clause 195(1)(d) he suggested that it is essential to furnish a
comprehensive definition of ‘false information’ to ensure clarity throughout the
Bill.  He also suggested that in Clause 224, the person who attempts to commit
suicide should be granted the opportunity for a medical examination to
demonstrate his mental condition.
9. xxx
∗ x xx xxx 
10. xxx xxx xxx 
11. xx x xxx xxx 
12. T he Chairman and the Members raised queries and sought clarification on
various Clauses of the Bills regarding petty organized crime, death by negligent
act, xxx  xxx      xxx. The witness replied to the queries. He was
requested to furnish any other information to the Secretariat within 3 days.
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

230 
(The witness then withdrew)
13. T he Chairman welcomed Shri Adish C. Agarwala, Senior Advocate,
President, Supreme Court Bar Association and requested him to present his views
on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to have on the criminal
justice system.
14. S
hri Adish C. Agarwala informed the Chairman and Me mbers of the
Committee that these Bills have brought some good changes.   Provisions that are
no longer relevant and which were being criticized by the general public have been
removed.  With these amendments people will be getting justice at the earliest even
though the legal fraternity might face some problems. xxx∗ xxx      xxx
15. The Chairman and Members sought clarifications and also made some
suggestions xxx  xxx      xxx With regard to additional information,
the witness was asked to furnish written inputs to the Secretariat within 3 days.
 ( The witness then withdrew)  
16. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
17. The meeting was adjourned at 05:38 p.m.
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

231 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 11 :00 a.m. on Saturd ay, the 23 rd September, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', Parliament House An nexe- Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
6. Shri Dilip Ghosh
7. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
8. Shri Ja myang Tsering Namgyal
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
12. Smt. G eetha Viswanath Vanga
13. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
 SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 

232 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Justice (Retd.) Satish Chandra
ii. S hri Utkarsh Sharma, Advocate
iii. S hri K. L. Janjani, Senior Advocate
iv. S hri Sanjeev Deshpande, Senior Advocate
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Vinay Kumar Mishra, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
ii. S hri Shanti Bhushan, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the  Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He informed the Members that as per agenda four domain experts have
been invited to hear their views on the three Bills, namely, The Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and The Bharatiya
Sakshya Bill, 2023.
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3. T he Chairman welcomed Justice (Retd.) Satish Chandra and Shri Utkars h
S
harma, Advocate to the meeting of the Committee and requested them to present
their views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to have on the
c
riminal justice system.
4. J ustice (Retd.) Satish Chandra informed that in Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
(BNS) 175 amendments have taken place, 8 new sections are introduced and 22
sections have been repealed.   He expressed his views on various clauses of the Bill
and suggested that in marginal heading of Clause 3, the word ‘expressions’ may be
replaced with a suitable word like ‘principles’ or ‘theory’. In Section 4(f) which
mentions about community service as a type of punishment, needs to be explained.
He was of the opinion that sterilization, as a punishment, may be added in the cases

233 
of the crimes relating to sex. Clause 20 deals with act of a child under seven and 
Clause 21 which deal with act of child above seven and under twelve years of age, 
he suggested these are not required as when the crime is committed by the child, 
the trial will be held as per the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Act, 2015. Similarly, Clause 22 which deals with act of a person with mental 
illness, he suggested that this may not be required as it will be taken care of by the 
Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
5. H
e suggested that in Illustration of Clause 26, an Exception may be made,
i.e., if there any negligence in the act,   then it should be made punishable. He al so
su
ggested that in marginal heading of Clause 67, the words ‘by person in
authority" is not required. He is of the view that in Clauses 145 and 146 which
pertain to waging war, attempting to wage war, have been covered in Unlawful
Activities (Prevention ) Act, 1967, therefore, it may not be required. Similarly,
Clauses 167 to 175, which pertain to offences relating to elections, are covered in
Representation of the People Act, 1951 and therefore not required.  He furth
er
su
ggested, in Clause 111 which deals with offence of terrorist act, the word
‘security’ should be replaced with ‘sovereignty’ and ‘India’ may be replaced with
‘Bharat’. He opined that Clauses 248 and 249 can be combined as they deal with
taking or offering gifts to screen an offender from punishment. In Clauses 272, 273
and 275 which deal with adulteration of food or drink intended for sale, sale of
obnoxious food or drink and adulteration of drugs respectively, he suggested
punishment should be enhanced to seven years or ten years or more. In Clause
306(1) which pertains to extortion, blackmail should be added, in any of the
illustration.  In case of false FIR, he suggested an undertaking may be taken from
the person who has come to lodge an FIR, or that person should be liable to pay the
compensation, if his information is found false. In Clause 354 which deals wit
h
de
famation, there should be a time limit to file a complaint in this regard when the
victim comes to know about defamation.
6. xxx ∗ xxx xxx
7. xxx  x xx xxx
8. xxx  x xx xxx
9. T he Chairman and the Members raised queries and seek clarification on
some Clauses of the Bills xxx  xxx      xxx The witness replied to the
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

234 
queries. He was requested to furnish any other information to the Secretariat within 
3 days.  
(The witnesses then withdrew)
10. T hereafter, the Chairman welcomed Shri K. L. Janjani, Senior Advocate, an d
r
equested him to present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they
are going to have on the criminal justice system.
11. S hri K.L. Janjani expressed his views on ‘The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023’ (BNS) and informed that the Indian Penal Code,1860 defined the crimes and
prescribed their punishments, under the Indian criminal justice system and th
e
e
xisting laws, stemming from the colonial era, no longer represented the present -
day dynamics and aspirations of Indian society. Thus, it was necessary to review
the existing criminal justice system to strengthen and revamp the legal system. The
Bill introduces new categories of offences like cyber crimes, terrorism, hate
crimes, mob lynching, etc. It offers special provisions for protecting women,
children, senior citizens, and other vulnerable sections of society. He informed that
a notable change has b een seen in Clause 48 which deals with abetment outside
India for an offence committed in India. In Clause 65 which deals with punishment
of rape, he suggested that being in the category of heinous crime, it should be
added that no concession or remission shall apply under this section. Gender
neutrality in rape laws should also be enacted as even men or transgender can be
victims of rape and in Clause 70 which deals with gang rape, there should be
provision for heavy fine to deter the criminals.
12. He also expressed his views on various Clauses which inter alia included that
in Clause 104 deals with causing death by negligence, an increased punishment
would deter the society from committing these rash and negligent acts;  Clause 10
9
pe
rtains to organized crime which has been added in the BNS is a much required
law; Clause 110  deals with petty organized crime like   snatching, pick-pocketing,
theft from vehicle etc.,  it is necessary to include them as these were not addressed
earlier; Clause 111 deals with  offences of terrorist act, is relevant to overcome the
modern types of threats not only to the Indian society but to the whole world;
Clause 137 which deals with kidnapping of child for purposes of begging, the
punishment has been enhanced and in Clauses 176 to 184  notable changes have
been made in the Bill.
13. Clause 195, which pertains to offence against national integration, he
suggested that punishment part should be enhanced. Clauses 316, 317 and 318
pertaining to cheating, he suggested, that due to the expansion and change in the

235 
nature of crimes and  to deter these kinds of crimes, the punishment need to be 
enhanced without concession like remission and premature release as per 
prevailing laws of the country. For Clause 354 which deals with defamation, he 
expressed that the punishment provided in the Clause is insufficient and must be 
enhanced depending upon the degree of humility faced by the defamed person.
 
14. T
he Chairman and the Members raised queries and sought clarification on
va
rious Clauses of the Bill.  The witness replied to the queries He was requested to
f
urnish any other information to the Secretariat within 3 days.
(The witness then withdrew)
15. xxx∗ x xx xxx 
16. xxx xxx xxx 
17. xxx xxx xxx 
18. xx x xxx xxx 
19. xx x xxx xxx 
20. xxx xxx xxx 
 (The witness then withdrew)
21. A  Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
22. The meeting was adjourned at 04:29 p.m.
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

236 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11 :00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 3 rd October, 2 023 
in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Ann exe- Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brijlal - Chairman 
2. Shri P. Chidambaram 
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
4. Shri N.R. Elango 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
11. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
12. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
13. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Mimbalkar 
14. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
15. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
16. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 

237 
 SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa, Former Vice-Chancellor, NALSAR
ii. D r. Aditya Sondhi, Sr. Advocate
iii. S hri Amit Desai, Sr. Advocate  
iv. Shri Priyank Kanoongo, Chairperson, National Commission for Protection
of
 Child Rights 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Vinay Kumar Mishra, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 
ii. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 
2. A t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He informed the Members that as per today’s agenda the Committee
will hear the views of four domain experts on the three Bills, namely, The
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2 023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023;
and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023. He also apprised the Members that before
the Committee proceeds with the agenda, Shri P. Chidambaram will present his
views on Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) as requested by him.
3. Some of the Members had also expressed their wish to present their views on
the proposed Bills. The Chairman acceded to their request and informed them that
they may present their views in the next meeting of the Committee.

238 
4. Thereafter, Shri P. Chidambaram presented his views on the Bharatiya Naya
Sanhita, 2023 (BNS). He expressed that the title of the English versions of the Bills
should be in English. He informed that substantial number of sections of the Indian
Penal Code  have been retained in the BNS without any change. However, some
new offences have been incorporated in the new Bill. He pointed out some drafting
errors in the various Clauses of the Bill such as Clauses 3(1)(a), 3(3), 8(1)(a),
8(1)(b), 8(5), 8(6)(a) 8(6)(b), 8(7), 23, 54, 57 etc.  He also expressed that Clause 11
which deals with solitary confinement is too harsh a punishment, it should be
deleted and Clause 37 which pertains to acts against which there is no right of
private defence, must be reconsidered. Clause 72(3), which pertains to disclosure
of identity of victim, he stated that if identity of victim is not disclosed, then there
is no need for punishment for publishing any matter. Similarly, punishment for
refusing to sign statement as provided in C lause 213 is unconstitutional, a
s
in
dividuals have the right not to self -incriminate. He gave some suggestions that
inter alia included punishment must be made severe in Clauses 189(3), 275, 276,
277, 282; death penalty should be abolished; Chapter 9 which deals with offences
relating to elections must be deleted, as the Representation of the People Act, 1951
will take care of it; etc.
(On arrival of witness)
 
5. T he Chairman welcomed Prof. Faizan Mustafa, Former Vice -Chancellor
National Academy of Legal Studies and Research (NALSAR), Hyderabad to the
meeting of the Committee and requested him to present his views on the propose
d
B
ills and the implications they are going to have on the criminal justice system.
6. P rof. Faizan Mustafa stated that the introduction of new laws provide an
opportunity to modernise and update the criminal justice system. He highlighted
some positive aspects of the BNS which inter alia  included inclusion of
transgender in gender’s definition, community service as a form of
punishment,  provision of punishment for offences such as sexual intercourse by
deceitful means or false promise to marry (Clause 69); gang rape on women under
age of 18 (Clause 70(2)); hiring, employing or engaging a child to commit a
n
o
ffence (Claus e 93); when a group of five or more persons acting in concert
commits murder (Clause 101(2)); punishment for non reporting of rash and
negligent  act causing death (Clause 104(2)); acts endangering sovereignty, unity
and integrity of India (Clause 150); etc. He also pointed out some negative aspects
of the Bill such as marital rape has not been made punishable; in Clause 22, mental
illness is covered, but not the insanity or unsoundness of mind which may not be
because of mental illness; some undefined, vague and ambiguous terms have been
used in Clause 150; difference in punishment of murder based on factors such as

239 
race, community, etc., by a group of five or more is prima facie  arbitrary and 
unreasonable; deletion of Section 377 of IPC in the new Bill, etc.   He expressed 
that serious crimes like terrorism and organised crimes are best dealt under special 
laws rather than the General laws; provision of joint liability under Sections 34 and 
149 of IPC has seen no changes in the new Bill; petty organised crim es have been 
made non -cognizable; and improvement has not been made in the definition of 
culpable homicide and murder. He had also raised concerns regarding provision of 
death penalty when more countries have abolished it. He was also of the view that 
in Clause 150, Explanation (i) and (iii) of Section 124(a) of IPC should be retained. 
7. xxx
∗ x xx xxx 
8. xxx xxx xxx 
9. xxx xxx xxx 
10. xxx xxx xxx 
 (The witness then withdrew)
11. T he Chairman welcomed Shri Aditya Sondhi, Sr. Advocate and requested
him to present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going
to have on the criminal justice system.
12. S
hri Aditya Sondhi informed that he would focus mainly on the sentencing
aspects of these Bills. He expressed that death penalty as a form of punishment
should be reconsidered. Majority of countries have done away with it.   He
m
entioned that although the death penalty is provided in the existing IPC and in
va
rious special laws, the statistics and the judgements of the Supreme Court clearly
indicate an anti-death penalty trend.  It is an opportune moment to revisit this issue
of the death sentence itself. He further stated that though death sentence is awarded
in rarest of rare case, but that has not really worked as a deterrent. He informe d
tha
t in the new Bill number of offences which awards death penalty have been
increased. He suggested that there should be provision for demarcation of various
mitigation steps in procedural bills, by taking guidance from the principles laid
down by the Supreme Court of India.   Further, death sentence can be replaced by
sentence of life imprisonment, which means the remainder of the life, without
parole.
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

240 
13. He suggested that provisions should be inserted in the Bills for mistrial where
outcome of the case get influenced due to media.  He also suggested that in case of
commutation and remission, sentiments of the victim's must be considered if bona
fide convictions have taken place. A quasi judicial board needs to be constituted
which deals with matters of commutation and remission rather than leaving the
judicial function to the discretion of Executive. He further proposed that a time
frame to be provided within which mercy petitions are to be considered or heard.
14. T
he Chairman and Members raised some queries related to completely
removing the death penalty from the penal code and are of the view that it can be
retained in rarest of rare case. The witness replie d to the queries. He was requested
to f
urnish any other information to the Secretariat within 3 days.
 ( The witness then withdrew)
15. T he Chairman welcomed Shri Amit Desai, Sr. Advocate and requested him
to present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to
have on the criminal justice system.
16. xx x ∗ x xx xxx 
17. xxx xxx xxx 
18. xxx xxx xxx 
19. xxx xxx xxx 
(The witness then withdrew)
21. T he Chairman welcomed Shri Priyank Kanoongo, Chairperson, Chairperson,
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights and requested him to present
his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to have on the
criminal justice system.
22. S
hri Priyank Kanoongo informed the Committee that he will present the
views of the Commission on the various aspects of Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
He stated that a child is any person below the age of 18 years, therefore he
suggested that in Clauses 27, 28(c) and 91 the word ‘twelve’ should be replace
d
w
ith the word ‘eighteen’.  He also suggested changes in some other Clauses of the
Bill which inter alia  included  in Clause 27(c) after the words’ grievous hurt’ the
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

words ‘or subjecting the child to corporal punishment whether voluntarily or not’ 
is to be added; in Clause 70(2) which pertains to gang rape, the word ‘woman’ 
should be replaced with the word ‘child’; in Clause 72(2)(c) which relates to 
disclosure of identity of victim of certain offences etc.,   a proviso should be added 
which reads “Nothing in the sub - section 2 shall extend to any person below the 
age of 18 years. Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Special 
Court, competent to try the case under the Act, may permit such disclosure, if in its 
opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the child.”; Clause 77(1)(i) which deals 
with stalking, before the word ‘a woman’ the words ‘a minor below the age of 18 
years or’ to be added, as offence of stalking is not age specific; etc.
23. He informed that Clause 93 which relates to hiring, employing or engaging a
chil
d to commit an offence is similar to the provisions of  POCSO Act and Juvenile
Justice Act, therefore the Clause to be made in lines of those Acts.   He also
suggested that Clause 94 which relates to procurement of child, Clause 96 which
relates to selling child for purposes of prostitution, etc., and Clause 97 which
relates to buying child for the purpose of prostitution, etc., should be shifted to
Chapter VI of the Bill which deals with ‘of offences affecting the Human Body’.
He also suggested certain changes in Clause 141- trafficking of person; Clause
142-exploitation of a trafficked person; Clause 143- habitual dealing in slaves; and
Clause 197- public servant disobeying direction under law.
24. The Chairman and the Members raised some queries and sought clarification
on som
e of the suggestions made on the Clauses of the Bill. The witness replied to
the queries. He was requested to furnish any other information to the Secretariat
within 3 days.
(The witness then withdrew)
25. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
26. The meeting was adjourned at 04:22 p.m.
 241 

242 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman 
2. Shri P. Chidambaram 
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
4. Shri N.R. Elango 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
8. Sh. Rakesh Sinha 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
11. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
12. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
13. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
14. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
16. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
17. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 4 th October, 20 23 
in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe- Extension, New Delhi.  
MEMBERS PRESENT 

243 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Smt. Prabita Khoyumthem, Deputy Director 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary
ii. S hri Satpal Chouhan, DG (Awards)
iii. S hri Shri Prakash, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel. 
ii. Shri R. K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel. 
2. A t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He informed the Members that as per agenda the Committee will take
up Clause -by-Clause discussion on the three Bills, namely, the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023; the Bharatiya  Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and the Bharatiya
Sakshya Bill, 2023.  He also informed that before proceeding, the Committee will
hear the views of some members who wished to express their views on the Bills or
with regard to any Clause of the Bills. Then, he requested Shri Derek O'Brien to
express his views on the Bills, followed by Shri P. Chidambaram and Shri N.R.
Elango.
3. Shri Derek O'Brien expressed that there is a need to hear more doma in
e
xperts and stakeholders on the proposed criminal law Bills to have valuable inputs
on these Bills. He suggested names of stakeholders whose views could be heard on
the proposed Bills. He stated that Clause by clause consideration of the Bills needs
to be deferred as there are numerous drafting errors. He pointed out that in the

244 
proposed Bills there is absorption of special laws like Prevention of Money 
Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) , Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 
1999 (MCOCA) into general criminal laws without any of the necessary 
procedural safeguards. He stated that the titles of the English version of the Bills 
should be in English. Thereafter, he expressed his views on the various aspects of 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) which inter alia  included that in the 
definition of terrorist in Clause 111(6), the addition of word ‘floods’ is ambiguous 
and the definition is so vague that it may end up giving the police unreasonable 
wide powers; Punishment for promise to marry in Clause 69, it would be difficult 
to prove whether the promise was made genuinely or not; the use of the word 
“unless” in Clause 23 instead of “provided that” makes the provision contradictory; 
Clause 101, provides for punishment for mob lynching as a distinct offence, 
however, the severity of punishment for mob lynching does not align with that of 
murder or intentional culpable homicide; etc. He also pointed out some other 
shortcomings in the Bill s uch as marital rape has not been made an offence, 
Section 377 of IPC has not been incorporated in the new Bill;
 transwomen has not 
been included in the definition of rape;  explanation to Clause 150 is incomplete; 
etc.
4. Thereafter, Shri P. Chidamb aram also expressed that Clause -by-Clause
consideration should be postponed until a clean draft is provided on BNS as there
are multiple drafting errors in the Bill. xxx∗  xxx      xxx
5. Thereafter, Shri N.R. Elango expressed that no major new provisions and
reforms have been introduced in the proposed criminal law Bills. The fundamental
rights whether those of the accused or of the victim, are not taken care of in these
Bills. He informed that there are a lot of drafting mistakes in these Bills and the re
is 
a need to have larger discussion with Bar associations, judges, stakeholders etc.
to have better understanding on them. He observed that these Bills are bringing
more stringent laws than what is already there, provision of death penalty is still
there, it has not been removed.
6. xxx xxx xxx
7. xxx x xx xxx
8. xxx x xx xxx 
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

245 
9. In BNS, he suggested if terrorism is brought into general law then t here
should not be any overlapping with Unlawful Activities (Prevention), Act, 1967 o r
the
re should not be any contradicting definition of terrorism between these two
laws. Similarly, before introducing organized crimes in this Bill, all the State
Governments who are having the special laws for organized crimes must be
consulted. He suggested that single date should be appointed instead of different
dates for different provisions as mentioned in Clause 1(2). He also suggested
some  more changes which inter alia included Explanation 5 in Clause 46 shoul
d
be
 deleted as it is contradictory; when a group of five or more persons acting in
concert commit murder, minimum punishment of seven years is not sufficient. The
punishment should be more (Clause 101(2)), as it is an aggravated form of murder;
Clause 104(1) needs to be properly worded; Punishment needs to be reconsidered
in Clause 115(4) as it relates to aggravated form of offence.  Section 377 of IPC
which pertains to unnatural sex has been omitted, it needs to be retained in the new
Bill if it happens without consent;  raised concern with regard to omission of
Section 497 of IPC in the new Bill etc.
10. xx
x ∗ x xx xxx 
(On arrival of witnesses) 
11. T he Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the Ministry of Law  and Justice to this meeting. He requested Home Secretary  to
a
ssist the Committee in Clause -by-Clause discussion on the three Bills and to
clarify and solve the queries raised by the Members of the Committee on Clauses
of the Bills, if so required.
12. H e informed that the Committee has received many representations and
suggestions from private individuals and organisations, Members of Parliament,
ex-Member of Parliament and State Governments, which were taken up with the
Ministry of Home Affairs for their comments.  Based on the number of suggestions
received on these Bills, the Ministry has prepared a statement containing Clause-
wise suggestions along with their comments which has been circulated to the
Members for reference.
13. T
he Home Secretary  informed the Committee that the Ministry looked at all
the suggestions from Members as well as experts and the typographical mistakes
which were pointed out and has prepared their response.   Before taking up clause -
by-clause consideration, he stated that regarding the names of the Bills, the
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

246 
Ministry will suggest that the names will be retained as has been proposed by the 
Ministry. The texts of the Bills are in English, it does not violate the provisions of 
article 348 of the Constitution, however, the Committee could take a final view in 
this regard.  
14. T
hereafter, BNS was taken up for clause by Clause discussion. He informed
that in Clause 2(1) which defines ‘act’ there was a suggestion that it should be a
single act and he informed that the Ministry will make correction as suggested.   In
Clause 2(7), it was suggested to include the definition of 'document' in BNS as
mentioned in Clause 2(c) of the Sakshya Bill.   The Ministry has agreed to the
suggestion. The Ministry did not agree with the suggestions to provide separate
definition for transgender and judge. Further the Ministry did not agree with the
suggestions in Clause 3(5), 3(6) and 3(7) as the Clauses convey the same meaning
as in the IPC. In Clause 4(b) there was a  suggestion to amend the "Im prisonment
for life", which was agreed to by the Ministry.   In clause 4(f), it was suggested to
define ‘community service’, the Ministry also agreed with the suggestion. The
Chairman and Members made queries regarding some explanations provided for
some of the Clauses, the Home Secretary replied to them.
15. The
 Ministry agreed with the suggestion that  provisions regardi ng
c
ommutation of death sentence or imprisonment for life, as laid down under Clause
5 of the BNS may be changed to bring it in conformity with Clause 475 of the
BNSS. Thereafter, Home Secretary informed that there was suggestion to repeal
Clause 11 and 12 which relate to solitary confinement, however the Ministry does
not consider to change this. He informed that in Clause 22, it was sugge sted t
o
r
eplace ‘mental illness’ with ‘unsound mind’, and it will be done accordingly. He
explained that changes suggested in Clauses 38, 48 and 57 need not be considered.
In Clause 63 few changes were suggested like to widen the definition of ‘rape’. It
was explained that these are existing provisions, it need not be changed.   In Clause
65(
1) which relates to rape, there was suggestion that no differentiation should be
made of a child between sixteen years or twelve years, it was explained that these
are existing sections and no change is considered necessary. The change s
su
ggested in Clause 67 which relates to sexual intercourse by husband upon his
wife during separation or by person in authority’ were agreed upon by the
Ministry. In the Explanation to Clause 150, there was a suggestion to include the
words “do not constitute an offence under this section” after the words “the
activities referred in this section”, it was informed that it was a drafting error and it
will be corrected.   He also informed that minor changes suggested in Clauses 69,
72(1), 111(1), 115(4) will be made accordingly.

247 
16. Thereafter, he explained that Ministry does not consider the suggested
changes in some Clauses of the Bill which inter alia included Clauses 76, 77(2),
78, 81(1), 84,  119(1), 138(4), 142(1), 144, 195(1)(d), 306(1), 334(1), 354 etc. In
Clause 101(2) there was a suggestion that mob lynching may be explicitly
recognized as a distinct offence and a legal definition for the term lynching should
be included in the Bill. He informed that changes will be made in consultation with
the Legislative Department, if necessary. Clause 104(2) which relates to causing
death by negligence, it was suggested to remove ambiguity in the Clause; Clause
115(4) which addresses the aggravated form of grievous hurt inflicted by a mob,
there was suggestion that penalty should be higher in this case; in Clause 109(1)
which relates to organised crime, it was suggested to bring more clarity;  in Clause
110(1) which relates to petty organized crime or organised crime in general,
suggestion was that the provisions are too vague and ambiguous. The Home
Secretary explained that in all these Clauses changes will be made in consultation
with the Legislative Department.
17. The Chairman and Members o
 f the Committee raised queries and sought
clarifications from the Ministry regarding its stand on some of the suggestions like
sustained provocation in case of murder, punishment for mob lynching, provision
for punishment for physical assault and verbal abuse to a healthcare professional,
definition of ‘terrorist act’, punishment in case of causing hurt to deter public
servant from duty, etc. The Home Secretary replied to queries.
18. xxx
∗ xxx x xx
19. xxx xxx x xx
20. xxx xxx x xx
(
The witnesses then withdrew)
21. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
ke
pt.
22. The meeting was adjourned at 04:04 p.m.
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

248 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 12:00 p .m. o n Thursday, the 5th October, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Ann exe Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Ku mar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri SanjayBhatia
9. Shri Dilip Ghosh
10. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
11. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
13. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
15. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

249 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Smt. Prabita Khoyumthem, Deputy Director 
Shri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary
ii. S hri Satpal Chouhan, DG (Awards)
iii. S hri Shri Prakash, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel.
ii. S hri R. K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee and informed them that the Committee will take up Clause -by-Clause
di
scussion of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and a few provisions
of Bharatiya Nyaya Sa nhita, 2023 to be discussed as it could not be taken up with
the Ministry of Home Affairs in the previous meeting of the Committee.
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3. The Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the
Ministry of Law and Justice to this meeting. He informed Home Secretary that
before initiating deliberations on Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023

250 
(BNSS), he would like to discuss a few provisions related to Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita (BNS) like punishment for unnatural sex without consent including 
bestiality; non - inclusion of Section 497 of IPC related to adultery in BNS; and 
making the age of child victims 18 years uniformly across some Clauses of BNS.
4. The Home Secretary informed that there have been sugg e stions that the
provision of Section 497 of IPC on adultery needs to be retained in the new Bill
with some modification. He informed that it could be considered as suggested by
some members, experts and State Governments. As regard to Section 377 of IPC
on unnatural sex, there have been suggestions that it may not be repealed in its
entirety. The Ministry agreed to retain it in the BNS to the extent that it addresses
non consensual acts.   Regarding age of the child, he informed that person below
eighteen years of age is a child, so there is no need to change any thing in the BNS.
5. xxx
∗ xxx x xx
6. xxx x xx xxx
7. xxx xxx  xxx
8. xxx xxx  xxx
9. xxx xxx  xxx
10. xxx xxx x xx
11. xxx xxx x xx
12. xxx xxx x xx
(The witnesses then withdrew)
13. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
ke
pt.
14. The meeting was adjourned at 04:23 p.m.
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

251 
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12:00 noo n on Friday, the 27 th October,  2 023 in 
Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
3. Shri N. R. Elango
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
11. Dr. ( Smt) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Dr. Nishikant Dubey
13. Shri Dilip Ghosh
14. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
15. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
17. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
18. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
19. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
20. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

252 
21. Shri Ravneet Singh
22. Dr . Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary
Smt. Prabita Khoyumthem, Joint Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He also extended a special welcome to Dr. Nishikant Dubey, who has
been recently nominated to this Committee. Proceeding further, he informed the
Members that the Committee was scheduled to consider and adopt the draft 246
th,
2
47th, and 248 th Reports on the proposed criminal laws Bills. However, on the
request received from some members to allow  more time for the Members to go
through the three draft Reports, he proposed that the consideration and adoption of
the reports be postponed to November 6, 2023. The Committee, accordingly,
agreed.
3. xxx ∗ x xx xxx
4. T hereafter, few Members made certain suggestions on some of the
recommendations in the three dr aft Reports. As regards Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita
(BNS), 2023, it was requested to include - (i) an amendment to the clause 104(1) in
the draft 246
th Report to reduce the punishment from the proposed seven years and
fine to five years and fine as the proposed punishment appeared to be high; and (ii)
an amendment to clause 130 was proposed to be included in the draft 246 th Report
to reduce the punishment provided under this clause from two years to one year as
political demonstrations represented the soul of democracy.
5. F urther, many submissions were made before the Committee with respect to
BNS which inter alia included – omission of clause 102; the clauses related with
organised crimes and terrorist activities needs to be re-looked, as they are already
covered under existing laws like Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; under
clause 115, if an accused is charged as an abettor through conspiracy, that person
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

253 
cannot be inde pendently tried for the offence of conspiracy; provide legal 
safeguards to healthcare workers under the BNS; unregulated multi-level 
marketing schemes are to be considered as economic offences in clause 109, etc. 
One of the Members also reiterated his earlier view before the Committee that the 
sexual intercourse even between consenting adults of same sex should be 
considered as an offence.
6. xxx
∗ xxx x xx
7. xxx xxx  xxx 
8. Some of the general observations made before the Committe e inter alia
included - the criminal law Bills should not be hastily taken up for consideration;
more deliberation is required on the Bills; views of the High Courts, Bar Council
of India, State Bar Councils, Advocate Associations, Bar Associations, Senior
Advocates, Women Lawyers Associations and eminent jurists need to be sought;
need to consult more stakeholders before preparing any report on the Bills; request
to extend the deadline for presenting the Reports; and to request to provide
sufficient time for submitting dissent notes.
9. With respect to extension of time for submission of Reports,  t
 he Chairman
clarified that on 7th September, 2019, the Ministry of Home Affairs wrote letters to
all the Governments, Governors, Chief Ministers, Lieutenant Go vernors,
Administrators of the States and Union Territories, requesting them to send their
suggestions on comprehensive amendment to the criminal laws. Further, on 6
th
Jan
uary, 2020 and on 9 th January, 2020, suggestions were also sought from Chief
Justice of India, Chief Justices of all High Courts, Bar Councils and Law
Universities/institutions and on 31 st December, 2021, the Ministry also requested
Members of Parliament, both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha to give their
suggestions.  This clearly shows an elaborate exercise had been undertaken by the
Ministry before drafting the Bills. Moreover, the Secretariat also wrote to all the
Chief Secretaries inviting suggestions from the respective State Governments on
the three Bills.
10. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
ke
pt.
11. The meeting was adjourned at 01:02 p.m.
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

254 
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12:00 noon on  Monday, the 06 th November, 2 023 in 
Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Dr. Nishikant Dubey
11. Shri Dilip Ghosh
12. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
13. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
14. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
15. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
16. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
17. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
18. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
19. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
20. Shri Ravneet Singh

255 
21. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shri Sreejith V ., Deputy Secretary
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee and informed the Members that the draft 246th, 247th, and 248th Reports
on T
he Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS), 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita (BNSS), 2023; and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill (BSB), 2023 respectively
would be considered and adopted in the meeting.
3. Before taking up the agenda, the Chairman breifly mentioned the chronology
of
 the three Bills which inter alia  included - introduction of the Bills in Lok Sabha
on 11th August, 2023; referral of the Bills to the DRSC on Home Affairs on 18 th
A
ugust, 2023; Committee's deliberations on the Bills; presentations made by Home
Secretary on the Bills; expression of views/suggestions by Members on the Bills;
Committee hearing the views of 19 domain experts on the Bills; and Committee
holding 12 meetings for examination of the Bills.
4. H
e also informed the Committee tha t on 4 th and 5th October, 2023, clause -
wise comments prepared by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) on the
suggestions received by the Committee were discussed. The draft reports were
prepared based on the suggestions & deliberations in the Committee, and that the
same have been circulated to Members. He also informed that certain suggestions
were received from Members in the meeting held on 27
th October, 2023. These
suggestions are related to clause 104(1) – causing death by negligence, for
reducing the punishment from seven years to five years; and to clause 130 – assault
or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty, for reducing
the punishment from two years to one year and those will be included in the 246
th
Rep
ort.
5. xxx ∗ x xx xxx
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

256 
6. Proceeding further, the Members expressed their views on the issues which
inter alia included – the Hindi title of the Bills apparently being in violation of
Article 248 of the Constitution; 90 to 95 per cent of the three draft Bills bei ng
a
pparently similar to the existing laws; not inviting the domain experts proposed
by some Members; abolition of death penalty; reintroduction of adultery in BNS ;
va
rious clauses of BNS such as clause 5 on ‘commutation of sentence of death or
imprisonment for life’; clause 11 on ‘solitary confinement’; clause 72(3) on
‘disclosure of identity of the victim of certain offences, etc’; clause 37 on ‘act s
a
gainst which there is no right of private defence’; clause 93 on ‘hiring, employing
or engaging a child to commit an offence’; clause 55 on ‘abetment of offence
punishable with death or imprisonment for life’; and clause 57 on ‘abetting
commission of offence by the public or by more than ten persons’.
7. M embers also expressed their views on some of the clauses of BNS   – clause
10
4(2) on ‘causing death by negligence’; clause 111 on ‘offence of terrorist act’;
clause 213 on ‘ refusing to sign statement’; clause 275 on ‘sale of adulterated
drugs’; clause 276 on ‘sale of drug as a different drug or preparation’; clause 277
on ‘fouling water of public spring or reservoir’; clause 354 on ‘defamation’;
offences related to elections under Chapter IX; community service, etc.
8. xxx
∗ x xx xxx
9. C ontinuing the discussions further, some of the Members appreciated the
holistic approach of the Government to decolonize the Indian mind and the
deliberations of the Committee made on the Bills. The  Members also opined that
many of the stakeholders have been consulted by the Committee which included
academicians, lawyers, judges, etc. It was also suggested that keeping these Bills
pending for more time is not desirable and that the Committee Reports on these
Bills need to be adopted as soon as possible.
10. xx
x xxx xxx 
11. xxx xxx xxx 
12. xxx xxx xxx 
13. Thereafter, the 246th, 247th, and 248th  Reports of the Committee were
adopted with the broad consensus of the Member s. The Committee authorised the
Chairman to carry out corrections of typographical/factual errors, if any. The
∗xxx    Relates to other matters 

257 
Committee also authorised him to present the Reports to the Hon’ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha, and to forward a copy to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, during the 
current inter-Session period as both the Houses of Parliament are not in session. 
The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the date of 
presentation/laying the Reports in the ensuing Session of Parliament and nominate 
Members for presentation/laying of Reports in the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha.
14. The Chairman then thanked all the Members of the Committee for keenly
taki
ng part in the discussions on the Bills and for giving various suggestions on the
Bills for streamlining, strengthening, simplifying, and enhancing the efficiency of
the criminal justice system. He remarked that the cooperation and contribution of
the Members has been indispensable for the successful completion of the
examination of the three criminal law Bills, and the preparation of the Reports. He
also congratulated the  Members for successfully completing the task in a time -
bound manner and concluded the meeting.
15. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
16. The
 meeting was adjourned at 02:06 p.m.
*****

ANNEXURES 
258

THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, commencement and application.
2. Definitions.
3. General Explanations and expressions.
CHAPTER II
OF PUNISHMENTS
4. Punishments.
5. Commutation of sentence of death or imprisonment for life.
6. Fractions of terms of punishment.
7. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous or
simple.
8. Amount of fine, liability in default of payment of fine, etc.
9. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.
10. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the judgment stating that it
is doubtful of which.
11. Solitary confinement.
12. Limit of solitary confinement.
13. Enhanced punishment for certain offences after previous conviction.
CHAPTER III
G
ENERAL EXCEPTIONS
14. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law.
15. Act of Judge when acting judicially.
16. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court.
17. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself, justified, by
law.
18. Accident in doing a lawful act.
19. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other
harm.
20. Act of a child under seven years of age.
21. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature understanding.
22. Act of a person of mental illness.
23. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his
will.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 121 of 2023
Annexure - I

(ii)
24. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is
intoxicated.
25. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done
by consent.
26. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person’s
benefit.
27. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or person with mental illness, by or by
consent of guardian.
28. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception.
29. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused.
30. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent.
31. Communication made in good faith.
32. Act to which a person compelled by threats.
33. Act causing slight harm.
Of  the Right of Private Defence
34. Things done in private defence.
35. Right of private defence of the body and of property.
36. Right of private defence against the act of a person with mental illness, etc.
37. Acts against which there is no right of private defence.
38. When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing death.
39. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.
40. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of the body.
41. When the right of private defence of property extends to causing death.
42. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.
43. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of property.
44. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent
person.
CHAPTER IV
O
F ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
Of  Abetment
45. Abetment of a thing.
46. Abettor.
47. Abetment in India of offences outside India.
48. Abetment outside India for offence in India.
49. Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in consequence and where
no express provision is made for its punishment.
50. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intention from
that of abettor.
51. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done.
52. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done.
C
LAUSES

(iii)
53. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted different from that intended
by the abettor.
54. Abettor present when offence is committed.
55. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.
56. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment.
57. Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten persons.
58. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or imprisonment for
life.
59. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty to prevent.
60. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.
Of  Criminal Conspiracy
61. Criminal conspiracy.
Of  Attempt
62. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment for
life or other imprisonment.
CHAPTER V
O
F O FFENCES AGAINST W OMAN AND C HILDREN
Of  Sexual offences
63. Rape.
64. Punishment for rape.
65. Punishment for rape in certain cases.
66. Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim.
67. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation or by a person in
authority.
68. Sexual intercourse by a person in authority.
69. Sexual intercourse by employing deceitful means etc.
70. Gang rape.
71. Punishment for repeat offenders.
72. Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain offences, etc.
Of criminal force and assault against women
73. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.
74. Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment.
75. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe.
76. V oyeurism.
77. Stalking.
78. Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman.
Of  offences relating to marriage
79. Dowry death.
80. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage.
C
LAUSES

(iv)
81. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.
82. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage.
83. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman.
84. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.
85. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc.
Of  the causing of miscarriage, etc.
86. Causing miscarriage.
87. Causing miscarriage without woman’s consent.
88. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage.
89. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it to die after birth.
90. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide.
Of  offences against children
91. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by parent or person having
care of it.
92. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body.
93. Hiring, employing or engaging a child to commit an offence.
94. Procuration of child.
95. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to steal from its person.
96. Selling child for purposes of prostitution, etc.
97. Buying child for purposes of prostitution, etc.
CHAPTER VI
O
F OFFENCES AFFECTING THE  H UMAN B ODY
Of  offences affecting life
98. Culpable homicide.
99. Murder.
100.Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose death was
intended.
101.Punishment for murder.
102.Punishment for murder by life-convict.
103.Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
104.Causing death by negligence.
105.Abetment of suicide of child or person with mental illness.
106. Abetment of suicide.
107. Attempt to murder.
108. Attempt to commit culpable homicide.
109. Organised crime.
C
LAUSES

(v)
110. Petty organised crime or organised in general.
111. Offence of terrorist act.
Of  hurt
112. Hurt.
113. V oluntarily causing hurt.
114. Grievous hurt.
115. V oluntarily causing grievous hurt.
116. V oluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means.
117. V oluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an
illegal to an act.
118. V oluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel
restoration of property.
119. V oluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty.
120. V oluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt on provocation.
121. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit an offence.
122. V oluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc.
123. Act endangering life or personal safety of others.
124. W rongful restraint.
125. W rongful confinement.
Of  Criminal Force and Assault
126. Force.
127. Criminal force.
128. Assault.
129. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation.
130. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty.
131. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonor person, otherwise than on grave
provocation.
132. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property carried by a person.
133. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a person.
134. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.
Of  Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour
135. Kidnapping.
136. Abduction.
137. Kidnapping or maiming a child for purposes of begging.
138. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder or for ransom etc.
139. Importation of girl or boy from foreign country.
140. W rongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted person.
141. Trafficking of person.
142. Exploitation of a trafficked person.
CLAUSES

(vi)
143. Habitual dealing in slaves.
144. Unlawful compulsory labour.
CHAPTER VII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE S TATE
145. W aging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against the
Government of India.
146. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 145.
147. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the Government of
India.
148. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war.
149. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain the exercise
of any lawful power.
150. Acts endangering  sovereignty unity and integrity of India.
151. Waging war against Government of any foreign State at peace with the Government
of India.
152. Committing depredation on territories of foreign State at peace with the Government
of India.
153. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections 153 and
154.
154. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of state or war to escape.
155. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape.
156. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner.
CHAPTER VIII
O
F OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAV Y AND AIR F ORCE
157. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from his duty.
158. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof.
159. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior officer, when in
execution of his office.
160. Abetment of such assault, if the assault committed.
161. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman.
162. Harbouring deserter.
163. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of master.
164. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman.
165. Persons subject to certain Acts.
166. W earing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman.
CHAPTER IX
O
F OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
167. Candidate, electoral right defined.
168. Bribery.
169. Undue influence at elections.
CLAUSES

(vii)
170. Personation at elections.
171. Punishment for bribery.
172. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election.
173. False statement in connection with an election.
174. Illegal payments in connection with an election.
175. Failure to keep election accounts.
CHAPTER X
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN, CURRENCY NOTES, BANK NOTES, AND
GOVERNMENT STAMPS
176. Counterfeiting coin, government stamps, currency-notes or bank-notes.
177. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit coin, Government stamp, currency-notes
or bank notes.
178. Possession of forged or counterfeit coin, Government stamp, currency-notes or
bank-notes.
179. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or counterfeiting coin,
Government stamp, currency notes or bank-notes.
180. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes.
181. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing from
document a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to Government.
182. Using Government stamp known to have been before used.
183. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used.
184. Prohibition of fictitious stamps.
185. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or composition
from that fixed by law.
186. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint.
CHAPTER XI
O
F O FFENCES AGAINST THE P UBLIC TRANQUILLITY
187. Unlawful assembly.
188. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of
common object.
189. Rioting.
190. W antonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot- if rioting be committed; if
not committed.
191. Liability of owner, occupier etc., of land on which an unlawful assembly or riot
takes place.
192. Af fray.
193. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc.
194. Promoting enmity between different groups on ground of religion, race, place of
birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of
harmony.
195. Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national integration.
C
LAUSES

(viii)
CHAPTER XII
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELA TING TO P UBLIC SERV ANTS
CLAUSES
196. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person.
197. Public servant disobeying direction under law.
198. Punishment for non-treatment of victim.
199. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury.
200. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.
201. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property.
202. Personating a public servant.
203. W earing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent intent.
CHAPTER XIII
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC S ERV ANTS
204. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding.
205. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing publication
thereof.
206. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant.
207. Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under section 82 of Act __ of 2023.
208. Omission to produce document to public servant by person legally bound to
produce it.
209. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person legally bound
to give it.
210. Furnishing false information.
211. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it.
212. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question.
213. Refusing to sign statement.
214. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person authorised to
administer an oath or affirmation.
215. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to
the injury of another person.
216. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a public servant.
217. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public servant.
218. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of public servant.
219. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions.
220. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give assistance.
221. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant.
222. Threat of injury to public servant.
223. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection to public
servant.
224. Attempt to commit suicide to compel or restraint exercise of lawful power.

(ix)
CHAPTER XIV
OF F ALSE EVIDENCEAND OFFENCES AGAINST P UBLIC J USTICE
CLAUSES
225. Giving false evidence.
226. Fabricating false evidence.
227. Punishment for false evidence.
228. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of capital
offence.
229. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of offence
punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment.
230. Threatening any person to give false evidence.
231. Using evidence known to be false.
232. Issuing or signing false certificate.
233. Using as true a certificate known to be false.
234. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence.
235. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.
236. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to
screen offender.
237. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform.
238. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.
239. Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence.
240. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution.
241. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited
or in execution.
242. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.
243. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.
244. Dishonestly making false claim in Court.
245. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.
246. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.
247. Harbouring offender.
248. T aking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment.
249. Of fering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening offender.
250. T aking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.
251. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension has
been ordered.
252. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.
253. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from
punishment or property from forfeiture.
254. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person from
punishment or property from forfeiture.

(x)
255. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law.
256. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who knows that
he is acting contrary to law.
257. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to
apprehend.
258. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to
apprehend person under sentence or lawfully committed.
259. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public servant.
260. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension.
261. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person.
262. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in
cases not otherwise, provided for.
263. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension or escape or rescue in cases not
otherwise provided for.
264. V iolation of condition of remission of punishment.
265. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding.
266. Personation of an assessor.
267. Failure by person released on bail or bond to appear in court.
CHAPTER XV
O
F OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE,
DECENCY AND M ORALS
268. Public nuisance.
269. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.
270. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.
271. Disobedience to quarantine rule.
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.
273. Sale of noxious food or drink.
274. Adulteration of drugs.
275. Sale of a dulterated drugs.
276. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.
277. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.
278. Making atmosphere noxious to health.
279. Rash driving or riding on a public way.
280. Rash navigation of vessel.
281. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy.
282. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel.
283. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation.
284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.
CLAUSES

(xi)
285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter.
286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.
287. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.
288. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down, repairing or constructing buildings
etc.
289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.
290. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for.
291. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue.
292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.
293. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to  child.
294. Obscene acts and songs.
295. Keeping lottery office.
CHAPTER XVI
OF O FFENCES  RELATING TO R ELIGION
296. Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to insult the religion of any class.
297. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class
by insulting its religion or religious beliefs.
298. Disturbing religious assembly.
299. Trespassing on burial places, etc.
300. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings.
CHAPTER XVII
O
F O FFENCES  AGAINST  P ROPERTY
301. Theft.
302. Snatching.
303. Theft in a dwelling house, or means of transportation or place of worship, etc.
304. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master.
305. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to the
committing of theft.
Of  extortion
306. Extortion.
Of  Robbery and Dacoity
307. Robbery.
308. Dacoity.
309. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt.
310. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon.
311. Punishment for belonging to gang of robbers, dacoits, etc.
CLAUSES

(xii)
Of  Criminal Misappropriation of Property
CLAUSES
312. Dishonest misappropriation of property.
313. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the
time of his death.
Of  Criminal Breach of Trust
314. Criminal breach of trust.
Of  the Receiving of Stolen Property
315. S tolen property.
Of  Cheating
316. Cheating.
317. Cheating by personation.
Of  Fraudulent Deeds and Dispositions of Property
318. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution
among creditors.
319. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors.
320. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement
of consideration.
321. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property.
Of  Mischief
322. Mischief.
323. Mischief by killing or maiming animal.
324. Mischief by injury, inundation, fire or explosive substance, etc.
325. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a rail, aircraft, decked vessel or one
of twenty tons burden.
326. Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with intent to
commit theft, etc.
Of  Criminal Trespass
327. Criminal trespass and house-trespass.
328. House-trespass and house-breaking.
329. Punishment for house-trespass or house breaking .
330. House-trespass in order to commit offence.
331. House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint.
332. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property.
CHAPTER XVIII
O
F O FFENCES  R ELATING T O D OCUMENTS  A ND T O P ROPERTY  M ARKS
333. Making a false document.
334. For gery.

(xiii)
335. For gery of record of Court or of public register, etc.
336. For gery of valuable security, will, etc.
337. Having possession of document described in section  335 or 336, knowing it to be
forged and intending to use it as genuine.
338. Forged document or electronic record and using it as genuine.
339. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc ., with intent to commit forgery
punishable under section 336.
340. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in
section 336, or possessing counterfeit marked material.
341. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable
security.
342. Falsification of accounts.
Of  Property Marks
343. Property mark.
344. T ampering with property mark with intent to cause injury.
345. Counterfeiting a property mark.
346. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark.
347. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.
348. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods.
CHAPTER XIX
O
F C RIMINAL  I NTIMIDA TION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE, D EFAMATION, E TC.
349. Criminal intimidation.
350. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace.
351. Statements conducing to public mischief.
352. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of the
Divine displeasure.
353. Misconduct in public by a drunken person.
Of  Defamation
354. Defamation.
Of breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person.
355. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person.
356. Repeal and savings.
C
LAUSES

1
THE  BHARATIYA   NYAYA  SANHITA,  2023
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the provisions relating to offences and  for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of the Sanhita.
Short title,
commencement
and
application.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 121 of 2023
5

2
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita and not otherwise for
every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within
India.
(4) Any person liable, by any law for the time being in force in India, to be tried for an
offence committed beyond India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this
Sanhita for any act committed beyond India in the same manner as if such act had been
committed within India.
(5) The provisions of this Sanhita apply also to any offence committed by—
(a) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;
(b) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be;
(c) any person in any place without and beyond India committing offence targeting
a computer resource located in India.
Explanation.—In this section the word “offence” includes every act committed outside
India which, if committed in India, would be punishable under this Sanhita.
Illustration.
A, who is a citizen of India, commits a murder in any place without and beyond India,
he can be tried and convicted of murder in any place in India in which he may be found.
(6) Nothing in this Sanhita shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny
and desertion of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the Government of India
or the provisions of any special or local law.
2. In this Sanhita unless the context otherwise requires,––
(1) “act” as well a series of acts as a single act;
(2) “animal” means any living creature, other than a human being;
(3) “counterfeit”.––A person is said to “counterfeit” who causes one   thing to
resemble another thing, intending by means of that resemblance to practice deception,
or knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be proctised.
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to counterfeiting that the imitation should be exact.
Explanation 2.—When a person causes one thing to resemble another thing, and the
resemblance is such that a person might be deceived thereby, it shall be presumed, until the
contrary is proved, that the person so causing the one thing to resemble the other thing
intended by means of that resemblance to practise deception or knew it to be likely that
deception would thereby be practised;
(4) “Court” means a Judge who is empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a
body of Judges, which is empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when such
Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially;
(5) “death” means the death of a human being unless the contrary appears from
the context;
(6) “dishonestly” means doing of an act with the intention of   causing wrongful
gain to one person or wrongful loss to another person;
(7) “document” means any matter expressed or described upon any substance
by means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to
be used, or which may be used, as evidence of that matter.
Explanation 1.—It is immaterial by what means or upon what substance the letters,
figures or marks are formed, or whether the evidence is intended for, or may be used in a
Court or not.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Illustrations.
(a) A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used as evidence
of the contract, is a document.
(b) A cheque upon a banker is a document.
(c) A power-of-attorney is a document.
(d) A Map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used as
evidence, is a document.
(e) A writing containing directions or instructions is a document.
Explanation 2.—Whatever is expressed by means of letters, figures or marks as
explained by mercantile or other usage, shall be deemed to be expressed by such
letters, figures or marks within the meaning of this section, although the same may not
be actually expressed.
Illustration.
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The
meaning of the endorsement, as explained by mercantile usage, is that the bill is to be
paid to the holder. The endorsement is a document, and shall be construed in the same
manner as if the words “pay to the holder” or words to that effect had been written
over the signature.
 (8) “fraudulently”.—A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does that
thing with intent to defraud but not otherwise.
(9) “gender”.—the pronoun “he” and its derivatives are used of any person,
whether male, female or transgender.
Explanation.–– “transgender” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause
(k) of section 2 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019;
 (10) “good faith”.—Nothing is said to be done or believed in “good faith”
which is done or believed without due care and attention;
(11) “Government” means the Central Government or a State Government;
(12) “harbour”.—except as otherwise provided in this Sanhita,  includes the
supplying a person with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or
means of conveyance, or the assisting a person by any means, whether of the same
kind as those enumerated in this section or not, to evade apprehension;
(13) “injury” means any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body,
mind, reputation or property;
(14) “illegal”- “legally bound to do”. —The word “illegal” is applicable to
everything which is an offence or which is prohibited by law, or which furnishes
ground for a civil action; and a person is said to be “legally bound to do” whatever it
is illegal in him to omit;
(15) “Judge” means a person who is officially designated as a Judge and includes
a person,––
(i) who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or
criminal, a definitive judgment, or a judgment which, if not appealed against,
would be definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by some other authority,
would be definitive; or
(ii) who is one of a body or persons, which body of persons is empowered
by law to give such a judgment.
40 of 2019.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
llustration.
A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has
power to sentence to fine or imprisonment, with or without appeal, is a Judge;
(16) “life”  means the life of a human being, unless the contrary appears from the
context;
  (17) “local law” means a law applicable only to a  particular part of India;
 (18) “man” means male human being of any age;
(19) “mental illness” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( a) of
section 2 of  the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017;
 (20) “month” and “year”.––Wherever the word “month” or the    word “year” is
used, it is to be understood that the month or the year is to be reckoned according to
the Gregorian calendar;
(21) “movable property” includes property of every description, except land
and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything which is attached
to the earth;
(22) “number”. —Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing
the singular number include the plural number, and words importing the plural number
include the singular number;
(23) “oath” includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath, and
any declaration required or authorised by law to be made before a public servant or to
be used for the purpose of proof, whether in a Court or not;
(24) “offence”.—Except in the Chapters and sections mentioned in sub-clauses
(a) and (b) the word “offence” means an act made punishable by this Sanhita, but––
(a) in Chapter III  and in the following sections, namely, sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5) of section 8, sections 10, 46, 47, 48, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 61, 113,
114, 117, sub-sections (7) and (8) of section 125,  217,  224,  225,  234,  242,  244,
245,  253,  254,  255,  256,  257, sub-sections (6) and (7) of section 306 and clause
(b) of section 324, the word “offence” means a thing punishable under this
Sanhita, or under any special  law or local law; and
(b) in sections 183, 205, 206, 232, 233, 243, 247 and 323 the word “offence”
shall have the same meaning when the act punishable under the special law or
local law is punishable under such law with imprisonment for a term of six months
or more, whether with or without fine;
(25) “omission” means sigle ommission as well as a series of omissions;
(26) “person” includes any company or association or body of persons, whether
incorporated or not;
(27) “public” includes any class of the public or any community;
(28) “public servant” means a person falling under any of the descriptions,
namely: —
(a) every commissioned officer in the Army, Navy or Air Force;
(b) every Judge including any person empowered by law to discharge,
whether by himself or as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory
functions;
(c) every officer including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner whose
duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law or fact, or
to make, authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any
10 of  2017.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
property, or to execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to
interpret, or to preserve order in the Court, and every person specially authorised
to perform any of such duties;
(d) every assessor or member of a panchayat assisting a Court or public
servant;
(e) every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been
referred for decision or report by any Court, or by any other competent public
authority;
(f) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered
to place or keep any person in confinement;
(g) every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such officer, to
prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice,
or to protect the public health, safety or convenience;
(h) every officer whose duty it is as such officer, to take, receive, keep or
expend any property on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey,
assessment or contract on behalf of the Government, or to execute any revenue-
process, or to investigate, or to report, on any matter affecting the pecuniary
interests of the Government, or to make, authenticate or keep any document
relating to the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent the infraction
of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of the Government;
(i) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or
expend any property, to make any survey or assessment or to levy any rate or tax
for any secular common purpose of any village, town or district, or to make,
authenticate or keep any document for the ascertaining of the rights of the
people of any village, town or district;
(j) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered
to prepare, publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election
or part of an election;
(k) every person—
(i) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees or
commission for the performance of any public duty by the Government;
(ii) in the service or pay of a local authority as defined in clause (31)
of section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, a corporation established by
or under a Central or State Act or a Government company as defined in
clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013.
Explanation.—
(a) persons falling under any of the descriptions made in this clause
are public servants, whether appointed by the Government or not;
(b) every person who is in actual possession of the situation of a
public servant, whatever legal defect there may be in his right to hold that
situation is a public servant;
(c)  “election” means an election for the purpose of selecting members
of any legislative, municipal or other public authority, of whatever character,
the method of election to which is by, or under any law for the time being
in force.
Illustration.
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant;
10 of 1897.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(29) “reason to believe”.—A person is said to have “reason to believe” a thing,
if he has sufficient cause to believe that thing but not otherwise;
(30) “special law” means a law applicable to a particular subject;
(31) “valuable security” means a document which is, or purports to be, a
document where by any legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted,
extinguished or released, or where by any person acknowledges that he lies under
legal liability, or has not a certain legal right.
Illustration.
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the effect of this
endorsement is to transfer the right to the bill to any person who may become the
lawful holder of it, the endorsement is a “valuable security”;
(32) “vessel” means anything made for the conveyance by water of human
beings or of property;
(33) “voluntarily”A person is said to cause an effect “voluntarily” when he
causes it by means whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time of
employing those means, he knew or had reason to believe to be likely to cause it.
Illustration.
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for the purpose of
facilitating a robbery and thus causes the death of a person. Here, A may not have
intended to cause death; and may even be sorry that death has been caused by his act;
yet, if he knew that he was likely to cause death, he has caused death voluntarily;
(34) “will” means any testamentary document;
(35) “woman” means a female human being of any age;
(36) “wrongful gain” means gain by unlawful means of property to which the
person gaining is not legally entitled;
(37)  “wrongful loss” means the loss by unlawful means of property to which the
person losing it is legally entitled;
(38) “gaining wrongfully”, “losing wrongfully”.—A person is said to gain
wrongfully when such person retains wrongfully, as well as when such person acquires
wrongfully. A person is said to lose wrongfully when such person is wrongfully kept out
of any property, as well as when such person is wrongfully deprived of property; and
(39) words and expressions used but not defined in this Sanhita but defined in
the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the  Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,
2023 and shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act Sanhita.
3. (1) Throughout this Sanhita every definition of an offence, every penal provision,
and every Illustration of every such definition or penal provision, shall be understood
subject to the exceptions contained in the Chapter entitled “General Exceptions”, though
those exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal provision, or Illustration.
Illustration s.
(a) The sections, in this Sanhita which contain definitions of offences, do not
express that a child under seven years of age cannot commit such offences; but the
definitions are to be understood subject to the general exception which provides that
nothing shall be an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.
(b) A, a police-officer, without warrant, apprehends Z, who has committed murder.
Here A is not guilty of the offence of wrongful confinement; for he was bound by law
to apprehend Z, and therefore the case falls within the general exception which provides
that “nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is bound by law to do it”.
General
Explanations
and
expressions.
21 of 2000.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(2) Every expression which is explained in any Part of this Sanhita, is used in every Part
of this Sanhita in conformity with the explanation.
(3) When property is in the possession of a person’s spouse, clerk or servant, on
account of that person, it is in that person’s possession within the meaning of this Sanhita.
Explanation.—A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in the capacity
of a clerk or servant, is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this sub-section.
(4) In every Part of this Sanhita, except where a contrary intention appears from the
context, words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omissions.
(5) When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common
intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done
by him alone.
(6) Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a criminal
knowledge or intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins in the
act with such knowledge or intention is liable for the act in the same manner as if the act were
done by him alone with that knowledge or intention.
(7) Wherever the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that effect, by an
act or by an omission, is an offence, it is to be understood that the causing of that effect
partly by an act and partly by an omission is the same offence.
Illustration.
A intentionally causes Z’s death, partly by illegally omitting to give Z food, and partly
by beating Z. A has committed murder.
(8) When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally
co-operates in the commission of that offence by doing any one of those acts, either singly
or jointly with any other person, commits that offence.
Illustration s.
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times giving him small doses
of poison. A and B administer the poison according to the agreement with intent to murder Z.
Z dies from the effects the several doses of poison so administered to him. Here A and B
intentionally cooperate in the commission of murder and as each of them does an act by
which the death is caused, they are both guilty of the offence though their acts are separate.
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, a prisoner, alternatively
for six hours at a time. A and B, intending to cause Z’s death, knowingly co-operate in
causing that effect by illegally omitting, each during the time of his attendance, to furnish Z
with food supplied to them for that purpose. Z dies of hunger. Both A and B are guilty of the
murder of  Z.
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A, intending to cause Z’s death, illegally
omits to supply Z with food; in consequence of which Z is much reduced in strength, but the
starvation is not sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed from his office, and B succeeds
him. B, without collusion or co-operation with A, illegally omits to supply Z with food,
knowing that he is likely thereby to cause Z’s death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder,
but, as A did not co-operate with B. A is guilty only of an attempt to commit murder.
(9) Where severalpersons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal
act, they may be guilty of different offences by means of that act.
Illustration.
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that his killing of Z would
be only culpable homicide not amounting to murder. B, having ill-will towards Z and intending
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
to kill him, and not having been subject to the provocation, assists A in killing Z. Here,
though A and B are both engaged in causing Z’s death, B is guilty of murder, and A is guilty
only of culpable homicide.
CHAPTER II
O
F PUNISHMENTS
4. The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Sanhita
are—
(a) Death;
(b) Imprisonment for life, that is to say, imprisonment for remainder of a person’s
natural life;
(c) Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:—
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
(2) Simple;
(d) Forfeiture of property;
(e) Fine;
 (f) Community Service.
5. In every case in which sentence of,––
(a) death has been passed, the appropriate Government may, without the consent
of the offender, commute the punishment for any other punishment provided by this
Sanhita;
(b) imprisonment for life has been passed, the appropriate Government may,
without the consent of the offender, commute the punishment for imprisonment of
either description for a term not exceeding fourteen years.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section expression“ appropriate Government”
means,––
(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is for an offence against
any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the
Central Government; and
(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is for an offence
against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends,
the Government of the State within which the offender is sentenced.
6. In calculating fractions of terms of punishment, imprisonment for life shall be reckoned
as equivalent to imprisonment for twenty years unless otherwise provided.
7. In every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment which may be of
either description, it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct
in the sentence that such imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous, or that such imprisonment
shall be wholly simple, or that any part of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest
simple.
8. (1) Where no sum is expressed to which a fine may extend, the amount of fine to
which the offender is liable is unlimited, but shall not be excessive.
(2) In every case of an offence––
(a) punishable with imprisonment as well as fine, in which the offender is
sentenced to a fine, whether with or without imprisonment;
Punishments.
Commutation
of sentence of
death or
imprisonment
for life.
Fractions of
terms of
punishment.
Sentence may
be (in certain
cases of
imprisonment)
wholly or
partly rigorous
or simple.
Amount of
fine, liability
in default of
payment of
fine, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(b) punishable with imprisonment or fine, or with fine only, in which the offender
is sentenced to a fine, it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender
to direct by the sentence that, in default of payment of the fine, the offender shall
suffer imprisonment for a certain term, in which imprisonment shall be in excess of any
other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or to which he may be liable
under a commutation of a sentence.
(3)The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in default of
payment of a fine shall not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the
maximum fixed for the offence, if the offence be punishable with imprisonment as well as fine.
(4) The imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of a fine or in
default of community service may be of any description to which the offender might have
been sentenced for the offence.
(5) If the offence is punishable with fine or community service, the imprisonment
which the Court imposes in default of payment of the fine or in default of community service
shall be simple, and the term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned, in
default of payment of fine or in default of community service, shall not exceed for any term
not exceeding,—
(a) two months when the amount of the fine shall not exceed five thousand
rupees; and
(b) four months when the amount of the fine shall not exceed ten thousand
rupees, and for any term not exceeding one year in any other case.
(6) (a)The imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall terminate
whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of law;
(b) If, before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment,
such a proportion of the fine be paid or levied that the term of imprisonment suffered in
default of payment is not less than proportional to the part of the fine still unpaid, the
imprisonment shall terminate.
Illustration.
A is sentenced to a fine of one thousand rupees and to four months’ imprisonment in
default of payment. Here, if seven hundred and fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied
before the expiration of one month of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the
first month has expired. If seven hundred and fifty rupees be paid or levied at the time of the
expiration of the first month, or at any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be
immediately discharged. If five hundred rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the
expiration of two months of the imprisonment. A will be discharged as soon as the two
months are completed. If five hundred rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of
those two months, or at any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately
discharged.
(7) The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time within
six years after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, the offender be liable
to imprisonment for a longer period than six years, then at any time previous to the expiration
of that period; and the death of the offender does not discharge from the liability any
property which would, after his death, be legally liable for his debts.
9. (1) Where anything which is an offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is
itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished with the punishment of more than one of
such his offences, unless it be so expressly provided.
(2) (a) Where anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of
any law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished; or
(b) Where several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves
Limit of
punishment of
offence made
up of several
offences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
constitute an offence, constitute, when combined, a different offence,
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the Court which tries
him could award for any one of such offences.
Illustration s.
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the offence of
voluntarily causing hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by each of the blows which
make up the whole beating. If A were liable to punishment for every blow, he might be
imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow. But he is liable only to one punishment for the
whole beating.
(b) But, if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A intentionally strikes Y , here, as the
blow given to Y is no part of the act whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one
punishment for voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the blow given to Y .
10. In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several
offences specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these offences he is
guilty, the offender shall be punished for the offence for which the lowest punishment is
provided if the same punishment is not provided for all.
11. Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this Sanhita the
Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence,
order that the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or portions of the
imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, according
to the following scale, namely: —
(a) a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed
six months;
(b) a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six
months and shall not exceed one year;
(c) a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed
one year.
12.  In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such confinement shall in no case
exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of
not less duration than such periods; and when the imprisonment awarded shall exceed three
months, the solitary confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of not
less duration than such periods.
13. Whoever, having been convicted by a Court in India, of an offence punishable
under Chapters X or Chapter XVII of this Sanhita with imprisonment of either description for
a term of three years or upwards, shall be guilty of any offence punishable under either of
those Chapters with like imprisonment for the like term, shall be subject for every such
subsequent offence to imprisonment for life, or to imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years.
CHAPTER III
G
ENERAL EXCEPTIONS
14. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a
mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be,
bound by law to do it.
Illustration s.
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer, in conformity with the
commands of the law. A has committed no offence.
Punishment of
person guilty
of one of
several
offences,
judgment
stating that it
is doubtful of
which.
Limit of
solitary
confinement.
Enhanced
punishment
for certain
offences after
previous
conviction.
Act done by a
person bound,
or by mistake
of fact
believing
himself bound,
by law.
Solitary
confinement.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(b) A, an officer of a Court, being ordered by that Court to arrest Y , and after due
enquiry, believing Z to be Y , arrests Z. A has committed no offence.
15. Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when acting judicially in the
exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to him by law.
16. Nothing which is done in pursuance of, or which is warranted by the judgment or
order of, a Court; if done whilst such judgment or order remains in force, is an offence,
notwithstanding the Court may have had no jurisdiction to pass such judgment or order,
provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such jurisdiction.
17. Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who
by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believes
himself to be justified by law, in doing it.
Illustration.
A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A, in the exercise, to the best of his
judgment exerted in good faith, of the power which the law gives to all persons of apprehending
murderers in the fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper authorities. A has
committed no offence, though it may turn out that Z was acting in self-defence.
18. Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, and without any
criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful
means and with proper care and caution.
Illustration.
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man who is standing by. Here,
if there was no want of proper caution on the part of A, his act is excusable and not an
offence.
19. Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that
it is likely to cause harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in
good faith for the purpose of preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property.
Explanation. —It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be prevented
or avoided was of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the
act with the knowledge that it was likely to cause harm.
Illustration s.
 (a) A, the captain of a vessel, suddenly, and without any fault or negligence on his
part, finds himself in such a position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably
run down a boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board, unless he changes the course
of his vessel, and that, by changing his course, he must incur risk of running down a boat C
with only two passengers on board, which he may possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course
without any intention to run down the boat C and in good faith for the purpose of avoiding
the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty of an offence, though he may run
down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be found
as a matter of fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse him in
incurring the risk of running down the boat C.
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the conflagration from
spreading. He does this with the intention in good faith of saving human life or property.
Here, if it be found that the harm to be prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to
excuse A ’s act, A is not guilty of the offence.
Act of Judge
when acting
judicially.
Act done
pursuant to
judgment or
order of
Court.
Act done by a
person justified,
or by mistake of
fact believing
himself,
justified, by law.
Accident in
doing a lawful
act.
Act likely to
cause harm,
but done
without
criminal
intent, and to
prevent other
harm.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12
20. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.
21. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under
twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and
consequences of his conduct on that occasion.
22. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by
reason of mental illness, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing
what is either wrong or contrary to law.
23. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by
reason of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is
either wrong, or contrary to law; unless that the thing which intoxicated him was administered
to him without his knowledge or against his will.
24.  In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge
or intent, a person who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with
as if he had the same knowledge as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless
the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against
his will.
25. Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not
known by the doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of any
harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen
years of age, who has given consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by
reason of any harm which it may be known by the doer to be likely to cause to any such
person who has consented to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration.
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This agreement implies the
consent of each to suffer any harm which, in the course of such fencing, may be caused
without foul play; and if A, while playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no offence.
26.  Nothing, which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason of any harm
which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely
to cause, to any person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a
consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that harm, or to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration.
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to cause the death of Z, who
suffers under the painful complaint, but not intending to cause Z’s death, and intending, in
good faith, Z’s benefit, performs that operation on Z, with Z’s consent. A has committed no
offence.
27. Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years
of age, or of person with mental illness, by or by consent, either express or implied, of the
guardian or other person having lawful charge of that person, is an offence by reason of any
harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause or be known by the doer to be
likely to cause to that person:
Provided that this exception shall not extend to––
(a)  the intentional causing of death, or to the attempting to cause death;
(b) the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause
Act of a child
above seven
and under
twelve of
immature
understanding.
Act of a
person of
mental illness.
Act of a person
incapable of
judgment by
reason of
intoxication
caused against
his will.
Offence
requiring a
particular
intent or
knowledge
committed by
one who is
intoxicated.
Act not
intended and
not known to
be likely to
cause death or
grievous hurt,
done by
consent.
Act not
intended to
cause death,
done by
consent in
good faith for
person's
benefit.
Act done in
good faith for
benefit of
child or
person with
mental illness,
by or by
consent of
guardian.
Act of a child
under seven
years of age.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the
curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
(c) the voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous
hurt, unless it be for the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or the curing of
any grievous disease or infirmity;
(d) the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not
extend.
Illustration.
A, in good faith, for his child’s benefit without his child’s consent, has his child cut for
the stone by a surgeon knowing it to be likely that the operation will cause the child’s death,
but not intending to cause the child’s death. A is within the exception, in as much as his
object was the cure of the child.
28. A consent is not such a consent as is intended by any section of this Sanhita,––
(a) if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception
of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the
consent was given in consequence of such fear or misconception; or
(b) if the consent is given by a person who, from mental illness, or intoxication,
is unable to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his
consent; or
(c)  unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a
person who is under twelve years of age.
29. The exceptions in sections 21, 22  and 23 do not extend to acts which are offences
independently of any harm which they may cause, or be intended to cause, or be known to
be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent, or on whose behalf the consent is given.
Illustration.
 Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of
the woman) is offence independently of any harm which it may cause or be intended to cause
to the woman. Therefore, it is not an offence “by reason of such harm”; and the consent of
the woman or of her guardian to the causing of such miscarriage does not justify the act.
30. Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for
whose benefit it is done in good faith, even without that person’s consent, if the circumstances
are such that it is impossible for that person to signify consent, or if that person is incapable
of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in lawful charge of him from whom it
is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit:
Provided that exception shall not extend to––
(a) the intentional causing of death, or the attempting to cause death;
(b) the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause
death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the
curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
(c) the voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt, for any
purpose other than the preventing of death or hurt;
(d) the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not
extend.
Illustration s.
(1) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z requires to
Consent
known to be
given under
fear or
misconception.
Exclusion of
acts which are
offences
independently
of harm
caused.
Act done in
good faith for
benefit of a
person
without
consent.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
be trepanned. A, not intending Z’s death, but in good faith, for Z’s benefit, performs the
trepan before Z recovers his power of judging for himself. A has committed no offence.
(2) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the shot may
kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z’s benefit. A’s bullet gives Z a
mortal wound. A has committed no offence.
(3) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal unless an
operation be immediately performed. There is no time to apply to the child’s guardian. A
performs the operation in spite of the entreaties of the child, intending, in good faith, the
child’s benefit. A has committed no offence.
(4) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a blanket. A
drops the child from the house top, knowing it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but
not intending to kill the child, and intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit. Here, even if
the child is killed by the fall, A has committed no offence.
Explanation.—Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of sections
21, 22 and 23.
31. No communication made in good faith is an offence by reason of any harm to the
person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person.
Illustration.
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he cannot live.
The patient dies in consequence of the shock. A has committed no offence, though he knew
it to be likely that the communication might cause the patient’s death.
32. Except murder, and offences against the State punishable with death, nothing is an
offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by threats, which, at the time of
doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension that instant death to that person will otherwise
be the consequence:
Provided the person doing the act did not of his own accord, or from a reasonable
apprehension of harm to himself short of instant death, place himself in the situation by
which he became subject to such constraint.
Explanation 1.—A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of being
beaten, joins a gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the benefit of this
exception, on the ground of his having been compelled by his associates to do anything that
is an offence by law.
Explanation 2.—A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, by threat of instant
death, to do a thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith compelled to take his
tools and to force the door of a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the
benefit of this exception.
33. Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to cause, or
that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of
ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm.
Of the  right  of  private defence
34. Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the right of private defence.
35. Every person has a right, subject to the restrictions contained in section 37, to
defend—
(a) his own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting
the human body;
(b) the property, whether movable or immovable, of himself or of any other
Communication
made in good
faith.
Act to which a
person
compelled by
threats.
Act causing
slight harm.
Things done
in private
defence.
Right of
private
defence of
body and of
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
person, against any act which is an offence falling under the definition of theft, robbery,
mischief or criminal trespass, or which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief
or criminal trespass.
36. When an act, which would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by
reason of the youth, the want of maturity of understanding, the mental illness or the intoxication
of the person doing that act, or by reason of any misconception on the part of that person,
every person has the same right of private defence against that act which he would have if
the act were that offence.
Illustration s.
(a) Z, under the influence of mental illness, attempts to kill A; Z is guilty of no offence.
But A has the same right of private defence which he would have if Z were sane.
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter. Z, in good faith,
taking A for a house-breaker, attacks A. Here Z, by attacking A under this misconception,
commits no offence. But A has the same right of private defence against Z, which he would
have if Z were not acting under that misconception.
37.  (1) There is no right of private defence,––
(a)  against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death
or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good
faith under colour of his office, though that act, may not be strictly justifiable by law;
(b) against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death
or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public
servant acting in good faith under colour of his office, though that direction may not
be strictly justifiable by law;
(c) in cases in which there is time to have recourse to the protection of the public
authorities.
(2) The right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm than
it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.
Explanation 1.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act
done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he knows or has reason
to believe, that the person doing the act is such public servant.
Explanation 2.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act
done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless he knows, or has
reason to believe, that the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such
person states the authority under which he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless he
produces such authority, if demanded.
38. The right of private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions specified in
section 37, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the
offence which occasions the exercise of the right be of any of the descriptions hereinafter
enumerated, namely:—
(a) such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will
otherwise be the consequence of such assault;
(b) such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous
hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such assault;
(c) an assault with the intention of committing rape;
(d) an assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust;
(e) an assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting;
Right of
private
defence
against act of
a person with
mental illness,
etc.
Acts against
which there is
no right of
private
defence.
When the
right of
private
defence of
body extends
to causing
death.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(f) an assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under
circumstances which may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to
have recourse to the public authorities for his release;
(g) an act of throwing or administering acid or an attempt to throw or administer
acid which may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise
be the consequence of such act.
39. If the offence be not of any of the descriptions specfied in section 38, the right of
private defence of the body does not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the
assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions specified in section 37, to the voluntary
causing to the assailant of any harm other than death.
40. The right of private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable
apprehension of danger to the body arises from an attempt or threat to commit the offence
though the offence may not have been committed; and it continues as long as such
apprehension of danger to the body continues.
41. The right of private defence of property extends, under the restrictions specified in
section 37, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the
offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which, occasions the exercise
of the right, be an offence of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:—
(a) robbery;
(b) house-breaking after sun set and before sun rise;
(c) mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on any building, tent
or vessel, which building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or as a place for
the custody of property;
(d) theft, mischief, or house-trespass, under such circumstances as may
reasonably cause apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence,
if such right of private defence is not exercised.
42. If the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which occasions
the exercise of the right of private defence, be theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any
of the descriptions specified in section 41, that right does not extend to the voluntary
causing of death, but does extend, subject to the restrictions specified in section 37, to the
voluntary causing to the wrong-doer of any harm other than death.
43. The right of private defence of property,––
(a)  commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property
commences;
(b) against theft continues till the offender has effected his retreat with the
property or either the assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property
has been recovered;
(c)  against robbery continues as long as the offender causes or attempts to
cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant
death or of instant hurt or of instant personal restraint continues;
(d) against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long as the offender
continues in the commission of criminal trespass or mischief;
(e) against house-breaking after sunset and before sun rise continues as long as
the house-trespass which has been begun by such house-breaking continues.
44. If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which reasonably
causes the apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually
When such
right extends
to causing any
harm other
than death.
Commencement
and
continuance of
right of private
defence of the
body.
When right of
private
defence of
property
extends to
causing death.
When such
right extends
to causing any
harm other
than death.
Commencement
and
continuance
of right of
private
defence of
property.
Right of private
defence against
deadly assault
when there is
risk of harm to
innocent person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
exercise that right without risk of harm to an innocent person, his right of private defence
extends to the running of that risk.
Illustration.
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot effectually exercise his
right of private defence without firing on the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming
young children who are mingled with the mob. A commits no offence if by so firing he harms
any of the children.
CHAPTER IV
O
F ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
Of Abetment
45. A person abets the doing of a thing, who—
(a) instigates any person to do that thing; or
(b) engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the
doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or
(c) intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment
of a material fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts
to cause or procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.
Illustration.
A, a public officer, is authorised by a warrant from a Court to apprehend Z. B, knowing
that fact and also that C is not Z, wilfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally
causes A to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C.
Explanation 2. —Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act,
does anything in order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the
commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act.
46. A person abets an offence, who abets either the commission of an offence, or the
commission of an act which would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of
committing an offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor.
Explanation 1. —The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to an
offence although the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act.
Explanation 2. —To constitute the offence of abetment it is not necessary that the act
abetted should be committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute the offence should be
caused.
Illustration s.
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to commit
murder.
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation stabs D. D recovers
from the wound. A is guilty of instigating B to commit murder.
Explanation 3.—It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by law
of committing an offence, or that he should have the same guilty intention or knowledge as
that of the abettor, or any guilty intention or knowledge.
Abetment of
thing.
Abettor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

18
Illustration s.
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a person with mental illness to commit an
act which would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing an
offence, and having the same intention as A. Here A, whether the act be committed or not, is
guilty of abetting an offence.
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child under seven years of age,
to do an act which causes Z’s death. B, in consequence of the abetment, does the act in the
absence of A and thereby causes Z’s death. Here, though B was not capable by law of
committing an offence, A is liable to be punished in the same manner as if B had been capable
by law of committing an offence, and had committed murder, and he is therefore subject to
the punishment of death.
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in consequence of his mental
illness, being incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is wrong or
contrary to law, sets fire to the house in consequence of A ’s instigation. B has committed no
offence, but A is guilty of abetting the offence of setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is liable
to the punishment provided for that offence.
(d)  A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B to take property belonging
to Z out of Z’s possession. A induces B to believe that the property belongs to A. B takes the
property out of Z’s possession, in good faith, believing it to be A ’s property. B, acting under
this misconception, does not take dishonestly, and therefore does not commit theft. But A is
guilty of abetting theft, and is liable to the same punishment as if B had committed theft.
Explanation 4. —The abetment of an offence being an offence, the abetment of such
an abetment is also an offence.
Illustration.
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly instigates C to murder Z, and
C commits that offence in consequence of B’s instigation. B is liable to be punished for his
offence with the punishment for murder; and, as A instigated B to commit the offence, A is
also liable to the same punishment.
Explanation 5. —It is not necessary to the commission of the offence of abetment by
conspiracy that the abettor should concert the offence with the person who commits it. It is
sufficient if he engages in the conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is committed.
Illustration.
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A shall administer the poison.
B then explains the plan to C mentioning that a third person is to administer the poison, but
without mentioning A’s name. C agrees to procure the poison, and procures and delivers it to
B for the purpose of its being used in the manner explained. A administers the poison; Z dies
in consequence. Here, though A and C have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged
in the conspiracy in pursuance of which Z has been murdered. C has therefore committed the
offence defined in this section and is liable to the punishment for murder.
47. A person abets an offence within the meaning of this Sanhita who, in India, abets
the commission of any act without and beyond India which would constitute an offence if
committed in India.
Illustration.
A, in India, instigates B, a foreigner in country X, to commit a murder in that country,
A is guilty of abetting murder.
48. A person abets an offence within the meaning of this Sanhita who, without and
beyond India, abets the commission of any act in India which would constitute an offence if
committed in India.
Abetment in
India of
offences
outside India.
Abetment
outside India
for offence in
India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
Illustration.
A, in country X, instigates B, to commit a murder in India, A is guilty of abetting murder.
49. Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of
the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Sanhita for the punishment of such
abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence.
Explanation. —An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment,
when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or
with the aid which constitutes the abetment.
Illustration s.
(a)  A instigates B to give false evidence. B, in consequence of the instigation, commits
that offence. A is guilty of abetting that offence, and is liable to the same punishment as B.
(b) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the conspiracy, procures the
poison and delivers it to B in order that he may administer it to Z. B, in pursuance of the
conspiracy, administers the poison to Z in A ’s absence and thereby causes Z’s death. Here
B is guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting that offence by conspiracy, and is liable to the
punishment for murder.
50. Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the
act with a different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be punished with the
punishment provided for the offence which would have been committed if the act had been
done with the intention or knowledge of the abettor and with no other.
51.When an act is abetted and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act
done, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had directly abetted it:
Provided that the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment, and was
committed under the influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in pursuance of the
conspiracy which constituted the abetment.
Illustration s.
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison for that
purpose. The child, in consequence of the instigation, by mistake puts the poison into the
food of Y , which is by the side of that of Z. Here, if the child was acting under the influence
of A’s instigation, and the act done was under the circumstances a probable consequence of
the abetment, A is liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated the
child to put the poison into the food of Y .
(b) A instigates B to burn Z’s house, B sets fire to the house and at the same time
commits theft of property there. A, though guilty of abetting the burning of the house, is not
guilty of abetting the theft; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a probable consequence
of the burning.
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight for the purpose of
robbery, and provides them with arms for that purpose. B and C break into the house, and
being resisted by Z, one of the inmates, murder Z. Here, if that murder was the probable
consequence of the abetment, A is liable to the punishment provided for murder.
52. If the act for which the abettor is liable under section 51 is committed in addition to
the act abetted, and constitute a distinct offence, the abettor is liable to punishment for each
of the offences.
Punishment of
abetment if
act abetted is
committed in
consequence
and where no
express
provision is
made for its
punishment.
Punishment of
abetment if
person abetted
does act with
different
intention
from that of
abettor.
Liability of
abettor when
one act
abetted and
different act
done.
Abettor when
liable to
cumulative
punishment
for act abetted
and for act
done.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

20
Illustration.
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public servant. B, in consequence,
resists that distress. In offering the resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous hurt to the
officer executing the distress. As B has committed both the offence of resisting the distress,
and the offence of voluntarily causing grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these
offences; and, if A knew that B was likely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the
distress, A will also be liable to punishment for each of the offences.
53. When an act is abetted with the intention on the part of the abettor of causing a
particular effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment,
causes a different effect from that intended by the abettor, the abettor is liable for the effect
caused, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had abetted the act with the
intention of causing that effect, provided he knew that the act abetted was likely to cause
that effect.
Illustration.
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of the instigation,
causes grievous hurt to Z. Z dies in consequence. Here, if A knew that the grievous hurt
abetted was likely to cause death, A is liable to be punished with the punishment provided
for murder.
54.Whenever any person, who is absent would be liable to be punished as an abettor,
is present when the act or offence for which he would be punishable in consequence of the
abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have committed such act or offence.
55. (1)Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment,
and no express provision is made under this Sanhita for the punishment of such abetment, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) If any act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment, and which
causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B had murdered Z, he
would have been subject to the punishment of death or imprisonment for life. Therefore A is
liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and also to a fine; and if
any hurt be done to Z in consequence of the abetment, he will be liable to imprisonment for
a term which may extend to fourteen years, and to fine.
56. (1)Whoever abets an offence punishable with imprisonment shall, if that offence
be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this
Sanhita for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for that offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the
longest term provided for that offence; or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or
with both.
(2) If the abettor or the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is to prevent
the commission of such offence, the abettor shall be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for that offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest
term provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustration s.
(a) A instigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B does not give false evidence, A has
nevertheless committed the offence defined in this section, and is punishable accordingly.
Liability of
abettor for
effect caused
by act abetted
different from
that intended
by abettor.
Abettor
present when
offence is
committed.
Abetment of
offence
punishable
with death or
imprisonment
for life.
Abetment of
offence
punishable
with
imprisonment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(b) A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, abets the commission of
robbery. Here, though the robbery be not committed, A is liable to one-half of the longest
term of imprisonment provided for that offence, and also to fine.
(c) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to
prevent that offence. Here, though the robbery be not committed, B is liable to one-half of the
longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery, and also to fine.
57. Whoever abets the commission of an offence by the public generally or by any
number or class of persons exceeding ten, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine.
Illustration.
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of more than ten
members to meet at a certain time and place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an
adverse sect, while engaged in a procession. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
58. Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life,
voluntarily conceals by any act or illegal omission, or by the use of encryption or any other
information hiding tool, the existence of a design to commit such offence or makes any
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design shall,––
(a) if that offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years; or
(b) if the offence be not committed, with imprisonment of either description, for
a term which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely informs the Magistrate
that a dacoity is about to be committed at C, a place in an opposite direction, and thereby
misleads the Magistrate with intent to facilitate the commission of the offence. The dacoity
is committed at B in pursuance of the design. A is punishable under this section.
59. Whoever, being a public servant, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such public
servant to prevent, voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission or by the use of
encryption or any other information hiding tool, the existence of a design to commit such
offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design
shall,––
(a) if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of any description
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term of
such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both; or
(b) if the offence be punishable with death or imprisonment for life, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years; or
(c) if the offence be not committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of
the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is provided for the offence,
or with both.
Illustration.
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information of all designs to commit
robbery which may come to his knowledge, and knowing that B designs to commit robbery,
omits to give such information, with intent to so facilitate the commission of that offence.
Abetting
commission of
offence by
public or by
more than ten
persons.
Concealing
design to
commit
offence
punishable
with death or
imprisonment
for life.
Public servant
concealing
design to
commit
offence which
it is his duty
to prevent.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
Here A has by an illegal omission concealed the existence of B’s design, and is liable to
punishment according to the provision of this section.
60. Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment, voluntarily conceals,
by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design shall,––
(a)  if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of the description
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth; and
(b)  if the offence be not committed, to one-eighth, of the longest term of such
imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Of Criminal conspiracy
61. (1)When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done––
(a) an illegal act; or
(b) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated
a criminal conspiracy:
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to
a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties
to such agreement in pursuance thereof.
Explanation.—It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such
agreement, or is merely incidental to that object.
(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy,––
(a)  to commit an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous
imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, shall, where no express provision is
made in this Sanhita for the punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same
manner as if he had abetted such offence;
(b)  other than a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable as aforesaid
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six
months, or with fine or with both.
Of attempt
62. Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Sanhita with
imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in
such attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express
provision is made by this Sanhita for the punishment of such attempt, be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to
one-half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or
with both.
Illustration.
 (a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a box, and finds after so
opening the box, that there is no jewel in it. He has done an act towards the commission of
theft, and therefore is guilty under this section.
(b) A makes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by thrusting his hand into Z’s pocket. A
fails in the attempt in consequence of Z’s having nothing in his pocket. A is guilty under this
section.
Concealing
design to
commit
offence
punishable
with
imprisonment.
Criminal
conspiracy.
Punishment for
attempting to
commit
offences
punishable with
imprisonment
for life or
other
imprisonment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

23
CHAPTER V
OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILDREN
Of Sexual offences
63. A man is said to commit “rape” if he—
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of
a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis,
into the vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any
other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into
the vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with
him or any other person; or
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do
so with him or any other person,
under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions: —
 (i) against her will.
(ii) without her consent.
(iii) with her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or
any person in whom she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt.
(iv) with her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband and that
her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or
believes herself to be lawfully married.
(v) with her consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of
mental illness or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through another
of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the nature
and consequences of that to which she gives consent.
(vi) with or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age.
(vii) when she is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “vagina” shall also include labia
majora.
Explanation 2. —Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the woman
by words, gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates
willingness to participate in the specific sexual act:
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall
not by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
Exception.1––A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
Exception.2––Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife
not being under eighteen years of age, is not rape.
64. (1)Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-section (2 ), commits rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable
to fine.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer, commits rape,—
Rape.
Punishment
for rape.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

24
(i) within the limits of the police station to which such police officer is
appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or
(iii) on a woman in such police officer’s custody or in the custody of a
police officer subordinate to such police officer; or
(b) being a public servant, commits rape on a woman in such public servant’s
custody or in the custody of a public servant subordinate to such public servant; or
(c) being a member of the armed forces deployed in an area by the Central
Government or a State Government commits rape in such area; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place
of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women’s
or children’s institution, commits rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home, place
or institution; or
(e) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits rape on a
woman in that hospital; or
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in a position of trust or
authority towards the woman, commits rape on such woman; or
(g) commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or
(h) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
(i) commits rape, on a woman incapable of giving consent; or
(j) being in a position of control or dominance over a woman, commits rape on
such woman; or
(k) commits rape on a woman suffering from mental illness or physical disability; or
(l) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm or maims or disfigures or
endangers the life of a woman; or
(m) commits rape repeatedly on the same woman,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “armed forces” means the naval, army and air forces and includes any member
of the Armed Forces constituted under any law for the time being in force, including
the paramilitary forces and any auxiliary forces that are under the control of the Central
Government or the State Government;
(b) “hospital” means the precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts of
any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence or of
persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation;
(c) “police officer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to the expression
“police” under the Police Act, 1861;
(d)  “women’s or children’s institution” means an institution, whether called an
orphanage or a home for neglected women or children or a widow’s home or an
institution called by any other name, which is established and maintained for the
reception and care of women or children.
5 of 1861.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

25
65. (1) Whoever, commits rape on a woman  under sixteen years of age shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years,
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the
victim.
(2) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under twelve years of age shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person’s natural life, and with fine or with death:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.
66. Whoever, commits an offence punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
of section 64 and in the course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the death
of the woman or causes the woman to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person’s natural life, or with death.
67. Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately, whether
under a decree of separation or otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned
in clauses (a) to (d) of section 63.
68. Whoever, being—
(a) in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship; or
(b) a public servant; or
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of custody
established by or under any law for the time being in force, or a women’s or children’s
institution; or
(d) on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital, abuses
such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or seduce any woman either in his
custody or under his charge or present in the premises to have sexual intercourse with
him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than five years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of section 63.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, Explanation 1 to section 63 shall
also be applicable.
Explanation 3. —“Superintendent”, in relation to a jail, remand home or other place of
custody or a women’s or children’s institution, includes a person holding any other office in
such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue of which such person can exercise any
authority or control over its inmates.
Punishment
for rape in
certain cases.
Punishment
for causing
death or
resulting in
persistent
vegetative
state of
victim.
Sexual
intercourse by
husband upon
his wife during
separation or
by  person in
authority.
Sexual
intercourse by
person in
authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
Explanation 4.—The expressions “hospital” and “women’s or children’s institution”
shall respectively have the same meaning as in Explanation to sub-section (2) of section 64.
69. Whoever, by deceitful means or making by promise to marry to a woman without
any intention of fulfilling the same, and has sexual intercourse with her, such sexual intercourse
not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.––– “deceitful means” shall include the false promise of employment or
promotion, inducement or marring after suppressing identity.
70. (1)Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting
in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed
the offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to life which shall mean imprisonment
for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the
victim.
(2) Where a woman under eighteen years of age is raped by one or more persons
constituting a group or acting in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons
shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape and shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
natural life, and with fine, or with death:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the
victim.
71. Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence punishable under
section 63 or section 64 or section 65 or section 66 or section 67 and is subsequently
convicted of an offence punishable under any of the said sections shall be punished with
imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
natural life, or with death.
72. (1) Whoever prints or publishes the name or any matter which may make known
the identity of any person against whom an offence under section 63 or section 64 or section
65 or section 66 or section 67 or section 68 is alleged or found to have been committed
(hereafter in this section referred to as the victim) shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) extends to any printing or publication of the name or
any matter which may make known the identity of the victim if such printing or publication
is—
(a) by or under the order in writing of the officer-in-charge of the police station
or the police officer making the investigation into such offence acting in good faith for
the purposes of such investigation; or
(b) by, or with the authorisation in writing of, the victim; or
(c) where the victim is dead or minor or person with mental illness, by, or with the
authorisation in writing of, the next of kin of the victim:
Provided that no such authorisation shall be given by the next of kin to anybody
other than the chairman or the secretary, by whatever name called, of any recognised
welfare institution or organisation.
Sexual
intercourse
by employing
deceitful
means, etc.
Gang rape.
Punishment
for repeat
offenders.
Disclosure of
identity of
victim of
certain
offences, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “recognised welfare institution
or organisation” means a social welfare institution or organisation recognised in this behalf
by the Central Government or State Government.
(3) Whoever prints or publishes any matter in relation to any proceeding before a
court with respect to an offence referred to in sub-section (1) without the previous permission
of such court shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—The printing or publication of the judgment of any High Court or the
Supreme Court does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this section.
Of criminal force and assult against women
73. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or
knowing it to be likely that he will there by outrage her modesty, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
74. (1) A man committing any of the following acts—
 (i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual
overtures; or
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) showing pornography against the will of a woman; or
(iv) making sexually coloured remarks,
shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment.
(2) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii)
of sub-section (1) shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (iv) of sub-section (1) shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine, or with both.
75. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such act with the
intention of disrobing or compelling her to be naked, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
76. Whoever watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private act in
circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed either
by the perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of the perpetrator or disseminates
such image shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for
a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall
also be liable to fine, and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purpose of this section, “private act” includes an act of
watching carried out in a place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be expected to
provide privacy and where the victim’s genitals, posterior or breasts are exposed or covered
only in underwear; or the victim is using a lavatory; or the victim is doing a sexual act that is
not of a kind ordinarily done in public.
Explanation 2.—Where the victim consents to the capture of the images or any act,
but not to their dissemination to third persons and where such image or act is disseminated,
such dissemination shall be considered an offence under this section.
Assault or
criminal force
to woman
with intent to
outrage her
modesty.
Sexual
harassment
and
punishment
for sexual
harassment.
Assault or use
of criminal
force to
woman with
intent to
disrobe.
Voyeurism.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
77. (1) Any man who—
(i) follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster
personal interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such woman; or
(ii) monitors the use by a woman of the internet, e-mail or any other form of
electronic communication,
 commits the offence of stalking:
Provided that such conduct shall not amount to stalking if the man who pursued it
proves that—
(i) it was pursued for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime and the man
accused of stalking had been entrusted with the responsibility of prevention and
detection of crime by the State; or
(ii) it was pursued under any law or to comply with any condition or requirement
imposed by any person under any law; or
(iii) in the particular circumstances such conduct was reasonable and justified.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also
be liable to fine; and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
78. Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes
any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object in any form, intending that such word or sound
shall be heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon
the privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, and also with fine.
Of offences relating to marriage
79. (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs
otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is
shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband
or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death
shall be called “dowry death”, and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused
her death.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “dowry” shall have the same
meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life.
80.  Every man who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to
believe that she is lawfully married to him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him
in that belief, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
81. (1) Whoever, having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such
marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such husband or wife, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Exception.—This sub-section does not extend to any person whose marriage with
such husband or wife has been declared void by a Court of competent jurisdiction, nor to
any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a former husband or wife, if such
husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have been continually absent
Stalking.
Word, gesture
or act
intended to
insult modesty
of woman.
Dowry death.
Cohabitation
caused by man
deceitfully
inducing
belief of lawful
marriage.
Marrying
again during
lifetime of
husband or
wife.
28 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
from such person for the space of seven years, and shall not have been heard of by such
person as being alive within that time provided the person contracting such subsequent
marriage shall, before such marriage takes place, inform the person with whom such marriage
is contracted of the real state of facts so far as the same are within his or her knowledge.
(2) Whoever commits the offence under sub-section ( 1) having concealed from the
person with whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the fact of the former marriage,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
82. Whoever, dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through the ceremony
of being married, knowing that he is not thereby lawfully married, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
83. Whoever takes or entices away any woman who is and whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be the wife of any other man,with intent that she may have illicit intercourse
with any person, or conceals or detains with that intent any such woman, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
84. Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “cruelty” means—
(a)  any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman
to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing
her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet
such demand.
85. Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman with intent that she may be compelled, or
knowing it to be likely that she will be compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in
order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, or knowing it to be likely that
she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
and whoever, by means of criminal intimidation as defined in this Sanhita or of abuse of
authority or any other method of compulsion, induces any woman to go from any place with
intent that she may be, or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit
intercourse with another person shall also be punishable as aforesaid.
Of the causing of miscarriage, etc.
86. Whoever voluntarily causes a woman with child to miscarry, shall, if such miscarriage
be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both; and, if the woman be quick with child, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—A woman who causes herself to miscarry, is within the meaning of this section.
87. Whoever commits the offence under section 86 without the consent of the woman,
whether the woman is quick with child or not, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Marriage
ceremony
fraudulently
gone through
without lawful
marriage.
Enticing or
taking away or
detaining with
criminal
intent married
woman.
Husband or
relative of
husband of
woman
subjecting her
to cruelty.
Kidnapping,
abducting or
inducing
woman to
compel her
marriage, etc.
Causing
miscarriage.
Causing
miscarriage
without woman's
consent.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

30
88.  (1) Whoever, with intent to cause the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any
act which causes the death of such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Where the act referred to in sub-section ( 1) is done without the consent of the
woman, shall be punishable either with imprisonment for life, or with the punishment specified
in said sub-section.
Explanation.—It is not essential to this offence that the offender should know that
the act is likely to cause death.
89. Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby
preventing that child from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does by
such act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to die after its birth, shall, if
such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the mother, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
or with fine, or with both.
90. Whoever does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused death
he would be guilty of culpable homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a quick
unborn child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of a pregnant woman, does an act
which, if it caused the death of the woman, would amount to culpable homicide. The woman
is injured, but does not die; but the death of an unborn quick child with which she is
pregnant is thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section.
Of offences against children
91. Whoever being the father or mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or
having the care of such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the intention
of wholly abandoning such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—This section is not intended to prevent the trial of the offender for
murder or culpable homicide, as the case may be, if the child die in consequence of the
exposure.
92. Whoever, by secretly burying or otherwise disposing of the dead body of a child
whether such child die before or after or during its birth, intentionally conceals or endeavours
to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
93. Whoever hires, employs or engages any  person below the age of eighteen years
to commit an offence shall be punished with imprisonment of either description or fine
provided for that offence as if the offence has been committed by such person himself.
Explanation.—Hiring, employing, engaging or using a child for sexual exploitation or
pornography is covered within the meaning of this section.
94. Whoever, by any means whatsoever, induces any child below the age of eighteen
years to go from any place or to do any act with intent that such child below the age of
eighteen years may be, or knowing that it is likely that such child will be, forced or seduced
to illicit intercourse with another person shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
95. Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the intention
of taking dishonestly any movable property from the person of such child, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Death caused
by act done
with intent to
cause
miscarriage.
Act done with
intent to
prevent child
being born
alive or to
cause it to die
after birth.
Causing death
of quick
unborn child
by act
amounting to
culpable
homicide.
Exposure and
abandonment
of child under
twelve years,
by parent or
person having
care of it.
Concealment
of birth by
secret disposal
of dead body.
Hiring,
employing or
engaging a
child to
commit an
offence.
Procuration of
child.
Kidnapping or
abducting child
under ten
years with
intent to steal
from its
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
96. Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of child below eighteen years of
age with intent that such child shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of
prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or
knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be employed or used for any such
purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—When a female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for hire, or
otherwise disposed of to a prostitute or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the
person so disposing of such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have
disposed of her with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section “illicit intercourse” means sexual
intercourse between persons not united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though
not amounting to a marriage, is recognised by the personal law or custom of the community
to which they belong or, where they belong to different communities, of both such
communities, as constituting between them a quasi-marital relation.
97. Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of any child  below the age
of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be employed or used for the
purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral
purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such child will at any age be employed or used for any
such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than seven years but which  may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who
buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen years
shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female
with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation 2.—“Illicit intercourse” has the same meaning as in section 96.
CHAPTER VI
O
F OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of offences affecting life
98. Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death,
or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the
knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable
homicide.
Illustration s.
(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or with
the knowledge that death is likely to be thereby caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm,
treads on it, falls in and is killed. A has committed the offence of culpable homicide.
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A, intending to cause, or
knowing it to be likely to cause Z’s death, induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z.
Here B may be guilty of no offence; but A has committed the offence of culpable homicide.
(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills B, who is behind a bush;
A not knowing that he was there. Here, although A was doing an unlawful act, he was not
guilty of culpable homicide, as he did not intend to kill B, or to cause death by doing an act
that he knew was likely to cause death.
Explanation 1.—A person who causes bodily injury to another who is labouring
under a disorder, disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of that other,
shall be deemed to have caused his death.
Selling child
for purposes
of
prostitution,
etc.
Buying child
for purposes of
prostitution,
etc.
Culpable
homicide.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

32
Explanation 2.—Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes such
bodily injury shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting to proper
remedies and skilful treatment the death might have been prevented.
Explanation 3.—The causing of the death of a child in the mother’s womb is not
homicide. But it may amount to culpable homicide to cause the death of a living child, if any
part of that child has been brought forth, though the child may not have breathed or been
completely born.
99. Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder,––
(a)  if the  act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing
death; or
(b) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing
such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person
to whom the harm is caused; or
(c) if  the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing
bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient
in the ordinary course of nature to cause death; or
(d) if the person committing the act  by which the  death is caused, knows that it
is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death, or such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring
the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
Illustration s.
(a)  A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence. A commits
murder.
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is likely to cause
his death, strikes him with the intention of causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of
the blow. A is guilty of murder, although the blow might not have been sufficient in the
ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a person in a sound state of health. But if A,
not knowing that Z is labouring under any disease, gives him such a blow as would not in the
ordinary course of nature kill a person in a sound state of health, here A, although he may
intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death, or
such bodily injury as in the ordinary course of nature would cause death.
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cause the death of
a man in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder,
although he may not have intended to cause Z’s death.
(d)  A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of persons and kills one
of them. A is guilty of murder, although he may not have had a premeditated design to kill any
particular individual.
Exception 1.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, whilst deprived of the
power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of the person who
gave the provocation or causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident:
Provided that the provocation is not,––
(a) sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for killing or
doing harm to any person;
(b) given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant in the
lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant;
(c) given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of private defence.
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to prevent
the offence from amounting to murder is a question of fact.
Murder.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

33
Illustration s.
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by Z, intentionally
kills Y , Z’s child. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was not given by the child, and
the death of the child was not caused by accident or misfortune in doing an act caused by the
provocation.
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this provocation, fires a pistol at
Y , neither intending nor knowing himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight.
A kills Z. Here A has not committed murder, but merely culpable homicide.
(c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden and violent passion by
the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was given by a thing
done by a public servant in the exercise of his powers.
(d) A appears as a witness before Z, a Magistrate. Z says that he does not believe a
word of A ’s deposition, and that A has perjured himself. A is moved to sudden passion by
these words, and kills Z. This is murder.
(e) A attempts to pull Z’s nose. Z, in the exercise of the right of private defence, lays
hold of A to prevent him from doing so. A is moved to sudden and violent passion in
consequence, and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was giving by a thing
done in the exercise of the right of private defence.
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. A, a bystander, intending
to take advantage of B’s rage, and to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife into B’s hand for that
purpose. B kills Z with the knife. Here B may have committed only culpable homicide, but A
is guilty of murder.
Exception 2.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender in the exercise in good
faith of the right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power given to him by
law and causes the death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of defence
without premeditation, and without any intention of doing more harm than is necessary for
the purpose of such defence.
Illustration.
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievous hurt to A. A
draws out a pistol. Z persists in the assault. A believing in good faith that he can by no other
means prevent himself from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has not committed
murder, but only culpable homicide.
Exception 3.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public servant
or aiding a public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers
given to him by law, and causes death by doing an act which he, in good faith, believes to be
lawful and necessary for the due discharge of his duty as such public servant and without
ill-will towards the person whose death is caused.
Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation
in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender’s
having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or
commits the first assault.
Exception 5.—Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is caused,
being above the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of death with his own
consent.
Illustration.
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a person under eighteen years of age to
commit suicide. Here, on account of Z’s youth, he was incapable of giving consent to his
own death; A has therefore abetted murder.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
100. If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to cause
death, commits culpable homicide by causing the death of any person, whose death he
neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide committed by
the offender is of the description of which it would have been if he had caused the death of
the person whose death he intended or knew himself to be likely to cause.
101. (1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits murder on the
ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language,  personal belief or any other
ground each member of such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for
life or imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
102. Whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for life, commits murder, shall be
punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder of that
person’s natural life.
103. Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished
with  imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the
act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; or with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years and with fine, if the act is done with the knowledge that
it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death.
104. (1) Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act
not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever causes death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not
amounting to culpable homicide and escapes from the scene of incident or fails to report the
incident to a Police officer or Magistrate soon after the incident, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description of a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
105. If any person under eighteen years of age, any person with mental illness, any
delirious person or any person in a state of intoxication, commits suicide, whoever abets the
commission of such suicide, shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
106. If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
107. (1) Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such
circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender
shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or to such punishment as is hereinbefore
mentioned.
(2) When any person offending under sub-section (1) is under sentence of imprisonment
for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which
shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural life.
Culpable
homicide by
causing death
of person
other than
person whose
death was
intended.
Punishment
for murder.
Punishment
for murder by
life-convict.
Punishment
for culpable
homicide not
amounting to
murder.
Causing death
by negligence.
Abetment of
suicide of child
or person with
mental illness.
Abetment of
suicide.
Attempt to
murder.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

35
Illustration s.
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death
ensued A would be guilty of murder. A is liable to punishment under this section.
(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tender years, exposes it in a
desert place. A has committed the offence defined by this section, though the death of the
child does not ensue.
(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet committed the
offence. A fires the gun at Z. He has committed the offence defined in this section, and, if by
such firing he wounds Z, he is liable to the punishment provided by the latter part of the first
paragraph of this section.
(d) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison and mixes the same with
food which remains in A’s keeping; A has not yet committed the offence defined in this
section. A places the food on Z’s table or delivers it to Z’s servants to place it on Z’s table. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
108. Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge and under such
circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide
not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if hurt is caused to any
person by such act, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration.
A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under such circumstances that
if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
A has committed the offence defined in this section.
109. (1) Any continuing unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery, vehicle theft,
extortion, land grabbing, contract killing, economic offences, cyber-crimes having severe
consequences, trafficking in people, drugs, illicit goods or services and weapons, human
trafficking racket for prostitution or ransom by the effort of groups of individuals acting in
concert, singly or jointly, either as a member of an organised crime syndicate or on behalf of
such syndicate, by use of violence, threat of violence, intimidation, coercion, corruption or
related activities or other unlawful means to obtain direct or indirect, material benefit including
a financial benefit,  shall constitute organised crime.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,––
(i) ‘‘benefit’’ includes property, advantage, service, entertainment, the use of or
access to property or facilities, and anything of benefit to a person whether or not it
has any inherent or tangible value, purpose or attribute;
(ii) “organised crime syndicate” means a criminal organisation or group of three
or more persons who, acting either singly or collectively in concert, as a syndicate,
gang, mafia, or (crime) ring indulging in commission of one or more serious offences or
involved in gang criminality, racketeering, and syndicated organised crime;
(iii) “continuing unlawful activity” means an activity prohibited by law, which is
a cognizable offence undertaken either singly or jointly, as a member of an organised
crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate in respect of which more than one
charge-sheets have been filed before a competent court within the preceding period of
ten years and that court has taken cognizance of such offence;
(iv) “economic offences” include criminal breach of trust; forgery, counterfeiting
of currency and valuable securities, financial scams, running Ponzi schemes,
mass-marketing fraud or multi-level marketing schemes with a view to defraud the
people at large for obtaining the monetary benefits or large scale organised betting in
any form, offences of money laundering and hawala transactions.
Attempt to
commit
culpable
homicide.
Organised
crime.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

36
(2) Whoever, attempts to commit or commits an offence of organised crime shall,—
(i) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punishable with
death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than rupees ten lakhs;
(ii) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs.
(3) Whoever, conspires or organises the commission of an organised crime, or assists,
facilitates or otherwise engages in any act preparatory to an organised crime, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than
rupees five lakhs.
(4) Any person who is a member of an organised crime syndicate shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees
five lakhs.
(5) Whoever, intentionally harbours or conceals or attempts to harbour or conceal any
person who has committed the offence of an organised crime or any member of an organised
crime syndicate or believes that his act will encourage or assist the doing of such crime shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be
less than rupees five lakhs:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the offender.
(6) Whoever, holds any property derived, or obtained from the commission of an
organised crime or proceeds of any organised crime or which has been acquired through the
organised crime syndicate funds shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also
be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees two lakhs.
(7) If any person on behalf of a member of an organised crime syndicate is, or at any
time has been in possession of movable or immovable property which he cannot satisfactorily
account for, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to imprisonment for ten years and shall also be liable to fine
which shall not be less than rupees one lakh and such property shall also be liable for
attachment and forfeiture.
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this section, “proceeds of any organised crime”
means all kind of properties which have been derived or obtained from commission of any
organised crime or have acquired through funds traceable to any organised crime and shall
include cash, irrespective of person in whose name such proceeds are standing or in whose
possession they are found.
110. (1) Any crime that causes general feelings of insecurity among citizens relating to
theft of vehicle or theft from vehicle, domestic and business theft, trick theft, cargo crime,
theft (attempt to theft, theft of personal property), organised pick pocketing, snatching, theft
through shoplifting or card skimming and Automated Teller Machine thefts or procuring
money in unlawful manner in public transport system or illegal selling of tickets and selling
of public examination question papers and such other common forms of organised crime
committed by organised criminal groups or gangs, shall constitute petty organised crimes
and shall include the said crimes when committed by mobile organised crime groups or
gangs that create network of contacts, anchor points, and logistical support among themselves
to carry out number of offences in region over a period before moving on.
(2) Whoever commits or attempts to commit any petty organised crime, under
sub-section (1) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
one year but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Petty
organised
crime or
organised
crime in
general.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

37
111. (1)  A person is said to have committed a terrorist act if he commits any act in India
or in any foreign country with the intention to threaten the unity, integrity and security of
India, to intimidate the general public or a segment thereof, or to disturb public order by
doing an act,––
(i) using bombs, dynamite or any other explosive substance or inflammable
material or firearms or other lethal weapons or poison or noxious gases or other chemicals
or any other substance (whether biological or otherwise) hazardous in nature in such
a manner so as to create an atmosphere or spread a message of fear, to cause death or
serious bodily harm to any person, or endangers a person’s life;
(ii) to cause damage or loss due to damage or destruction of property or disruption
of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community, destruction of a
Government or public facility, public place or private property;
(iii) to cause extensive interference with, damage or destruction to critical
infrastructure;
(iv) to provoke or influence by intimidation the Government or its organisation,
in such a manner so as to cause or likely to cause death or injury to any public
functionary or any person or an act of detaining any person and threatening to kill or
injure such person in order to compel the Government to do or abstain from doing any
act, or destabilise or destroy the political, economic, or social structures of the country,
or create a public emergency or undermine public safety;
(v) included within the scope of any of the Treaties listed in the Second Schedule
to the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
(2) Whoever, attempts to commit or commits an offence of terrorist act shall,––
(i) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punishable with
death or imprisonment for life without the benefit of parole, and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than rupees ten lakhs;
(ii) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs.
(3) Whoever, conspires, organises or causes to be organised any organisation,
association or a group of persons for terrorist acts, or assists, facilitates or otherwise conspires
to engage in any act preparatory to any terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs.
(4) Any person, who is a member of terrorist organisation, which is involved in terrorist
act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs.
(5) Whoever, intentionally harbours or conceals or attempts to harbour or conceal any
person who has committed an offence of any terrorist act shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five
lakh:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the offender.
(6) Whoever, holds any property directly or indirectly, derived or obtained from
commission of terrorist act or proceeds of terrorism, or acquired through the terrorist fund, or
possesses, provides, collects or uses property or funds or makes available property, funds
or financial service or other related services, by any means, to be used, in full or in part to
Offence if
terrorist act.
37 of 1967.
37
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

38
carry out or facilitate the commission of any terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall
not be less than rupees five lakhs and such property shall also be liable for attachment and
forfeiture.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,––
(a) “terrorist” refers to any person who—
(i) develops, manufactures, possesses, acquires, transports, supplies or
uses weapons, explosives, or releases nuclear, radiological or other dangerous
substance, or cause fire, floods or explosions;
 (ii) commits, or attempts, or conspires to commit terrorist acts by any
means, directly or indirectly;
(iii) participates, as a principal or as an accomplice, in terrorist acts;
(b) the expression “proceeds of terrorism” shall have the same meaning  as assigned
to it  in clause (g) of section 2 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967;
(c) “terrorist organisation, association or a group of persons” refers to any
entity owned or controlled by any terrorist or group of terrorists that—
 (i) commits, or attempts to commit, terrorist acts by any means, directly or
indirectly;—
(ii) participates in acts of terrorism;—
(iii) prepares for terrorism;—
(iv) promotes terrorism;—
(v) organises or directs others to commit terrorism;—
(vi) contributes to the commission of terrorist acts by a group of persons
acting with common purpose of furthering the terrorist act where the contribution
is made intentionally and with the aim of furthering the terrorist act or with the
knowledge of the intention of the group to commit a terrorist act; or
(vii) is otherwise involved in terrorism; or
(viii) any organisation listed in the First Schedule to the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967 or  an organisation operating under the same name as an
organisation so listed.
Of hurt
112. Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause
hurt.
113. (1) Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to any
person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does
thereby cause hurt to any person, is said “voluntarily to cause hurt”.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub- section (1) of section 120 voluntarily
causes hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
114. The following kinds of hurt only are designated as “grievous”, namely:––
(a) Emasculation.
(b) Permanent privation of the sight of either eye.
(c) Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear.
(d) Privation of any member or joint.
(e) Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint.
(f) Permanent disfiguration of the head or face.
(g) Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth.
(h) Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be during the
space of fifteen days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits.
115. (1)Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he intends to cause or
knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is
grievous hurt, is said “voluntarily to cause grievous hurt”.
Hurt.
V oluntarily.
causing hurt.
Grievous hurt.
V oluntarily
causing
grievous hurt.
37 of 1967.
37 of 1967.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

39
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section ( 3), voluntarily causes
grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt except when he
both causes grievous hurt and intends or knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt.
But he is said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to be likely
to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he actually causes grievous hurt of another kind.
Illustration.
A, intending of knowing himself to be likely permanently to disfigure Z’s face, gives
Z a blow which does not permanently disfigure Z’s face, but which causes Z to suffer severe
bodily pain for the space of fifteen days. A has voluntarily caused grievous hurt.
(3) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section ( 1) and in the course of such
commission causes any hurt to a person which causes that person to be in permanent
disability or in persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life,
which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life.
(4) When grievous hurt of a person is caused by a group of five or more persons on the
ground of his, race, caste, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other ground,
each member of such group shall be guilty of the offence of causing grievous hurt, and shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
116. (1) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (1) of section 120,
voluntarily causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any
instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire
or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by
means of any explosive substance or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to
the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years,  or with fine which may extend  to twenty  thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 120, voluntarily
causes grievous hurt by any means referred to in sub–section (1 ), shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than one year but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
117. (1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer,
or from any person interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of
constraining the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to do anything which is
illegal or which may facilitate the commission of an offence, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any purpose referred to in sub-
section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
118.(1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer
or from any person interested in the sufferer, any confession or any information which may
lead to the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the
sufferer or any person interested in the sufferer to restore or to cause the restoration of any
property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim or demand, or to give information which
may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable security, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
V oluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
to extort
confession, or
to compel
restoration of
property.
V oluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
by dangerous
weapons or
means.
V oluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
to extort
confession, on
to compel
restoration of
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

40
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any purpose referred to in
sub–section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a police-officer, tortures Z in order to induce Z to confess that he committed a
crime. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(b) A, a police-officer, tortures B to induce him to point out where certain stolen
property is deposited. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A, a revenue officer, tortures Z in order to compel him to pay certain arrears of
revenue due from Z. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
119. (1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt to any person being a public servant in the
discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person or
any other public servant from discharging his duty as such public servant or in consequence
of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful discharge of his duty
as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt  to any person being a public servant in
the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that
person or any other public servant from discharging his duty as such public servant or in
consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful discharge
of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term  which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
120. (1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he
neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt to any person other than the
person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he
neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt to any person other than the
person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both.
Explanation. —This section is subject to the same provision as Exception 1,
section 99.
121. Whoever administers to or causes to be taken by any person any poison or any
stupefying, intoxicating or unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause hurt to
such person, or with intent to commit or to facilitate the commission of an offence or knowing
it to be likely that he will thereby cause hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
122. (1) Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns or
maims or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous
hurt by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by using any other
means with the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such
injury or hurt or causes a person to be in a permanent vegetative state shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of
the treatment of the victim:
V oluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
to deter public
servant from
his duty.
V oluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
on
provocation.
Causing hurt
by means of
poison, etc.,
with intent to
commit an
offence.
V oluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
by use of acid,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

41
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.
(2) Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to administer
acid to any person, or attempts to use any other means, with the intention of causing
permanent or partial damage or deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement or disability
or grievous hurt to that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “acid” includes any substance
which has acidic or corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable of causing bodily
injury leading to scars or disfigurement or temporary or permanent disability.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, permanent or partial damage or
deformity or permanent vegetative state, shall not be required to be irreversible.
123.Whoever does any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or the
personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to two thousand five
hundred rupees, or with both, but—
(a) where the hurt is caused, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where  grievous hurt is  caused, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees
, or with both.
Of  wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement
124. (1) Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person from
proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to
restrain that person.
Exception. —The obstruction of a private way over land or water which a person in
good faith believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence within the
meaning of this section.
Illustration.
A obstructs a path along which Z has a right to pass, A not believing in good faith that
he has a right to stop the path. Z is thereby prevented from passing. A wrongfully
restrains Z.
(2)Whoever wrongfully restrains any person shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both.
125. (1)Whoever wrongfully restrains any person in such a manner as to prevent that
person from proceedings beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said “wrongfully to confine”
that person.
Illustrations.
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z in. Z is thus prevented from
proceeding in any direction beyond the circumscribing line of wall. A wrongfully confines Z.
(b) A places men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and tells Z that they will fire
at Z if Z attempts to leave the building. A wrongfully confines Z.
(2) Whoever wrongfully confines any person shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees
, or with both.
Act
endangering
life or personal
safety of
others.
Wrongful
restraint.
Wrongful
Confinment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

42
(3) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for three days, or more, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
(4) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for ten days or more, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
(5) Whoever keeps any person in wrongful confinement, knowing that a writ for the
liberation of that person has been duly issued, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years in addition to any term of imprisonment
to which he may be liable under any other section of this Chapter and shall also be liable to
fine.
(6) Whoever wrongfully confines any person in such manner as to indicate an intention
that the confinement of such person may not be known to any person interested in the
person so confined, or to any public servant, or that the place of such confinement may not
be known to or discovered by any such person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
threeyears in addition to any other punishment to which he may be liable for such wrongful
confinement and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the
person confined, or from any person interested in the person confined, any property or
valuable security or of constraining the person confined or any person  interested in such
person to do anything illegal or to give any information which may facilitate the commission
of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(8) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the
person confined or any person interested in the person confined any confession or any
information which may lead to the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose
of constraining the person confined or any person interested in the person confined to
restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim
or demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or
valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of criminal force and assault
126. A person is said to use force to another if he causes motion, change of motion, or
cessation of motion to that other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or change of
motion, or cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with any part of that
other’s body, or with anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so
situated that such contact affects that other’s sense of feeling:
Provided that the person causing the motion, or change of motion, or cessation of
motion, causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of the following
three ways,namely:––
(a) by his own bodily power;
(b) by disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion or change or
cessation of motion takes place without any further act on his part, or on the part of
any other person;
(c) by inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to cease to move.
Force.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

43
127. Whoever intentionally uses force to any person, without that person’s consent,
in order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or annoyance to
the person to whom the force is used, is said to use criminal force to that other.
Illustrations.
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boat on a river. A unfastens the moorings, and thus
intentionally causes the boat to drift down the stream. Here A intentionally causes
motion to Z, and he does this by disposing substances in such a manner that the
motion is produced without any other action on any person’s part. A has therefore
intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z’s consent, in order to the
committing of any offence, or intending or knowing it to be likely that this use of force
will cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force to Z.
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z’s horses, and thereby causes them to
quicken their pace. Here A has caused change of motion to Z by inducing the animals
to change their motion. A has therefore used force to Z; and if A has done this without
Z’s consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or
annoy Z, A has used criminal force to Z.
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the pole and stops the
palanquin. Here A has caused cessation of motion to Z, and he has done this by his
own bodily power. A has therefore used force to Z; and as A has acted thus intentionally,
without Z’s consent, in order to the commission of an offence. A has used criminal
force to Z.
(d) A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. Here A has by his own bodily
power moved his own person so as to bring it into contact with Z. He has therefore
intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z’s consent, intending or
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used
criminal force to Z.
(e) A throw a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that the stone will be thus
brought into contact with Z, or with Z’s clothes, or with something carried by Z, or that
it will strike water and dash up the water against Z’s clothes or something carried by Z.
Here, if the throwing of the stone produce the effect of causing any substance to come
into contact with Z, or Z’s clothes, A has used force to Z, and if he did so without Z’s
consent, intending thereby to injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force
 to Z.
(f) Aintentionally pulls up a Woman’s veil. Here A intentionally uses force to her,
and if he does so without her consent intending or knowing it to be likely that he may
thereby injure, frighten or annoy her, he has used criminal force to her.
(g) Z is bathing. A pours into the bath water which he knows to be boiling. Here
A intentionally by his own bodily power causes such motion in the boiling water as
brings that water into contact with Z, or with other water so situated that such contact
must affect Z’s sense of feeling; A has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he
has done this without Z’s consent intending or knowing it to be likely that he may
thereby cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force.
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z’s consent. Here, if A intends to
cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, he uses criminal force to Z.
128. Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be
likely that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he
who makes that gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to
commit an assault.
Criminal force.
Assault.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

44
Explanation.—Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a
person uses may give to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those
gestures or preparations amount to an assault.
Illustrations.
(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby
cause Z to believe that A is about to strike Z. A has committed an assault.
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending or knowing it to
be likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe that he is about to cause the dog to
attack Z. A has committed an assault upon Z.
(c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, “I will give you a beating”. Here, though the
words used by A could in no case amount to an assault, and though the mere gesture,
unaccompanied by any other circumstances, might not amount to an assault, the
gesture explained by the words may amount to an assault.
129. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person otherwise than on grave
and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the punishment for an
offence under this section, if the provocation is sought or voluntarily provoked by the
offender as an excuse for the offence, or
if the provocation is given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public
servant, in the lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant, or
if the provocation is given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of
private defence.
Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate the offence, is a
question of fact.
130. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in
the execution of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that
person from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of anything
done or attempted to be done by such person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such
public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
131. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, intending thereby to
dishonour that person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
132. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting to commit
theft on any property which that person is then wearing or carrying, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
133. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting wrongfully
to confine that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with
both.
Punishment
for assault or
criminal force
otherwise than
on grave
provocation.
Assault or
criminal force
to deter public
servant from
discharge of
his duty.
Assault or
criminal force
with intent to
dishonor
person,
otherwise than
on grave
provocation.
Assault or
criminal force
in attempt to
commit theft
of property
carried by a
person.
Assault or
criminal force
in attempt
wronglfully to
confine a
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

45
134. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person on grave and sudden
provocation given by that person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
Explanation.—This section is subject to the same Explanation as section 129.
Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour
135. (1) Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from India, and kidnapping from
lawful guardianship––
(a) whoever conveys any person beyond the limits of India without the consent
of that person, or of some person legally authorised to consent on behalf of that
person, is said to kidnap that person from India;
(b) whoever takes or entices any child below the age of eighteen years or any
person with mental illness, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such child or
person with mental illness, without the consent of such guardian, is said to kidnap
such child or person from lawful guardianship.
Explanation.––The words “lawful guardian” in this clause include any person
lawfully entrusted with the care or custody of such child or other person.
Exception.—This clause does not extend to the act of any person who in good
faith believes himself to be the father of an illegitimate child below the age of eighteen
years, or who in good faith believes himself to be entitled to the lawful custody of such
child, unless such act is committed for an immoral or unlawful purpose.
(2) Whoever kidnaps any person from India or from lawful guardianship shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
136. Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful means induces, any person to go
from any place, is said to abduct that person.
137. (1) Whoever kidnaps any child  below the age of  eighteen years or, not being the
lawful guardian of such child, obtains the custody of the child, in order that such child may
be employed or used for the purposes of begging shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which  may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever maims any child below the age of eighteen years in order that such child
may be employed or used for the purposes of begging shall be punishable with imprisonment
which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to life which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and with fine.
(3) Where any person, not being the lawful guardian of a child below the age of
eighteen years employs or uses such child for the purposes of begging, it shall be presumed,
unless the contrary is proved, that he kidnapped or otherwise obtained the custody of such
child in order that such child might be employed or used for the purposes of begging.
(4) In this section “begging” means—
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place, whether under the pretence of
singing, dancing, forture-telling, performing tricks or selling articles or otherwise;
(ii) entering on any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving
alms;
Assault or
criminal force
on grave
provocation.
Kidnapping.
Abduction.
Kidnapping or
maiming a
child for
purposes of
begging.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

46
(iii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any
sore, wound, injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other person or
of an animal;
(iv) using such childas an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms.
138.  (1) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be
murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations.
(a) A kidnaps Z from India, intending or knowing it to be likely that Z may be sacrificed
to an idol. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A forcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order that B may be murdered.
A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(2) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a person in detention after such
kidnapping or abduction, and threatens to cause death or hurt to such person, or by his
conduct gives rise to a reasonable apprehension that such person may be put to death or
hurt, or causes hurt or death to such person in order to compel the Government or any
foreign State or international inter-governmental organisation or any other person to do or
abstain from doing any act or to pay a ransom, shall be punishable with death, or imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be
secretly and wrongfully confined, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be subjected,
or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being subjected to grievous hurt, or
slavery, or to the unnatural lust of any person, or knowing it to be likely that such person will
be so subjected or disposed of, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
139. Whoever imports into India from any country outside India any girl under the age
of twenty-one years or any boy under the age of eighteen years with intent that girl or boy
may be, or knowing it to be likely that girl or boy will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse
with another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years
and shall also be liable to fine.
140. Whoever, knowing that any person has been kidnapped or has been abducted,
wrongfully conceals or confines such person, shall be punished in the same manner as if he
had kidnapped or abducted such person with the same intention or knowledge, or for the
same purpose as that with or for which he conceals or detains such person in confinement.
141. (1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation, recruits, transports, harbours,
transfers, or receives, a person or persons, by—
(a) using threats; or
(b) using force, or any other form of coercion; or
(c) by abduction; or
(d) by practicing fraud, or deception; or
(e) by abuse of power; or
Kidnapping or
abducting in
order to
murder or for
ransom etc.
Importation of
girl or boy
from foreign
country.
Wrongfully
concealing or
keeping in
confinement,
kidnapped or
abducted
person.
Trafficking of
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

47
(f) by inducement, including the giving or receiving of payments or benefits, in
order to achieve the consent of any person having control over the person recruited,
transported, harboured, transferred or received,
commits the offence of trafficking.
Explanation 1.—The expression “exploitation” shall include any act of physical
exploitation or any form of sexual exploitation, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude,
beggary or forced removal of organs.
Explanation 2.—The consent of the victim is immaterial in determination of the offence
of trafficking.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a child below the age of eighteen
years,it shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one child below the age of
eighteen years, it shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than fourteen years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(6) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of child below the age of
eighteen years on more than one occasion, then such person shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) When a public servant or a police officer is involved in the trafficking of any person
then, such public servant or police officer shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which
shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
142. (1) Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe that a child below  the age of
eighteen years has been trafficked, engages such child for sexual exploitation in any manner,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, knowingly by or having reason to believe that a person has been
trafficked, engages such person for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
143. Whoever habitually imports, exports, removes, buys, sells, traffics or deals in
slaves, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
144. Whoever unlawfully compels any person to labour against the will of that person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.
Exploitation
of a trafficked
person.
Habitual
dealing in
slaves.
Unlawful
compulsory
labour.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

48
CHAPTER VII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
145. Whoever wages war against the Government of India, or attempts to wage such
war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life
and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
 A joins an insurrection against the Government of India. A has committed the offence
defined in this section.
146. Whoever within or without and beyond India conspires to commit any of the
offences punishable by section 145, or conspires to overawe, by means of criminal force or
the show of criminal force, the Central Government or any State Government, shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—To constitute a conspiracy under this section, it is not necessary that
any act or illegal omission shall take place in pursuance thereof.
147. Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to wage war
with the intention of either waging or being prepared to wage war against the Government of
India, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description for
a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
148. Whoever by any act, or by any illegal omission, conceals the existence of a
design to wage war against the Government of India, intending by such concealment to
facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that such concealment will facilitate, the waging of such
war, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
149.Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compelling the President of India, or
Governor of any State, to exercise or refrain from exercising in any manner any of the lawful
powers of such President or Governor, assaults or wrongfully restrains, or attempts wrongfully
to restrain, or overawes, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, or attempts
so to overawe, such President or Governor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
150. Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by
signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic communication or by use of financial
mean, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite, secession or armed rebellion or  subversive
activities, or encourages feelings of separatist activities or endangers sovereignty or unity
and integrity of India; or indulges in or commits any such act shall be punished with
imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which may extend to seven years and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation.––Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures, or administrative
or other action of the Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means
without exciting or attempting to excite the activities referred to in this section.
151. Whoever wages war against the Government of any foreign State at peace with
the Government of India or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or
with fine.
Waging, or
attempting to
wage war, or
abetting
waging of war,
against
Government
of India.
Conspiracy to
commit
offences
punishable by
section 145.
Collecting
arms, etc.,
with intention
of waging war
against
Government
of India.
Concealing
with intent to
facilitate
design to wage
war.
Assaulting
President
Governor, etc.,
with intent to
compel or
restrain
exercise of any
lawful power.
Acts
endangering
sovereignty
unity and
integrity of
India.
Waging war
agaisnt
Government
of any foreign
State at peace
with
Government
of India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

49
152. Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparations to commit depredation, on
the territories of any foreign State at peace with the Government of India, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine and to forfeiture of any property used or intended to be used in
committing such depredation, or acquired by such depredation.
153. Whoever receives any property knowing the same to have been taken in the
commission of any of the offences mentioned in sections 151 and 152, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine and to forfeiture of the property so received.
154. Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or
prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such prisoner to escape from any place in which such
prisoner is confined, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
155. Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or
prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner to escape from any place of confinement in
which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
156. Whoever knowingly aids or assists any State prisoner or prisoner of war in
escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue any such prisoner, or harbours
or conceals any such prisoner who has escaped from lawful custody, or offers or attempts to
offer any resistance to the recapture of such prisoner, shall be punished with imprisonment
for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation. —A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is permitted to be at large on
his parole within certain limits in India, is said to escape from lawful custody if he goes
beyond the limits within which he is allowed to be at large.
CHAPTER VIII
O
F OFFENCES RELA TING TO THE ARMY, NAV Y AND AIR FORCE
157. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in
the Army, Navy or Air Force  subject to the Acts referred to in section 165 of the Government
of India or attempts to seduce any such officer, soldier, sailor or airman from his allegiance or
his duty, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
158. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in
the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, shall, if mutiny be committed in
consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
159. Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army,
Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, on any superior officer being in the execution
of his office, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Committing
depredation on
territories of
foreign State
at peace with
Governemnt
of India.
Receiving
property taken
by war or
depredation
mentioned in
sections 151
and 152.
Public servant
voluntarily
allowing
prisoner of
sate or war to
escape.
Public servant
negligently
suffering such
prisoner to
escape.
Aiding escape
of rescuing or
harbouring
such prisoner.
Abetting
mutiny, or
attempting to
seduce a
soldier, sailor
or airman
from his duty.
Abetment of
mutiny, if
mutiny is
committed in
consequence
thereof.
Abetment of
assault by
soldier, sailor
or airman on
his superior
office, when in
execution of
his office.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

50
160.Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy
or Air Force of the Government of India, on any superior officer being in the execution of his
office, shall, if such assault be committed in consequence of that abetment be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
161. Whoever abets the desertion of any officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army,
Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
162. Whoever, except as hereinafter excepted, knowing or having reason to believe
that an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of
India, has deserted, harbours such officer, soldier, sailor or airman, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine or
with both.
Exception.—This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is given
by the spouse of the deserter.
163. The master or person in charge of a merchant vessel, on board of which any
deserter from the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India is concealed, shall,
though ignorant of such concealment, be liable to a penalty not exceeding  three thousand
rupees, if he might have known of such concealment but for some neglect of his duty as such
master or person in charge, or but for some want of discipline on board of the vessel.
164. Whoever abets what he knows to be an act of insubordination by an officer,
soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force, of the Government of India, shall, if
such act of insubordination be committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
165. No person subject to the Army Act, 1950 the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934,
or the Air Force Act , 1950 shall be  subject to punishment under this Sanhita for any of the
offences defined in this Chapter.
166. Whoever, not being a soldier, sailor or airman in the Army, Naval or Air service of
the Government of India, wears any garb or carries any token resembling any garb or token
used by such a soldier, sailor or airman with the intention that it may be believed that he is
such a soldier, sailor or airman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER IX
O
F OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
167. For the purposes of this Chapter—
(a) “candidate” means a person who has been nominated as a candidate at any
election;
(b) “electoral right” means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand as, or to
withdraw from being, a candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at an election.
168. (1) Whoever—
(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any
other person to exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for having
exercised any such right; or
Abetment of
such assault, if
assault
committed.
Abetment of
desertion of
soldier, sailor
or airman.
Harbouring
deserter.
Deserter
concealed on
board
merchant
vessel through
negligence of
master.
Abetment of
act of
insubordination
by soldier,
sailor or
airman.
Persons subject
to certain
Acts.
Wearing garb
or carrying
token used by
soldier, sailor
or airman.
Candidate,
Electoral right
defined.
Bribery.
46 of 1950.
45 of 1950.
34 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

51
(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as a reward
for exercising any such right or for inducing or attempting to induce any other person
to exercise any such right,
commits the offence of bribery:
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall not
be an offence under this section.
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts to procure, a gratification
shall be deemed to give a gratification.
(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a gratification shall
be deemed to accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a gratification as a motive for
doing what he does not intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, shall be
deemed to have accepted the gratification as a reward.
169. (1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere with the free exercise of
any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), whoever—
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or voter
is interested, with injury of any kind; or
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or any
person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered an object of Divine
displeasure or of spiritual censure,
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or
voter, within the meaning of sub-section (1).
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action or the mere exercise or
a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be
interference within the meaning of this section.
170. Whoever at an election applies for a voting paper on votes in the name of any
other person, whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having voted once at
such election applies at the same election for a voting paper in his own name, and whoever
abets, procures or attempts to procure the voting by any person in any such way, commits
the offence of personation at an election:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who has been authorised
to vote as proxy for an elector under any law for the time being in force in so far as he votes
as a proxy for such elector.
171. Whoever commits the offence of bribery shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both:
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine only.
Explanation.— “Treating” means that form of bribery where the gratification consists
in food, drink, entertainment, or provision.
172. Whoever commits the offence of undue influence or personation at an election
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year or with fine, or with both.
173. Whoever with intent to affect the result of an election makes or publishes any
statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal character or
conduct of any candidate shall be punished with fine.
Undue
influence at
elections.
Personation at
elections.
Punishment
for bribery.
Punishment
for undue
influence or
personation at
an election.
False
statement in
connection
with an
election.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

52
174. Whoever without the general or special authority in writing of a candidate incurs
or authorises expenses on account of the holding of any public meeting, or upon any
advertisement, circular or publication, or in any other way whatsoever for the purpose of
promoting or procuring the election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees:
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not exceeding the
amount of ten rupees without authority obtains within ten days from the date on which such
expenses were incurred the approval in writing of the candidate, he shall be deemed to have
incurred such expenses with the authority of the candidate.
175. Whoever being required by any law for the time being in force or any rule having
the force of law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with an election
fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
CHAPTER  X
O
F OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN, CURRENCY NOTES, BANK NOTES, AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS
176. Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of
counterfeiting, any coin, stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, currency-
note or bank-note, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(1) the expression “bank-note” means a promissory note or engagement for the
payment of money to bearer on demand issued by any person carrying on the business
of banking in any part of the world, or issued by or under the authority of any State or
Sovereign Power, and intended to be used as equivalent to, or as a substitute for
money;
(2) “coin” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in  section 2 of the Coinage
Act, 2011 and includes metal used for the time being as money and is stamped and
issued by or under the authority of any State or Sovereign Power intended to be so
used;
(3) a person commits the offence of “counterfeiting Government stamp” who
counterfeits by causing a genuine stamp of one denomination to appear like a genuine
stamp of a different denomination;
(4) a person commits the offence of counterfeiting coin who intending to practice
deception, or knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be practiced, causes a
genuine coin to appear like a different coin; and
 (5) the offence of  “counterfeiting coin” includes diminishing the weight or
alteration of the composition, or alteration of the appearance of the coin.
177. Whoever sells or delivers to, or buys or receives from, any other person, or
otherwise traffics or uses as genuine, any forged or counterfeit coin, stamp issued by
Government for the purpose of revenue, currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having
reason to believe the same to be forged or counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment
for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
178. Whoever has in his possession any forged or counterfeit coin, stamp issued by
Government for the purpose of revenue, currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having
reason to believe the same to be forged or counterfeit and intending to use the same as
genuine or that it may be used as genuine, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Illegal
payments in
connection
with an
election.
Failure to keep
election
accounts.
Counterfeiting
coin,
Government
stamps,
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
Using as
genuine, forged
or counterfeit
coin,
Government
stamp,
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
Possession of
forged or
counterfeit
coin,
Government
stamp,
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
11 of 2011.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

53
179. Whoever makes or mends, or performs any part of the process of making or
mending, or buys or sells or disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery, die,
instrument or material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe
that it is intended to be used, for forging or counterfeiting any coin, stamp issued by
Government for the purpose of revenue,  currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
180. (1) Whoever makes, or causes to be made, or uses for any purpose whatsoever,
or delivers to any person, any document purporting to be, or in any way resembling, or so
nearly resembling as to be calculated to deceive, any currency-note or bank-note shall be
punished with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees.
(2) If any person, whose name appears on a document the making of which is an
offence under sub-section (1), refuses, without lawful excuse, to disclose to a police-officer
on being so required the name and address of the person by whom it was printed or otherwise
made, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to six hundred rupees.
(3) Where the name of any person appears on any document in respect of which any
person is charged with an offence under sub-section (1) or on any other document used or
distributed in connection with that document it may, until the contrary is proved, be presumed
that the person caused the document to be made.
181. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to the Government, removes or
effaces from any substance, bearing any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of
revenue, any writing or document for which such stamp has been used, or removes from any
writing or document a stamp which has been used for such writing or document, in order that
such stamp may be used for a different writing or document, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.
182. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to the Government, uses for
any purpose a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, which he knows to
have been before used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
183. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to Government, erases or
removes from a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, any mark, put or
impressed upon such stamp for the purpose of denoting that the same has been used, or
knowingly has in his possession or sells or disposes of any such stamp from which such
mark has been erased or removed, or sells or disposes of any such stamp which he knows to
have been used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
184. (1) Whoever—
(a) makes, knowingly utters, deals in or sells any fictitious stamp, or knowingly
uses for any postal purpose any fictitious stamp; or
(b) has in his possession, without lawful excuse, any fictitious stamp; or
(c) makes or, without lawful excuse, has in his possession any die, plate,
instrument or materials for making any fictitious stamp,
Makinhg or
possessing
instruments or
materials for
forging or
counterfeiting
coin,
Government
stamp,
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
Making or
using
documents
resembling
currency-notes
or bank-notes..
Effacing
writing from
substance
bearing
Government
stamp, or
removing
document a
stamp used for
it,with intent
to cause loss to
Government.
Using
Government
stamp known
to have been
before used.
Erasure of
mark denoting
that stamp has
been used.
Prohibition of
fictitious
stamps.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

54
shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.
(2) Any such stamp, die, plate, instrument or materials in the possession of any person
for making any fictitious stamp may be seized and, if seized shall be forfeited.
(3) In this section “fictitious stamp” means any stamp falsely purporting to be issued
by Government for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, or any facsimile or imitation or
representation, whether on paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by Government for that
purpose.
(4) In this section and also in sections 176 to 179, and sections 181 to 183 both
inclusive, the word “Government”, when used in connection with, or in reference to any
stamp issued for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, shall, notwithstanding anything
in clause (11) of section 2, be deemed to include the person or persons authorised by law to
administer executive Government in any part of India or in any foreign country.
185. Whoever, being employed in any mint lawfully established in India, does any act,
or omits what he is legally bound to do, with the intention of causing any coin issued from
that mint to be of a different weight or composition from the weight or composition fixed by
law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
186. Whoever, without lawful authority, takes out of any mint, lawfully established in
India, any coining tool or instrument, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
C
HAPTER XI
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY
187. (1) An assembly of five or more persons is designated an “unlawful assembly”, if
the common object of the persons composing that assembly is—
(a)  to overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, the Central Government
or any State Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State, or any public
servant in the exercise of the lawful power of such public servant; or
(b) to resist the execution of any law, or of any legal process; or
(c) to commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other offence; or
(d) by means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to any person, to take or
obtain possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a
right of way, or of the use of water or other incorporeal right of which he is in possession
or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or supposed right; or
(e) by means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to compel any person to
do what he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what he is legally entitled to do.
Explanation .—An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may
subsequently become an unlawful assembly.
(2) Whoever, being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly,
intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an unlawful
assembly and such member shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful assembly, knowing that such unlawful
assembly has been commanded in the manner prescribed by law to disperse, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
Person
employed in
mint causing
coin to be of
different
weight or
composition
from that
fixed by law.
Unlawfully
taking coining
instrument
from mints.
Unlawful
assembly.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

55
(4) Whoever, being armed with any deadly weapon, or with anything which, used as a
weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, is a member of an unlawful assembly, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
(5) Whoever knowingly joins or continues in any assembly of five or more persons
likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly has been lawfully
commanded to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation .—If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the meaning of
sub-section (1), the offender shall be punishable under sub-section ( 3).
(6) Whoever hires or engages, or employs, or promotes, or connives at the hiring,
engagement or employment of any person to join or become a member of any unlawful
assembly, shall be punishable as a member of such unlawful assembly, and for any offence
which may be committed by any such person as a member of such unlawful assembly in
pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment, in the same manner as if he had been
a member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had committed such offence.
(7) Whoever harbours, receives or assembles, in any house or premises in his
occupation or charge, or under his control any persons knowing that such persons have
been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be hired, engaged or employed, to join or
become members of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(8) Whoever is engaged, or hired, or offers or attempts to be hired or engaged, to do or
assist in doing any of the acts specified in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(9) Whoever, being so engaged or hired as referred to in sub-section (8), goes armed,
or engages or offers to go armed, with any deadly weapon or with anything which used as a
weapon of offence is likely to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
188. If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution
of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be
likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at the time of the
committing of that offence, is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence.
189. (1)
 Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any
member thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member of
such assembly is guilty of the offence of rioting.
(2) Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with a deadly weapon or with anything
which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or
with both.
190.Whoever malignantly, or wantonly by doing anything which is illegal, gives
provocation to any person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will
cause the offence of rioting to be committed, shall, if the offence of rioting be committed in
consequence of such provocation, be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both; and if the offence of rioting
be not committed, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.
Every member
of unlawful
assembly guilty
of offence
committed in
persecution of
common
object.
Rioting.
Wantonly
giving
provocation
with intent to
cause riot-if
rioting be
committed; if
not
committed.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

56
191. (1) Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot takes place, the owner or occupier of
the land upon which such unlawful assembly is held, or such riot is committed, and any
person having or claiming an interest in such land, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding
one thousand rupees, if he or his agent or manager, knowing that such offence is being or
has been committed, or having reason to believe it is likely to be committed, do not give the
earliest notice thereof in his or their power to the officer in charge at the nearest police-
station, and do not, in the case of his or their having reason to believe that it was about to be
committed, use all lawful means in his or their power to prevent it and, in the event of its
taking place, do not use all lawful means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot
or unlawful assembly.
(2) Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the
owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes place or who claims any
interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has
accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, such person shall be punishable with fine, if he or
his agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed or
that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not
respectively use all lawful means in his or their power to prevent such assembly or riot from
taking place, and for suppressing and dispersing the same.
(3) Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the
owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes place, or who claims any
interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has
accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, the agent or manager of such person shall be
punishable with fine, if such agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was
likely to be committed, or that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed was
likely to be held, shall not use all lawful means in his power to prevent such riot or assembly
from taking place and for suppressing and dispersing the same.
192. (1) When two or more persons, by fighting in a public place, disturb the public
peace, they are said to commit an affray.
(2) Whoever commits an affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
193. (1) Whoever assaults or obstructs any public servant or uses criminal force on
any public servant in the discharge of his duty in endeavouring to disperse an unlawful
assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which shall not be less
than twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever threatens to assault or attempts to obstruct any public servant or threaten
or attempts to use criminal force to any public servant in the discharge of his duty in
endeavouring to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
194. (1) Whoever—
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations
or through electronic communication or  otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote,
on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or
any other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will
between different religious, racials, language or regional groups or castes or
communities; or
Liability of
owner,
occupier, etc.,
of land on
which an
unlawful
assembly or
riot takes
place.
Affray.
Assaulting or
obstructing
public servant
when
supperssing
riot, etc.
Promoting
enmity
between
different
groups on
ground of
religion, race,
place of birth,
residence,
language, etc.,
and doing acts
prejudicial to
maintenance
of harmony.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

57
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between
different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and
which disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquility; or
(c) organises any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity intending that
the participants in such activity shall use or be trained to use criminal force or violence
or knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to
use criminal force or violence, or participates in such activity intending to use or be
trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that the participants
in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence, against any
religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community and such activity
for any reason whatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of
insecurity amongst members of such religious, racial, language or regional group or
caste or community,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship
or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable
to fine.
195. (1) Whoever, by words either spoken or written or by signs or by visible
representations or through electronic communication or otherwise,—
(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of persons cannot, by
reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or
caste or community, bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
established or uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that any class of persons
shall, by reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional
group or caste or community, be denied, or deprived of their rights as citizens of India; or
(c) makes or publishes any assertion, counsel, plea or appeal concerning the
obligation of any class of persons, by reason of their being members of any religious,
racial, language or regional group or caste or community, and such assertion, counsel,
plea or appeal causes or is likely to cause disharmony or feelings of enmity or hatred or
ill-will between such members and other persons; or
(d) makes or publishes false or misleading information jeopardising the
sovereignty unity and integrity or security of India,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship
or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable
to fine.
CHAPTER XII
O
F OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERV ANTS
196. Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as
to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will by such disobedience, cause injury to any person, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.
Imputations,
assertions
prejudicial to
national
integration.
Public servant
disobeying law,
with intent to
cause injury to
any person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

58
Illustration.
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, in order to satisfy a
decree pronounced in Z’s favour by a Court, knowingly disobeys that direction of law, with
the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A has committed the offence
defined in this section.
197. Whoever, being a public servant,—
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law which prohibits him from requiring
the attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation into an
offence or any other matter; or
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any other direction of
the law regulating the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation; or
(c) fails to record any information given to him under sub-section ( 1) of
section 174 of the  Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 in relation to cognizable
offence punishable under  section 64,  section 65 section 66,  section 67, section 68,
section 71, section 73,  section 76, section 122  or section 141 or section 142,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months but which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine.
198. Whoever, being in charge of a hospital, public or private, whether run by the
Central Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other person, contravenes
the provisions of section 449 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with
both.
199. Whoever, being a public servant, and being, as such public servant, charged with
the preparation or translation of any document or electronic record, frames, prepares or
translates that document or electronic record in a manner which he knows or believes to be
incorrect, intending thereby to cause or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause
injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
200. Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant
not to engage in trade, engages in trade, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both or with community service.
201. Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant,
not to purchase or bid for certain property, purchases or bids for that property, either in his
own name or in the name of another, or jointly, or in shares with others, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both;
and the property, if purchased, shall be confiscated.
202. Whoever pretends to hold any particular office as a public servant, knowing that
he does not hold such office or falsely personates any other person holding such office, and
in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act under colour of such office, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than
six months but which may extend to three years and with fine.
203. Whoever, not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or
carries any token resembling any garb or token used by that class of public servants, with
the intention that it may be believed, or with the knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that
he belongs to that class of public servants, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both.
Public servant
disobeying
direction under
law.
Punishment
for non-
treatment of
victim.
Public servant
framing an
incorrect
document with
intent to cause
injury.
Public servant
unlawfully
engaging in
trade.
Public servant
unlawfully
buying or
bidding for
property.
Personating a
public servant.
Wearing garb
or carrying
token used by
public servant
with fraudulent
intent.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

59
CHAPTER XIII
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERV ANTS
204.  Whoever absconds in order to avoid being served with a summons, notice or
order proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to issue
such summons, notice or order,––
(a)  shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where such summons or notice or order is to attend in person or by agent, or
to produce a document or an electronic record in a Court  shall punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
205. Whoever in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any
other person, of any summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally
competent, as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, or intentionally
prevents the lawful affixing to any place of any such summons, notice or orderor intentionally
removes any such summons, notice or order from any place to which it is lawfully affixed or
intentionally prevents the lawful making of any proclamation, under the authority of any
public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to direct such proclamation to be
made,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by
agent, or to produce a document or electronic record in a Court with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees
, or with both.
206. Whoever, being legally bound to attend in person or by an agent at a certain place
and time in obedience to a summons, notice, order, or proclamation proceeding from any
public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to issue the same,  intentionally
omits to attend at that place or time or departs from the place where he is bound to attend
before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by
agent in a Court with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees
,or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A, being legally bound to appear before a High Court, in obedience to a
subpoena issuing from that Court, intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a District Judge, as a witness, in
obedience to a summons issued by that District Judge intentionally omits to appear. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
207. Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and the specified time as required
by a proclamation published under sub-section ( 1) of section 84 of the Bhartiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 
 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years or with fine or with both or with community service, and where a declaration has
been made under sub-section (4) of that section pronouncing him as a proclaimed offender,
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine.
Absconding to
avoid service
of summons or
other
proceeding.
Preventing
service of
summons or
other
proceeding, or
preventing
publication
thereof.
Non-
attendance in
obedience to
an order from
public servant.
Non-
appearance in
response to a
proclamation
under section
82 of Bhartiya
Nagarik
Suraksha
Sunhita 2023.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

60
208. Whoever, being legally bound to produce or deliver up any document or electronic
record to any public servant, as such, intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up the
same,––
(a)  shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) and where the document or electronic record is to be produced or delivered
up to a Court with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustration.
A, being legally bound to produce a document before a District Court, intentionally
omits to produce the same. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
209. Whoever, being legally bound to give any notice or to furnish information on any
subject to any public servant, as such, intentionally omits to give such notice or to furnish
such information in the manner and at the time required by law,––
(a)  shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the notice or information required to be given respects the commission
of an offence, or is required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an
offence, or in order to the apprehension of an offender, with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both;
(c) where the notice or information required to be given is required by an order
passed under section 447 of the Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
210. Whoever, being legally bound to furnish information on any subject to any
public servant, as such, furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or has
reason to believe to be false,––
(a)  shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees
, or with both;
(b) where  the information which he is legally bound to give respects the
commission of an offence, or is required for the purpose of preventing the commission
of an offence, or in order to the apprehension of an offender, with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations.
 (a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within the limits of
his estate, wilfully misinforms the Magistrate of the district that the death has occurred
by accident in consequence of the bite of a snake. A is guilty of the offence defined in
this section.
(b) A, a village watchman, knowing that a considerable body of strangers has
passed through his village in order to commit a dacoity in the house of Z, residing in a
neighbouring place, and being section 28 of the
  Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,
2023  to give early and punctual information of the above fact to the officer of the
nearest police-station, wilfully misinforms the police officer that a body of suspicious
characters passed through the village with a view to commit dacoity in a certain distant
place in a different direction. Here A is guilty of the offence defined in the latter part of
this section.
Omission to
produce
document to
public servant
by person
legally bound
to produce it.
Omission to
give notice or
information to
public servant
by person
legally bound
to give it.
Furnishing
false
information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

61
Explanation.—In section 209 and in this section the word “offence” include any act
committed at any place out of India, which, if committed in India, would be punishable
under any of the following sections, namely, 97, 99, 172, 173, 174, 175, 301, clauses (b) to
(d) of section 303, sections 304, 305, 306, 320, 325 and 326 and the word “offender”
includes any person who is alleged to have been guilty of any such act.
211. Whoever refuses to bind himself by an oath or affirmation to state the truth,
when required so to bind himself by a public servant legally competent to require that he
shall so bind himself, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
212. Whoever, being legally bound to state the truth on any subject to any public
servant, refuses to answer any question demanded of him touching that subject by such
public servant in the exercise of the legal powers of such public servant, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
213. Whoever refuses to sign any statement made by him, when required to sign
that statement by a public servant legally competent to require that he shall sign that
statement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both.
214. Whoever, being legally bound by an oath  or affirmation to state the truth on
any subject to any public servant or other person authorised by law to administer such
oath  or affirmation, makes, to such public servant or other person as aforesaid, touching
that subject, any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be
false or does not believe to be true, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
215. Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or
believes to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause, such public servant—
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or omit
if the true state of facts respecting which such information is given were known by
him; or
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or annoyance
of any person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a police-officer, subordinate to such Magistrate,
has been guilty of neglect of duty or misconduct, knowing such information to be false,
and knowing it to be likely that the information will cause the Magistrate to dismiss Z. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A falsely informs a public servant that Z has contraband salt in a secret place,
knowing such information to be false, and knowing that it is likely that the consequence
of the information will be a search of Z’s premises, attended with annoyance to Z. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
Refusing oath
or affirmation
when duly
required by
public servant
to make it.
Refusing to
answer public
servant
authorised to
question.
Refusing to
sign statement.
False
statement on
oath or
affirmation to
public sevant
or person
authorised to
administer an
oath or
affirmation.
False
information,
with intent to
cause public
servant to use
his lawful
power to the
injury of
another
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

62
(c) A falsely informs a policeman that he has been assaulted and robbed in the
neighbourhood of a particular village. He does not mention the name of any person as one
of his assailants, but knows it to be likely that in consequence of this information the
police will make enquiries and institute searches in the village to the annoyance of the
villagers or some of them. A has committed an offence under this section.
216. Whoever offers any resistance to the taking of any property by the lawful
authority of any public servant, knowing or having reason to believe that he is such
public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with
both.
217. Whoever intentionally obstructs any sale of property offered for sale by the
lawful authority of any public servant, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
218. Whoever, at any sale of property held by the lawful authority of a public
servant, as such, purchases or bids for any property on account of any person, whether
himself or any other, whom he knows to be under a legal incapacity to purchase that
property at that sale, or bids for such property not intending to perform the obligations
under which he lays himself by such bidding, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.
219. Whoever voluntarily obstructs any public servant in the discharge of his
public functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand five
hundred rupees, or with both.
220. Whoever, being bound by law to render or furnish assistance to any public
servant in the execution of his public duty, intentionally omits to give such assistance,––
(a)  shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one month, or with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees,
or with both;
(b) and where such assistance be demanded of him by a public servant legally
competent to make such demand for the purposes of executing any process lawfully
issued by a Court or of preventing the commission of an offence, or suppressing a
riot, or affray, or of apprehending a person charged with or guilty of an offence, or
of having escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both.
221. Whoever, knowing that, by an order promulgated by a public servant lawfully
empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to abstain from a certain act, or to take
certain order with certain property in his possession or under his management, disobeys
such direction,––
(a) shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause obstruction, annoyance
or injury, or risk of obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any persons lawfully employed,
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or
with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, or with both;
Resistance to
the taking of
property by
the lawful
authority of a
public servant.
Obstructing
sale of
property
offered for sale
by authority of
public servant.
Illegal purchase
or bid for
property
offered for sale
by authority of
public servant.
Obstructing
public servant
in discharge of
public
functions.
Omission to
assist public
servant when
bound by law
to give
assistance.
Disobedience
to order duly
promulgated
by public
servant.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

63
(b) and where  such disobedience causes or tends to cause danger to human
life, health or safety, or causes or tends to cause a riot or affray, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—It is not necessary that the offender should intend to produce harm,
or contemplate his disobedience as likely to produce harm. It is sufficient that he knows of
the order which he disobeys, and that his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce,
harm.
Illustration.
 An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate
such order, directing that a religious procession shall not pass down a certain street. A
knowingly disobeys the order, and thereby causes danger of riot. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
222. Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any public servant, or to any person
in whom he believes that public servant to be interested, for the purpose of inducing that
public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to do any act, connected with the
exercise of the public functions of such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
223. Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any person for the purpose of
inducing that person to refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection
against any injury to any public servant legally empowered as such to give such protection,
or to cause such protection to be given, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
224. Whoever attempts to commit suicide with the intent to compel or restrain any
public servant from discharging his official duty shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both or with community
service.
CHAPTER XIV
O
F FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
225. Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of law to
state the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes any
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not
believe to be true, is said to give false evidence.
Explanation 1.—A statement is within the meaning of this section, whether it is
made verbally or otherwise.
Explanation 2.—A false statement as to the belief of the person attesting is within
the meaning of this section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by
stating that he believes a thing which he does not believe, as well as by stating that he
knows a thing which he does not know.
Illustrations.
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against Z for one thousand rupees,
falsely swears on a trial that he heard Z admit the justice of B’s claim. A has given false
evidence.
Threat of
injury to
public servant.
Threat of
injury to
induce person
to refrain
from applying
for protection
to public
servant.
Attempt to
commit suicide
to compel or
restraint
exercise of
lawful power.
Giving false
evidence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

64
(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he believes a certain
signature to be the handwriting of Z, when he does not believe it to be the handwriting of
Z. Here A states that which he knows to be false, and therefore gives false evidence.
(c) A, knowing the general character of Z’s handwriting, states that he believes a
certain signature to be the handwriting of Z; A in good faith believing it to be so. Here A ’s
statement is merely as to his belief, and is true as to his belief, and therefore, although the
signature may not be the handwriting of Z, A has not given false evidence.
(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he knows that Z was at
a particular place on a particular day, not knowing anything upon the subject. A gives
false evidence whether Z was at that place on the day named or not.
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true interpretation or
translation of a statement or document which he is bound by oath to interpret or translate
truly, that which is not and which he does not believe to be a true interpretation or
translation. A has given false evidence.
226. Whoever causes any circumstance to exist or makes any false entry in any
book or record, or electronic record or makes any document or electronic record containing
a false statement, intending that such circumstance, false entry or false statement may
appear in evidence in a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public
servant as such, or before an arbitrator, and that such circumstance, false entry or false
statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause any person who in such proceeding is to
form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneous opinion touching any point
material to the result of such proceeding is said “to fabricate false evidence”.
Illustrations.
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention that they may be
found in that box, and that this circumstance may cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has
fabricated false evidence.
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of using it as corroborative
evidence in a Court. A has fabricated false evidence.
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a criminal conspiracy, writes
a letter in imitation of Z’s handwriting, purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in
such criminal conspiracy, and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the officers of
the police are likely to search. A has fabricated false evidence.
227.  (1) Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any of a judicial proceeding,
or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a judicial
proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any case other than
that referred to in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees.
Fabricating
false evidence.
Punishment
for false
evidence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

65
Explanation 1.—A trial before a Court-martial is a judicial proceeding.
Explanation 2.—An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceeding before
a Court is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place
before a Court.
Illustration.
A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of ascertaining whether Z
ought to be committed for trial, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As
this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false evidence.
Explanation  3.—An investigation directed by a Court according to law, and
conducted under the authority of a Court is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that
investigation may not take place before a Court.
Illustration.
A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court to ascertain on the spot the
boundaries of land, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this
enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false evidence.
228.  (1) Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence, intending thereby to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an
offence which is capital by the law for the time being in force in India shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
   ( 2) If an innocent person be convicted and executed in consequence of false
evidence referred in sub-section ( 1), the person who gives such false evidence shall be
punished either with death or the punishment hereinbefore described.
229. Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending thereby to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an
offence which by the law for the time being in force in India is not capital, but punishable
with  imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term of seven years or upwards, shall be
punished as a person convicted of that offence would be liable to be punished.
Illustration.
A gives false evidence before a Court intending thereby to cause Z to be convicted
of a dacoity. The punishment of dacoity is imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, with or without fine. A, therefore, is liable to
imprisonment for life or imprisonment, with or without fine.
230. ( 1) Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or
property or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with
intent to cause that person to give false evidence shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) If innocent person is convicted and sentenced in consequence of false evidence
referred to in sub-section ( 1), with death or imprisonment for more than seven years, the
person who threatens shall be punished with the same punishment and sentence in the
same manner and to the same extent such innocent person is punished and sentenced.
Giving or
fabricating
false evidence
with intent to
procure
conviction of
capital
offence.
Giving or
fabricating
false evidence
with intent to
procure
conviction of
offence
punishable with
imprisonment
for life or
imprisonment.
Threatening
any person to
give false
evidence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

66
231. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true or genuine evidence any
evidence which he knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the same manner
as if he gave or fabricated false evidence.
232. Whoever issues or signs any certificate required by law to be given or signed,
or relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in evidence, knowing
or believing that such certificate is false in any material point, shall be punished in the
same manner as if he gave false evidence.
233. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any such certificate as a true
certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the
same manner as if he gave false evidence.
234. Whoever, in any declaration made or subscribed by him, which declaration any
Court or any public servant or other person, is bound or authorised by law to receive as
evidence of any fact, makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, touching any point material to the
object for which the declaration is made or used, shall be punished in the same manner as
if he gave false evidence.
235. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true any such declaration,
knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the same manner
as if he gave false evidence.
Explanation.—A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the ground of some
informality, is a declaration within the meaning of section 234 and  this section.
236.Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, causes any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the
intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any
information respecting the offence which he knows or believes to be false shall,—
(a) if the offence which he knows or believes to have been committed is
punishable with death be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for any term not extending
to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the
offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the
imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration.
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with the intention of
screening B from punishment. A is liable to imprisonment of either description for seven
years, and also to fine.
237. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, intentionally omits to give any information respecting that offence which he is
legally bound to give, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,
or with both.
Using evidence
known to be
false.
Issuing or
signing false
certificate.
Using as true a
certificate
known to be
false.
False
statement
made in
declaration
which is by
law receivable
as evidence.
Using as true
such
declaration
knowing it to
be false.
Causing
disappearance
of evidence of
offence, or
giving false
information
to screen
offender.
Intentional
omission to
give
information
of offence by
person bound
to inform.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

67
238.Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, gives any information respecting that offence which he knows or believes to
be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—In sections 236 and 237 and in this section the word “offence”
includes any act committed at any place out of  India, which, if committed in  India, would
be punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 97, 99, 172, 173, 174, 175,
301,303, 304, 305, 306, 320, 325 and 326.
239. Whoever secretes or destroys any document or electronic record which he
may be lawfully compelled to produce as evidence in a Court or in any proceeding lawfully
held before a public servant, as such, or obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any
part of such document or electronic record with the intention of preventing the same from
being produced or used as evidence before such Court or public servant as aforesaid, or
after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the same for that
purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
240. Whoever falsely personates another, and in such assumed character makes
any admission or statement, or confesses judgment, or causes any process to be issued or
becomes bail or security, or does any other act in any suit or criminal prosecution, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
241. Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person
any property or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest
therein from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which
has been pronounced, or which he knows to be likely to be pronounced, by a Court  or
other competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a decree or order which has
been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court in a civil suit, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years or with fine which may extend  to five thousand rupees, or with both.
242. Whoever fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest
therein, knowing that he has no right or rightful claim to such property or interest, or
practices any deception touching any right to any property or any interest therein,
intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture
or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he
knows to be likely to be pronounced by a Court or other competent authority, or from
being taken in execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to
be likely to be made by a Court in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
243. Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be passed against
him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum than is due to such
person or for any property or interest in property to which such person is not entitled, or
fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has
been satisfied, or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
Giving false
information
respecting an
offence
committed.
Destruction of
document to
prevent its
production as
evidence.
False
personation
for purpose of
act or
proceeding in
suit or
prosecution.
Fraudulent
removal or
concealment
of property to
prevent its
seizure as
forfeited or in
execution.
Fraudulent
claim to
property to
prevent its
seizure as
forfeited or in
execution.
Fraudulently
suffering
decree for sum
not due.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

68
Illustration.
A institutes a suit against Z. Z, knowing that A is likely to obtain a decree against
him, fraudulently suffers a judgment to pass against him for a larger amount at the suit of
B, who has no just claim against him, in order that B, either on his own account or for the
benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any sale of Z’s property which may be made
under A’s decree. Z has committed an offence under this section.
244. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to injure or annoy any
person, makes in a Court any claim which he knows to be false, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
245. Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or order against any person for a sum
not due, or for a larger sum than is due or for any property or interest in property to which
he is not entitled, or fraudulently causes a decree or order to be executed against any
person after it has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied,
or fraudulently suffers or permits any such act to be done in his name, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
246. Whoever, with intent to cause injury to any person, institutes or causes to be
instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely charges any person with
having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such
proceeding or charge against that person,—
(a) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with
both;
(b) if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge of an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for ten years or upwards,
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
247. Whenever an offence has been committed, whoever harbours or conceals a
person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the offender, with the intention of
screening him from legal punishment shall,—
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable
to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one
year, and not to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of the description provided
for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.––“Offence” in this section includes any act committed at any place
out of India, which, if committed in India, would be punishable under any of the following
sections, namely 97, 99, 172, 173, 174, 175, 301,303, 304, 305, 306, 320, 325 and 326 and
Dishonestly
making false
claim in
Court.
Fraudulently
obtaining
decree for sum
not due.
False charge
of offence
made with
intent to
injure.
Harbouring
offender.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

69
every such act shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the
accused person had been guilty of it in India.
Exception.—This section shall not extend to any case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the offender.
Illustration.
A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in order to screen
him from legal punishment. Here, as B is liable to imprisonment for life, A is liable to
imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding three years, and is also liable
to fine.
248. Whoever accepts or attempts to obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification
for himself or any other person, or any restitution of property to himself or any other
person, in consideration of his concealing an offence or of his screening any person from
legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the
purpose of bringing him to legal punishment shall,––
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years,
be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a
term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
249. Whoever gives or causes, or offers or agrees to give or cause, any gratification
to any person, or restores or causes the restoration of any property to any person, in
consideration of that person’s concealing an offence, or of his screening any person from
legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the
purpose of bringing him to legal punishment shall,––
(a)  if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and also be liable to
fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years,
be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a
term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
250. Whoever takes or agrees or consents to take any gratification under pretence
or on account of helping any person to recover any movable property of which he shall
have been deprived by any offence punishable under this Sanhita , shall, unless he uses
all means in his power to cause the offender to be apprehended and convicted of the
Taking gift,
etc., to screen
an offender
from
punishment.
Offering gift
or restoration
of property in
consideration
of screening
offender.
Taking gift to
help to
recover stolen
property, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

70
offence, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both.
251. Whenever any person convicted of or charged with an offence, being in lawful
custody for that offence, escapes from such custody, or whenever a public servant, in the
exercise of the lawful powers of such public servant, orders a certain person to be
apprehended for an offence, whoever, knowing of such escape or order for apprehension,
harbours or conceals that person with the intention of preventing him from being
apprehended, shall be punished in the manner following, namely:––
(a) if the offence for which the person was in custody or is ordered to be
apprehended is punishable with death, he shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for
ten years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, with or without fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one
year and not to ten years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of the description
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the
longest term of the imprisonment provided for such offence, or with fine, or with
both.
Explanation.––“Offence” in this section includes also any act or omission of which
a person is alleged to have been guilty out of India, which, if he had been guilty of it in
India, would have been punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law
relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in
India, and every such act or omission shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to
be punishable as if the accused person had been guilty of it in India.
Exception.—The provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the person to be apprehended.
252. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that any persons are about to
commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, harbours them or any of them, with
the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity, or of screening
them or any of them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section it is immaterial whether the robbery
or dacoity is intended to be committed, or has been committed, within or without India.
Exception.—This section does not extend to the case in which the harbour is by the
spouse of the offender.
253. Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law
as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending thereby
to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal
punishment, or subject him to a less punishment than that to which he is liable, or with
intent to save, or knowing that he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or
any charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Harbouring
offender who
has escaped
from custody
or whose
apprehension
has been
ordered.
Penalty for
harbouring
robbers or
dacoits.
Public servant
disobeying
direction of
law with
intent to save
person from
punishment or
property from
forfeiture.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

71
254. Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public servant, charged
with the preparation of any record or other writing, frames that record or writing in a
manner which he knows to be incorrect, with intent to cause, or knowing it to be likely that
he will thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or with intent thereby
to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal
punishment, or with intent to save, or knowing that he is likely thereby to save, any
property from forfeiture or other charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.
255. Whoever, being a public servant, corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces
in any stage of a judicial proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he
knows to be contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
256. Whoever, being in any office which gives him legal authority to commit persons
for trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly or maliciously
commits any person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person in confinement, in the
exercise of that authority knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, or with fine, or with both.
257. Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend or to keep in confinement any person charged with or liable to be apprehended
for an offence, intentionally omits to apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such
person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in escaping or attempting to escape
from such confinement, shall be punished,––
(a) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to
have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be apprehended for, an
offence punishable with death; or
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have
been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence
punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been
apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term less than ten years.
258. Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under sentence of a Court for any
offence or lawfully committed to custody, intentionally omits to apprehend such person,
or intentionally suffers such person to escape or intentionally aids such person in escaping
or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished,—
(a) with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to fourteen years, with or without fine, if the person in
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, is under sentence of
death; or
Public servant
framing
incorrect
record or
writing with
intent to save
person from
punishment or
property from
forfeiture.
Public servant
in judicial
proceeding
corruptly
making report,
etc., contrary
to law.
Commitment
for trial or
confinement by
person having
authority who
knows that he is
acting contrary
to law.
Intentional
omission to
apprehend on
the part of
public servant
bound to
apprehend.
Intentional
omission to
apprehend on
the part of
public servant
bound to
apprehend
person under
sentence or
lawfully
committed.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

72
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement or who ought to have
been apprehended, is subject, by a sentence of a Court or by virtue of a commutation
of such sentence, to imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of ten years, or
upwards; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both, if the person in confinement or who ought to
have been apprehended is subject by a sentence of a Court to imprisonment for a
term not extending to ten years or if the person was lawfully committed to custody.
259. Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to keep
in confinement any person charged with or convicted of any offence or lawfully committed
to custody, negligently suffers such person to escape from confinement, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
260. Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful
apprehension of himself for any offence with which he is charged or of which he has been
convicted, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in which he is lawfully
detained for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation. —The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for
which the person to be apprehended or detained in custody was liable for the offence with
which he was charged, or of which he was convicted.
261. Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful
apprehension of any other person for an offence, or rescues or attempts to rescue any
other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully detained for an offence,—
(a) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both;
(b) if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or attempted to be
rescued, is charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the person to be apprehended, or rescued, or attempted to be rescued,
is charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with death,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(d) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is
liable under the sentence of a Court or by virtue of a commutation of such a sentence,
to imprisonment for life, or imprisonment, for a term of ten years, or upwards, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(e) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is
under sentence of death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment
of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Resistance or
obstruction by
a person to his
lawful
apprehension.
Escape from
confinement
or custody
negligently
suffered by
public servant.
Resistance or
obstruction to
lawful
apprehension
of another
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

73
262. Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in section 257,
section 258 or section 259, or in any other law for the time being in force, omits to apprehend
that person or suffers him to escape from confinement, shall be punished—
(a) if  he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine or with both; and
(b) if he does so negligently, with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
263. Whoever, in any case not provided for in section 260 or section 261 or in any
other law for the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction
to the lawful apprehension of himself or of any other person, or escapes or attempts to
escape from any custody in which he is lawfully detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue
any other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully detained, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine, or with both.
264. Whoever, having accepted any conditional remission of punishment, knowingly
violates any condition on which such remission was granted, shall be punished with the
punishment to which he was originally sentenced, if he has already suffered no part of that
punishment, and if he has suffered any part of that punishment, then with so much of that
punishment as he has not already suffered.
265. Whoever intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption to any public
servant, while such public servant is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
266. Whoever, by personation or otherwise, shall intentionally cause, or knowingly
suffer himself to be returned, empanelled or sworn as an assessor in any case in which he
knows that he is not entitled by law to be so returned, empanelled or sworn, or knowing
himself to have been so returned, empanelled or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily
serve on such assessor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
267. Whoever, having been charged with an offence and released on bail or on bond
without sureties, fails without sufficient cause (the burden of proving which shall lie upon
him), to appear in court in accordance with the terms of the bail or bond, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both.
Explanation.—The punishment under this section is—
(a) in addition to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a
conviction for the offence with which he has been charged; and
(b) without prejudice to the power of the court to order forfeiture of the bond.
CHAPTER  XV
O
F  OFFENCES  AFFECTING THE PUBLIC  HEALTH,  SAFETY,  CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND
MORALS
268. A person is guilty of a public nuisance who does any act or is guilty of an illegal
omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the
people in general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must necessarily
cause injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to persons who may have occasion to use
any public right but a  common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes some
convenience or advantage.
Omission to
apprehend, or
sufferance of
escape, on
part of public
servant, in
cases not
otherwise,
provided for
.
Resistance or
obstruction to
lawful
apprehension
or escape or
rescue in cases
not otherwise
provided for.
Violation of
condition of
remission of
punishment.
Intentional
insult or
interruption
to public
servant sitting
in judicial
proceeding.
Personation
of an assessor.
Failure by
person
released on
bail or bond to
appear in
court.
Public
nuisance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

74
269. Whoever unlawfully or negligently does any act which is, and which he knows or
has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.
270. Whoever malignantly does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason
the believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
271. Whoever knowingly disobeys any rule made by the Government for putting any
mode of transport into a state of quarantine, or for regulating the intercourse of any such
transport in a state of quarantine or for regulating the intercourse between places where an
infectious disease prevails and other places, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
272. Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article
noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be
likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, or with both.
273. Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article which
has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink, knowing or
having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
274. Whoever adulterates any drug or medical preparation in such a manner as to
lessen the efficacy or change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or to make
it noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it to be likely that it will be
sold or used for, any medicinal purpose, as if it had not undergone such adulteration, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
275. Whoever, knowing any drug or medical preparation to have been adulterated in
such a manner as to lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious, sells
the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from any dispensary for medicinal
purposes as unadulterated, or causes it to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not
knowing of the adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,
or with both.
276. Whoever knowingly sells, or offers or exposes for sale, or issues from a dispensary
for medicinal purposes, any drug or medical preparation, as a different drug or medical
preparation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
277. Whoever voluntarily corrupts or fouls the water of any public spring or reservoir,
so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is ordinarily used, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees
, or with both.
278. Whoever voluntarily vitiates the atmosphere in any place so as to make it noxious
to the health of persons in general dwelling or carrying on business in the neighbourhood or
passing along a public way, shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees.
279. Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public way in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other
Negligent act
likely to spread
infection of
disease
dangerous to
life.
M
alignant act
likely to spread
infection of
disease dangerous
to life.
Disobedience
to quarantine
rule.
Adulteration
of food or
drink intended
for sale.
Sale of noxious
food or drink.
Adulteration
of drugs.
Sale of
adulterated
drugs.
Sale of drug as
a different
drug or
preparation.
Fouling water
of public
spring  or
reservoir.
Making
atmosphere
noxious to
health.
Rash driving
or riding on a
public way.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

75
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
280. Whoever navigates any vessel in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger
human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
281. Whoever exhibits any false light, mark or buoy, intending or knowing it to be
likely that such exhibition will mislead any navigator, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and with fine which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees.
282. Whoever knowingly or negligently conveys, or causes to be conveyed for hire,
any person by water in any vessel, when that vessel is in such a state or so loaded as to
endanger the life of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both.
283. Whoever, by doing any act, or by omitting to take order with any property in his
possession or under his charge, causes danger, obstruction or injury to any person in any
public way or public line of navigation, shall be punished, with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees.
284. Whoever does, with any poisonous substance, any act in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any person or
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any poisonous substance in his
possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such
poisonous substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both.
285. Whoever does, with fire or any combustible matter, any act so rashly or negligently
as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person or
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any fire or any combustible matter in
his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such
fire or combustible matter, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees,
or with both.
286. Whoever does, with any explosive substance, any act so rashly or negligently as
to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, or
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any explosive substance in his
possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from that
substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
287. Whoever does, with any machinery, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger
human life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other personor knowingly or negligently
omits to take such order with any machinery in his possession or under his care as is
sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such machinery, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
288. Whoever, in pulling down, repairing or constructingany building, knowingly or
negligently omits to take such measures with that building as is sufficient to guard against
any probable danger to human life from the fall of that building, or of any part thereof, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
Rash naviga-
tion of vessel.
Exhibition of
false light,
mark or buoy.
Conveying
person by
water for hire
in unsafe or
overloaded
vessel.
Danger or
obstruction in
public way or
line of
navigation.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
poisonous
substance.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to fire
or combustible
matter.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
explosive
substance.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
machinery.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
pulling down,
repairing or
constructing
buildings etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

76
289. Whoever knowingly or negligently omits to take such measures with any animal
in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life, or any
probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, or with both.
290. Whoever commits a public nuisance in any case not otherwise punishable by this
Sanhita shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
291. Whoever repeats or continues a public nuisance, having been enjoined by any
public servant who has lawful authority to issue such injunction not to repeat or continue
such nuisance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees
, or with both.
292. (1) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing,
painting, representation, figure or any other object, including display of any content  in
electronic form shall be deemed to be obscene if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient
interest or if its effect, or (where it comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of any one
of its items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are
likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or
embodied in it.
(2) Whoever—
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any manner puts into
circulation, or for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition or circulation,
makes, produces or has in his possession any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing,
painting, representation or figure or any other obscene object whatsoever in whatever
manner; or
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the purposes
aforesaid, or knowing or having reason to believe that such object will be sold, let to
hire, distributed or publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation; or
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of which he
knows or has reason to believe that any such obscene objects are, for any of the
purposes aforesaid, made produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed,
publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation; or
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person is
engaged or is ready to engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that
any such obscene object can be procured from or through any person; or
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, and, in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years, and also with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Exception.—This section does not extend to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or
figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public
good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting,
representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art or learning or
other objects of general concern; or
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
animal.
Punishment for
public nuisance
in cases not
otherwise
provided for.
Continuance of
nuisance after
injunction to
discontinue.
Sale, etc., of
obscene books,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

77
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented
on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958; or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or
used for any religious purpose.
293. Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or circulates to any child below
the age of eighteen years such obscene object as is referred to in section 292, or offers or
attempts so to do, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, and, in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and also with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees.
294. Whoever, to the annoyance of others,—
(a) does any obscene act in any public place; or
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or words, in or near any
public place,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
295. (1) Whoever keeps any office or place for the purpose of drawing any lottery not
being a State lottery or a lottery authorised by the State Government, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or
with both.
    (2) Whoever publishes any proposal to pay any sum, or to deliver any goods, or to
do or forbear from doing anything for the benefit of any person, on any event or contingency
relative or applicable to the drawing of any ticket, lot, number or figure in any such lottery,
shall be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
CHAPTER  XVI
O
F OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION
296. Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held
sacred by any class of persons with the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any
class of persons or with the knowledge that any class of persons is likely to consider such
destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their religion, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
297. Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings
of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible
representations or through electronic means or otherwise, insults or attempts to insult the
religion or the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
298. Whoever voluntarily causes disturbance to any assembly lawfully engaged in
the performance of religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.
Sale, etc., of
obscene
objects to
child.
Obscene acts
and songs.
Keeping
lottery office.
Injuring or
defiling place
of worship,
with intent to
insult the
religion of any
class.
Deliberate and
malicious acts,
intended to
outrage
religious
feelings of any
class by
insulting its
religion or
religious
beliefs.
Disturbing
religious
assembly.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
24 of 1958.

78
299. Whoever, with the intention of wounding the feelings of any person, or of insulting
the religion of any person or with the knowledge that the feelings of any person are likely to
be wounded, or that the religion of any person is likely to be insulted thereby, commits any
trespass in any place of worship or on any place of sepulture, or any place set apart for the
performance of funeral rites or as a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any
indignity to any human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons assembled for the
performance of funeral ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
300. Whoever, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any
person, utters any word or makes any sound in the hearing of that person or makes any
gesture in the sight of that persons or places any object in the sight of that person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
CHAPTER  XVII
O
F OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
301. (1) Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the
possession of any person without that person’s consent, moves that property in order to
such taking, is said to commit theft.
Explanation 1.—A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable
property, is not the subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of theft as
soon as it is severed from the earth.
Explanation 2.—A moving effected by the same act which effects the severance may
be a theft.
Explanation 3.—A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle
which prevented it from moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by
actually moving it.
Explanation 4.—A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to
move that animal, and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion so caused,
is moved by that animal.
Explanation 5.—The consent mentioned in this sectionmay be express or implied, and
may be given either by the person in possession, or by any person having for that purpose
authority either express or implied.
Illustrations.
(a) A cuts down a tree on Z’s ground, with the intention of dishonestly taking the tree
out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent. Here, as soon as A has severed the tree in order
to such taking, he has committed theft.
(b) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z’s dog to follow it. Here, if
A’s intention be dishonestly to take the dog out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent, A
has committed theft as soon as Z’s dog has begun to follow A.
(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives the bullock in a certain
direction, in order that he may dishonestly take the treasure. As soon as the bullock begins
to move, A has committed theft of the treasure.
(d) A being Z’s servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z’s plate, dishonestly runs
away with the plate, without Z’s consent. A has committed theft.
(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of a warehouse, till Z shall
return. A carries the plate to a goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was not in Z’s possession.
It could not therefore be taken out of Z’s possession, and A has not committed theft, though
he may have committed criminal breach of trust.
Trespassing on
burial places,
etc.
Uttering words,
etc., with
deliberate
intent to
wound religious
feelings.
Theft.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

79
(f) A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z occupies. Here the ring
is in Z’s possession, and if A dishonestly removes it, A commits theft.
(g) A finds a ring lying on the highroad, not in the possession of any person. A, by
taking it, commits no theft, though he may commit criminal misappropriation of property.
(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z’s house. Not venturing to
misappropriate the ring immediately for fear of search and detection,  A hides the ring in a
place where it is highly improbable that it will ever be found by Z, with the intention of taking
the ring from the hiding place and selling it when the loss is forgotten. Here A, at the time of
first moving the ring, commits theft.
(i) A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweler, to be regulated. Z carries it to his shop. A, not
owing to the jeweler any debt for which the jeweler might lawfully detain the watch as a
security, enters the shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z’s hand, and carries it away.
Here A, though he may have committed criminal trespass and assault, has not committed
theft, inasmuch as what he did was not done dishonestly.
(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z retains the watch lawfully as
a security for the debt, and A takes the watch out of Z’s possession, with the intention of
depriving Z of the property as a security for his debt, he commits theft, inasmuch as he takes
it dishonestly.
(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of Z’s possession without
Z’s consent, not having paid what he borrowed on the watch, he commits theft, though the
watch is his own property inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly.
(l) A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent, with
the intention of keeping it until he obtains money from Z as a reward for its restoration. Here
A takes dishonestly; A has therefor committed theft.
(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and takes
away a book without Z’s express consent for the purpose merely of reading it, and with the
intention of returning it. Here, it is probable that A may have conceived that he had Z’s
implied consent to use Z’s book. If this was A’s impression, A has not committed theft.
(n) A asks charity from Z’s wife. She gives A money, food and clothes, which A knows
to belong to Z her husband. Here it is probable that A may conceive that Z’s wife is authorised
to give away alms. If this was A ’s impression, A has not committed theft.
(o) A is the paramour of Z’s wife. She gives a valuable property, which A knows to
belong to her husband Z, and to be such property as she has no authority from Z to give. If
A takes the property dishonestly, he commits theft.
(p) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A ’s own property, takes
that property out of Z’s possession. Here, as A does not take dishonestly, he does not
commit theft.
(2) Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both and  in case of second
or subsequent conviction of any person under this section, he shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend
to five years and with fine:
Provided that in cases of theft where the value of the stolen property is less than five
thousand rupees, and a person is convicted for the first time, shall upon return of the value
of property or restoration of the stolen property, shall be punished with community service.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

80
302. (1) Theft is “snatching” if, in order to commit theft, the offender suddenly or
quickly or forcibly seizes or secures or grabs or takes away from any person or from his
possession any moveable property.
(2) Whoever commits snatching, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
303. Whoever commits theft—
(a) in any building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or used for the
custody of property; or
(b) of any means of transport used for the transport of goods or passengers; or
(c) of any article or goods from any means of transport used for the transport of
goods or passengers; or
(d) of idol or icon in any place of worship; or
(e) of any property of the Government or of a local authority,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
304. Whoever, being a clerk or servant, or being employed in the capacity of a clerk or
servant, commits theft in respect of any property in the possession of his master or employer,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
305. Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or
restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any person, in order to the committing
of such theft, or in order to the effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft, or
in order to the retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations.
 (a) A commits theft on property in Z’s possession; and while committing this theft, he
has a loaded pistol under his garment, having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting
Z in case Z should resist. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A picks Z’s pocket, having posted several of his companions near him, in order that
they may restrain Z, if Z should perceive what is passing and should resist, or should attempt
to apprehend A. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
Of Extortion
306. (1) Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or
to any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any
person any property, or valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted
into a valuable security, commits “extortion”.
Illustrations.
(a) A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless Z gives him money.
He thus induces Z to give him money. A has committed extortion.
(b) A threatens Z that he will keep Z’s child in wrongful confinement, unless Z will sign
and deliver to A a promissory note binding Z to pay certain monies to A. Z sings and delivers
the note. A has committed extortion.
(c) A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z’s field unless Z will sign and deliver
to B a bond binding Z under a penalty to deliver certain produce to B, and thereby induces
Z to signs and deliver the bond. A has committed extortion.
Snatching.
Theft in a
dwelling house,
or means of
transportation
or place of
worship, etc.
Theft by clerk
or servant of
property in
possession of
master.
Theft after
preparation
made for
causing death,
hurt or re-
straint in order
to the commit-
ting of theft.
Extortion.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

81
(d) A, by putting Z in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces Z to sign or
affix his seal to a blank paper and deliver it to A. Z signs and delivers the paper to A.
Here, as the paper so signed may be converted into a valuable security. A has committed
extortion.
(e) A threatens Z by sending a message through an electronic device that “Your child
is in my possession, and will be put to death unless you send me one lakh rupees.” A thus
induces Z to give him money.  A has committed “extortion”.
(2) Whoever commits extortion shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts any person in fear, or attempts
to put any person in fear, of any injury, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any
person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous
hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any
person in fear of an accusation, against that person or any other, of having committed, or
attempted to commit, an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of an accusation against
that person or any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence punishable
with death, or with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, or of having attempted to induce any other person to commit such offence, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of  Robbery and Dacoity
307. (1) In all robbery there is either theft or extortion.
(2) Theft is “robbery” if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the
theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the
offender, for that end voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or
wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
(3) Extortion is “robbery” if the offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in
the presence of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that person in
fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint to that person or to some
other person, and, by so putting in fear, induces the person so put in fear then and there to
deliver up the thing extorted.
Explanation. —The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put the
other person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
Illustrations
(a) A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z’s money and jewels from Z’s clothes,
without Z’s consent. Here A has committed theft, and, in order to the committing of that theft,
has voluntarily caused wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore committed robbery.
Robbery.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

82
(b) A meets Z on the high road, shows a pistol, and demands Z’s purse. Z, in
consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z by putting him in
fear of instant hurt, and being at the time of committing the extortion in his presence. A has
therefore committed robbery.
(c) A meets Z and Z’s child on the high road. A takes the child, and threatens to fling it
down a precipice, unless Z delivers his purse. Z, in consequence, delivers his purse. Here A
has extorted the purse from Z, by causing Z to be in fear of instant hurt to the child who is
there present. A has therefore committed robbery on Z.
(d) A obtains property from Z by saying “Your child is in the hands of my gang, and will
be put to death unless you send us ten thousand rupees”. This is extortion, and punishable
as such: but it is not robbery, unless Z is put in fear of the instant death of his child.
(2) Whoever commits robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery be committed
on the highway between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen
years.
(3) Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) If any person, in committing or in attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily causes
hurt, such person, and any other person jointly concerned in committing or attempting to
commit such robbery, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
308. (1) When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery,
or where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a
robbery, and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or
more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit “dacoity”.
(2) Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
(3) If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits
murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death,
or imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever makes any preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
(5) Whoever is one of five or more persons assembled for the purpose of committing
dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) Whoever belongs to a gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually
committing dacoity, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
309. If, at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly
weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt
to any person, the imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be
less than seven years.
310. If, at the time of attempting to commit robbery or dacoity, the offender is armed
with any deadly weapon, the imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall
not be less than seven years.
Dacoity.
Robbery, or
dacoity, with
attempt to
cause death or
grievous hurt.
Attempt to
commit
robbery or
dacoity when
armed with
deadly weapon.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

83
311. Whoever belongs to any gang of persons associated in habitually committing
theft or robbery, and not being a gang of dacoits, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of Criminal misappropriation of property.
312. Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable
property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than six months but which may extend to two years and with fine.
Illustrations.
(a) A takes property belonging to Z out of Z’s possession, in good faith believing at
the time when he takes it, that the property belongs to himself. A is not guilty of theft; but if
A, after discovering his mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property to his own use, he is
guilty of an offence under this section.
(b) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and takes
away a book without Z’s express consent. Here, if A was under the impression that he had Z’s
implied consent to take the book for the purpose of reading it, A has not committed theft. But,
if A afterwards sells the book for his own benefit, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A and B, being, joint owners of a horse. A takes the horse out of B’s possession,
intending to use it. Here, as A has a right to use the horse, he does not dishonestly
misappropriate it. But, if A sells the horse and appropriates the whole proceeds to his own
use, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
Explanation 1.—A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a misappropriation
within the meaning of this section.
Illustration.
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a blank endorsement.
A, knowing that the note belongs to Z, pledges it with a banker as a security for a loan,
intending at a future time to restore it to Z. A has committed an offence under this section.
Explanation 2.—A person who finds property not in the possession of any other
person, and takes such property for the purpose of protecting it for, or of restoring it to, the
owner, does not take or misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of an offence; but he
is guilty of the offence above defined, if he appropriates it to his own use, when he knows or
has the means of discovering the owner, or before he has used reasonable means to discover
and give notice to the owner and has kept the property a reasonable time to enable the owner
to claim it.
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a case, is a question
of fact.
It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner of the property, or that
any particular person is the owner of it; it is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating it, he
does not believe it to be his own property, or in good faith believe that the real owner cannot
be found.
Illustrations.
(a) A finds a rupee on the high road, not knowing to whom the rupee belongs, A picks
up the rupee. Here A has not committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank note. From the direction and contents
of the letter he learns to whom the note belongs. He appropriates the note. He is guilty of an
offence under this section.
(c) A finds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture as to the person who
has lost the cheque. But the name of the person, who has drawn the cheque, appears. A
Punishment
for belonging
to gang of
robbers,
dacoits, etc.
Dishonest
misappropria-
tion of
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

84
knows that this person can direct him to the person in whose favour the cheque was drawn.
A appropriates the cheque without attempting to discover the owner. He is guilty of an
offence under this section.
(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. A picks up the purse with the intention of
restoring it to Z, but afterwards appropriates it to his own use. A has committed an offence
under this section.
(e) A finds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs; he afterwards discovers
that it belongs to Z, and appropriates it to his own use. A is guilty of an offence under this
section.
(f) A finds a valuable ring, not knowing to whom it belongs. A sells it immediately
without attempting to discover the owner. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
313. Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any property,
knowing that such property was in the possession of a deceased person at the time of that
person’s decease, and has not since been in the possession of any person legally entitled to
such possession, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and if the offender at the time of
such person’s decease was employed by him as a clerk or servant, the imprisonment may
extend to seven years.
Illustration.
Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A, before the money comes
into the possession of any person entitled to such possession, dishonestly misappropriates
it. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
Of Criminal breach of trust
314. (1) Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion
over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or
dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing
the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied,
which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person
so to do, commits “criminal breach of trust”.
Explanation 1.—A person, being an employer of an establishment whether exempted
under section 17 of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions
Act, 1952 or not who deducts the employee’s contribution from the wages payable to the
employee for credit to a Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund established by any law for
the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the
contribution so deducted by him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution
to the said Fund in violation of the said law, shall be deemed to have dishonestly used the
amount of the said contribution in violation of a direction of law as aforesaid.
Explanation 2.—A person, being an employer, who deducts the employees’
contribution from the wages payable to the employee for credit to the Employees’ State
Insurance Fund held and administered by the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation
established under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 shall be deemed to have been
entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by him and if he makes default in
the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation of the said Act, shall be
deemed to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a
direction of law as aforesaid.
Illustrations.
(a) A, being executor to the will of a deceased person, dishonestly disobeys the law
which directs him to divide the effects according to the will, and appropriates them to his
own use. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
Dishonest
misappropria-
tion of
property
possessed by
deceased
person at the
time of his
death.
Criminal
breach of
trust.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
19 of 1952.
34 of 1948.

85
(b) A is a warehouse-keeper Z going on a journey, entrusts his furniture to A, under a
contract that it shall be returned on payment of a stipulated sum for warehouse room. A
dishonestly sells the goods. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(c) A, residing in Kolkata, is agent for Z, residing at Delhi. There is an express or implied
contract between A and Z, that all sums remitted by Z to A shall be invested by A, according
to Z’s direction. Z remits a lakh of rupees to A, with directions to A to invest the same in
Company’s paper. A dishonestly disobeys the directions and employs the money in his own
business. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(d) But if A, in illustration (c), not dishonestly but in good faith, believing that it will be
more for Z’s advantage to hold shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z’s directions, and
buys shares in the Bank of Bengal, for Z, instead of buying Company’s paper, here, though
Z should suffer loss, and should be entitled to bring a civil action against A, on account
of that loss, yet A, not having acted dishonestly, has not committed criminal breach of
trust.
(e) A, a revenue-officer, is entrusted with public money and is either directed by law, or
bound by a contract, express or implied, with the Government, to pay into a certain treasury
all the public money which he holds. A dishonestly appropriates the money. A has committed
criminal breach of trust.
(f) A, a carrier, is entrusted by Z with property to be carried by land or by water. A
dishonestly misappropriates the property. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(2) Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever, being entrusted with property as a carrier, wharfinger or warehouse-
keeper, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of such property, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever, being a clerk or servant or employed as a clerk or servant, and being in
any manner entrusted in such capacity with property, or with any dominion over property,
commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over
property in his capacity of a public servant or in the way of his business as a banker,
merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that
property, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of the Receiving of stolen property
315. (1) Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft or extortion or
robbery or cheating, and property which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of
which criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as “stolen property”,
whether the transfer has been made, or the misappropriation or breach of trust has been
committed, within or without India, but, if such property subsequently comes into the
possession of a person legally entitled to the possession thereof, it then ceases to be stolen
property.
(2) Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having
reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, the possession
whereof he knows or has reason to believe to have been transferred by the commission of
Stolen
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

86
dacoity, or dishonestly receives from a person, whom he knows or has reason to believe to
belong or to have belonged to a gang of dacoits, property which he knows or has reason to
believe to have been stolen, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever habitually receives or deals in property which he knows or has reason to
believe to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or disposing of or making away with
property which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
Of Cheating
316. (1) Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the
person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person
shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do
anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or
omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation
or property, is said to “cheat”.
Explanation.—A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of
this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service, intentionally deceives Z, and
thus dishonestly induces Z to let him have on credit goods for which he does not mean to
pay. A cheats.
(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally deceives Z into a
belief that this article was made by a certain celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly
induces Z to buy and pay for the article. A cheats.
(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article intentionally deceives Z into
believing that the article corresponds with the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to
buy and pay for the article. A cheats.
(d) A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house with which A keeps no
money, and by which A expects that the bill will be dishonoured, intentionally deceives Z,
and thereby dishonestly induces Z to deliver the article, intending not to pay for it. A cheats.
(e) A, by pledging as diamond articles which he knows are not diamonds, intentionally
deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend money. A cheats.
(f) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to repay any money that Z
may lend to him and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend him money, A not intending to
repay it. A cheats.
(g) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to deliver to Z a certain
quantity of indigo plant which he does not intend to deliver, and thereby dishonestly induces
Z to advance money upon the faith of such delivery. A cheats; but if A, at the time of
obtaining the money, intends to deliver the indigo plant, and afterwards breaks his contract
and does not deliver it, he does not cheat, but is liable only to a civil action for breach of
contract.
(h) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A has performed A ’s part of a contract
made with Z, which he has not performed, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to pay money.
A cheats.
Cheating.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

87
(i) A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in consequence of such sale
he has no right to the property, sells or mortgages the same to Z, without disclosing the fact
of the previous sale and conveyance to B, and receives the purchase or mortgage money
from Z. A cheats.
(2) Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful
loss to a person whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating relates, he was
bound, either by law, or by a legal contract, to protect, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver
any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable
security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into
a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
317. (1) A person is said to “cheat by personation” if he cheats by pretending to be
some other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for or another, or representing
that he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really is.
Explanation. —The offence is committed whether the individual personated is a real
or imaginary person.
Illustrations.
(a) A cheats by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the same name. A cheats by
personation.
(b) A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A cheats by personation.
(2) Whoever cheats by personation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Of  fraudulent deeds and dispositions of  property
318. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person,
or transfers or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate consideration, any
property, intending thereby to prevent, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby prevent,
the distribution of that property according to law among his creditors or the creditors of any
other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
319. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt or demand due to himself
or to any other person from being made available according to law for payment of his debt or
the debts of such other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
320. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any
deed or instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge, any property, or any
interest therein, and which contains any false statement relating to the consideration for
such transfer or charge, or relating to the person or persons for whose use or benefit it is
really intended to operate, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Cheating by
personation.
Dishonest or
fraudulent
removal or
concealment
of property to
prevent
distribution
among
creditors.
Dishonestly or
fraudulently
preventing
debt being
available for
creditors.
Dishonest or
fraudulent
execution of
deed of transfer
containing
false statement
of
consideration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

88
321. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently conceals or removes any property of himself
or any other person, or dishonestly or fraudulently assists in the concealment or removal
thereof, or dishonestly releases any demand or claim to which he is entitled, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
Of  Mischief
322. (1) Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful
loss or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any
such change in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or
utility, or affects it injuriously, commits “mischief”.
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the offender should
intend to cause loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or destroyed. It is
sufficient if he intends to cause, or knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage
to any person by injuring any property, whether it belongs to that person or not.
Explanation 2.—Mischief may be committed by an act affecting property belonging
to the person who commits the act, or to that person and others jointly.
Illustrations.
(a) A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z intending to cause wrongful
loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(b) A introduces water in to an ice-house belonging to Z and thus causes the ice to
melt, intending wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(c) A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with the intention of thereby
causing wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in execution in order to satisfy a
debt due from him to Z, destroys those effects, with the intention of thereby preventing Z
from obtaining satisfaction of the debt, and of thus causing damage to Z. A has committed
mischief.
(e) A having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be cast away, with the
intention of causing damage to the underwriters. A has committed mischief.
(f) A cause a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause damage to Z who has lent
money on bottomry on the ship. A has committed mischief.
(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse, intending thereby to
cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(h) Acausescattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, intending to cause and knowing
that he is likely to cause damage to Z’s crop. A has committed mischief.
(2) Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to any property
including the property of Government or Local Authority shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of
twenty thousand rupees and more  but less than one lakh rupees shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
(5) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of
one lakh rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Dishonest or
fraudulent
removal or
concealment
of property.
Mischief.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

89
(6) Whoever commits mischief, having made preparation for causing to any person
death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of wrongful restraint, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
323. Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless
any animal shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
324. Whoever commits mischief  by,––––
(a)  doing any act which causes, or which he knows to be likely to cause, a
diminution of the supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or drink for
human beings or for animals which are property, or for cleanliness or for carrying on
any manufacture, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both;
(b) doing any act which renders or which he knows to be likely to render any
public road, bridge, navigable river or navigable channel, natural or artificial, impassable
or less safe for travelling or conveying property, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with
both;
(c)  doing any act which causes or which he knows to be likely to cause an
inundation or an obstruction to any public drainage attended with injury or damage,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to five years, or with fine, or with both;
(d)  destroying or moving any sign or signal used for navigation of rail, aircraft
or ship or other thing placed as a guide for navigators, or by any act which renders any
such sign or signal less useful as a guide for navigators, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with
fine, or with both;
(e)  destroying or moving any land-mark fixed by the authority of a public servant,
or by any act which renders such land-mark less useful as such, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both;
(f)  fire or any explosive substance intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby cause, damage to any property including agricultural produce,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine;
(g)  fire or any explosive substance, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby cause, the destruction of any building which is ordinarily used as
a place of worship or as a human dwelling or as a place for the custody of property,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
325. (1) Whoever commits mischief to any rail, aircraft, or a decked vessel or any
vessel of a burden of twenty tons or upwards, intending to destroy or render unsafe, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby destroy or render unsafe, that rail, aircraft or
vessel, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever commits, or attempts to commit, by fire or any explosive substance, such
mischief as is described in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for life or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Mischief by
killing or
maiming
animal.
Mischief by
injury,
inundation, fire
or explosive
substance, etc.
Mischief with
intent to
destroy or
make unsafe a
rail, aircraft,
decked vessel
or one of
twenty tons
burden.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

90
326. Whoever intentionally runs any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit
theft of any property contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such property,
or with intent that such theft or misappropriation of property may be committed, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Of criminal trespass
327. (1) Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with
intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of
such property or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains
there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person or with intent to
commit an offenceis said to commit “criminal trespass”.
(2) Whoever commits criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any building,
tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a
place for the custody of property, is said to commit “house-trespass”.
Explanation.—The introduction of any part of the criminal trespasser’s body is entering
sufficient to constitute house-trespass.
(3) Whoever commits criminal trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both.
(4) Whoever commits house-trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both.
328. (1) Whoever commits house-trespass having taken precautions to conceal such
house-trespass from some person who has a right to exclude or eject the trespasser from the
building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is said to commit “lurking house-
trespass”.
(2) A person is said to commit “house-breaking” who commits house-trespass if he
effects his entrance into the house or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter
described; or if, being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of committing an offence,
or having committed an offence therein, he quits the house or any part of it in any of
following ways, namely:––
(a) if he enters or quits through a passage made by himself, or by any abettor of
the house-trespass, in order to the committing of the house-trespass;
(b) if he enters or quits through any passage not intended by any person, other
than himself or an abettor of the offence, for human entrance; or through any passage
to which he has obtained access by scaling or climbing over any wall or building;
(c) if he enters or quits through any passage which he or any abettor of the
house-trespass has opened, in order to the committing of the house-trespass by any
means by which that passage was not intended by the occupier of the house to be
opened;
(d) if he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to the committing of the
house-trespass, or in order to the quitting of the house after a house-trespass;
(e) if he effects his entrance or departure by using criminal force or committing
an assault, or by threatening any person with assault;
(f) if he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to have been fastened
against such entrance or departure, and to have been unfastened by himself or by an
abettor of the house-trespass.
Punishment for
intentionally
running vessel
aground or
ashore with
intent to
commit theft,
etc.
Criminal
trespass and
house-trespass.
House-trespass
and house-
breaking.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

91
Explanation.—Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and between which
and such house there is an immediate internal communication, is part of the house within the
meaning of this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of Z’s house, and
putting his hand through the aperture. This is house-breaking.
(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port-hole between decks.
This is house-breaking.
(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through a window. This is house-
breaking.
(d) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having opened
a door which was fastened. This is house-breaking.
(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having lifted a
latch by putting a wire through a hole in the door. This is house-breaking.
(f) A finds the key of Z’s house door, which Z had lost, and commits house-trespass
by entering Z’s house, having opened the door with that key. This is house-breaking.
(g) Z is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking Z down, and
commits house-trespass by entering the house. This is house-breaking.
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y , is standing in Y’s doorway. A commits house-trespass by
entering the house, having deterred Z from opposing him by threatening to beat him. This is
house-breaking.
329. (1) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before
sunrise, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the
committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to
fine; and if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may
be extended to ten years.
(4) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before
sunrise, in order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years,
and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term
of the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen years.
(5) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass, or house-breaking, having made
preparation for causing hurt to any person, or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully
restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt or of assault or of wrongful
restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description or a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before
sunrise, having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or
of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment for
house-trespass
or house-
breaking.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

92
(7) Whoever, whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, causes
grievous hurt to any person or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(8) If, at the time of the committing of lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after
sunset and before sunrise, any person guilty of such offence shall voluntarily cause or
attempt to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, every person jointly concerned in
committing such lurking house-trespass  or house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
330. Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence––
(a) punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
rigorous imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine;
(b) punishable with imprisonment for life, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the
imprisonment may be extended to seven years.
331. Whoever commits house-trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt to
any person or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for
putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
332. (1) Whoever dishonestly or with intent to commit mischief, breaks open or
unfastens any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to contain property,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever, being entrusted with any closed receptacle which contains or which he
believes to contain property, without having authority to open the same, dishonestly, or with
intent to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens that receptacle, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.
CHAPTER  XVIII
O
F OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS
333. A person is said to make a false document or false electronic record—
  (A) Who dishonestly or fraudulently—
(i) makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part of a document;
(ii) makes or transmits any electronic record or part of any electronic
record;
(iii) affixes any electronic signature on any electronic record;
(iv)makes any mark denoting the execution of a document or the
authenticity of the electronic signature,
with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document or part of document,
electronic record or electronic signature was made, signed, sealed, executed, transmitted or
House-trespass
in order to
commit
offence.
House-trespass
after
preparation for
hurt, assault or
wrongful
restraint.
Dishonestly
breaking open
receptacle
containing
property.
Making a false
document.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

93
affixed by or by the authority of a person by whom or by whose authority he knows that it
was not made, signed, sealed, executed or affixed; or
(B) Who without lawful authority, dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation
or otherwise, alters a document or an electronic record in any material part thereof,
after it has been made, executed or affixed with electronic signature either by himself or
by any other person, whether such person be living or dead at the time of such
alteration; or
(C) Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal, execute or
alter a document or an electronic record or to affix his electronic signature on any
electronic record knowing that such person by reason of mental illness or intoxication
cannot, or that by reason of deception practised upon him, he does not know the
contents of the document or electronic record or the nature of the alteration.
Illustrations.
(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000, written by Z. A, in order to defraud
B, adds cipher to the 10,000, and makes the sum 1,00,000 intending that it may be believed by
B that Z so wrote the letter. A has committed forgery.
(b) A, without Z’s authority, affixes Z’s seal to a document purporting to be a conveyance
of an estate from Z to A, with the intention of selling the estate to B and thereby of obtaining
from B the purchase-money. A has committed forgery.
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payable to bearer, but without any
sum having been inserted in the cheque. A fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the
sum of ten thousand rupees. A commits forgery.
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by A, without inserting the
sum payable and authorises B to fill up the cheque by inserting a sum not exceeding ten
thousand rupees for the purpose of making certain payments. B fraudulently fills up the
cheque by inserting the sum of twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery.
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B’s authority,
intending to discount it as a genuine bill with a banker and intending to take up the bill on its
maturity. Here, as A draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker by leading him to
suppose that he had the security of B, and thereby to discount the bill, A is guilty of forgery.
(f) Z’s will contains these words—“I direct that all my remaining property be equally
divided between A, B and C.” A dishonestly scratches out B’s name, intending that it may be
believed that the whole was left to himself and C. A has committed forgery.
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payable to Z or his order
by writing on the bill the words “Pay to Z or his order” and signing the endorsement. B
dishonestly erases the words “Pay to Z or his order”, and thereby converts the special
endorsement into a blank endorsement. B commits forgery.
(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A afterwards, in order to defraud Z of his estate,
executes a conveyance of the same estate to B, dated six months earlier than the date of the
conveyance to Z, intending it to be believed that he had conveyed the estate to B before he
conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery.
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a different legatee named by Z,
and by representing to Z that he has prepared the will according to his instructions, induces
Z to sign the will. A has committed forgery.
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B’s name without B’s authority, certifying that A is
a man of good character and in distressed circumstances from unforeseen misfortune,
intending by means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. Here, as A made
a false document in order to induce Z to part with property, A has committed forgery.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

94
(k) A without B’s authority writes a letter and signs it in B’s name certifying to A ’s
character, intending thereby to obtain employment under Z. A has committed forgery in as
much as he intended to deceive Z by the forged certificate, and thereby to induce Z to enter
into an express or implied contract for service.
Explanation 1.—A man’s signature of his own name may amount to forgery.
Illustrations.
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed that
the bill was drawn by another person of the same name. A has committed forgery.
(b) A writes the word “accepted” on a piece of paper and signs it with Z’s name, in
order that B may afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and
negotiate the bill as though it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery; and if B,
knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper pursuant to A’s intention, B is also guilty of
forgery.
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the same
name. A endorses the bill in his own name, intending to cause it to be believed that it was
endorsed by the person to whose order it was payable; here A has committed forgery.
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B, after the
seizure of the estate, in collusion with Z, executes a lease of the estate, to Z at a nominal rent
and for a long period and dates the lease six months prior to the seizure, with intent to
defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that the lease was granted before the seizure. B,
though he executes the lease in his own name, commits forgery by antedating it.
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A ’s benefit, and
with intent to defraud his creditors; and in order to give a colour to the transaction, writes a
promissory note binding himself to pay to B a sum for value received, and antedates the
note, intending that it may be believed to have been made before A was on the point of
insolvency. A has committed forgery under the first head of the definition.
Explanation 2.—The making of a false document in the name of a fictious person,
intending it to be believed that the document was made by a real person, or in the name of a
deceased person, intending it to be believed that the document was made by the person in
his lifetime, may amount to forgery.
Illustration.
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictious person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in
the name of such fictitious person with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery.
Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “affixing electronic
signature” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 2
of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
334. (1) Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a
document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any
person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to
enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be
committed, commits forgery.
(2) Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged
shall be used for the purpose of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Forgery.
21 of 2000.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

95
(4) Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged
shall harm the reputation of any party, or knowing that it is likely to be used for that purpose,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
335. Whoever forges a document or an electronic record, purporting to be a record or
proceeding of or in a Court or an identity document issued by Government including voter
identity card or Aadhaar Card, or a register of birth,  marriage or burial, or a register kept by
a public servant as such, or a certificate or document purporting to be made by a public
servant in his official capacity, or an authority to institute or defend a suit, or to take any
proceedings therein, or to confess judgment, or a power of attorney, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “register” includes any list, data or
record of any entries maintained in the electronic form as defined in clause (r) of sub-section (1)
of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
336. Whoever forges a document which purports to be a valuable security or a will, or
an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any person to make or
transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereon, or to
receive or deliver any money, movable property, or valuable security, or any document
purporting to be an acquaintance or receipt acknowledging the payment of money, or an
acquaintance or receipt for the delivery of any movable property or valuable security, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
337. Whoever has in his possession any document or electronic record, knowing the
same to be forged and intending that the same shall fraudulently or dishonestly be used as
genuine, shall, if the document or electronic record is one of the description mentioned in
section 335 of this Sanhita, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the document is one
of the description mentioned in section 336, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
338. (1) A false document or electronic record made wholly or in part by forgery is
designated “a forged document or electronic record”.
(2)Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any document or electronic
record which he knows or has reason to believe to be a forged document or electronic record,
shall be punished in the same manner as if he had forged such document or electronic record.
339. (1) Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making
an impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any
forgery which would be punishable under section 336 of this Sanhita, or, with such intent,
has in his possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be
counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an
impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery
which would be punishable under any section of this Chapter other than section 336, or, with
such intent, has in his possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the
same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever possesses any seal, plate or other instrument knowing the same to be
counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Forgery of
record of
Court or of
public register,
etc.
Forgery of
valuable
security, will,
etc.
Having
possession of
document
described in
section  335 or
336, knowing it
to be forged
and intending
to use it as
genuine.
21 of 2000.
Forged
document or
electronic
record and
using it as
genuine.
Making or
possessing
counterfeit
seal, etc., with
intent to
commit
forgery
punishable
under section
336.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

96
(4) Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any seal, plate or other
instrument knowing or having reason to believe the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished
in the same manner as if he had made or counterfeited such seal, plate or other instrument.
340. (1) Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any material, any device
or mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document described in section 336 of this
Sanhita, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the
appearance of authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such
material, or who, with such intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance
of which any such device or mark has been counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment
for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any material, any device or
mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document or electronic record other than
the documents described in section 336 of this Sanhita, intending that such device or mark
shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of authenticity to any document then
forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who with such intent, has in his
possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has been
counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
341. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury to
the public or to any person, cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to cancel, destroy or
deface, or secretes or attempts to secrete any document which is or purports to be a will, or
an authority to adopt a son, or any valuable security, or commits mischief in respect of such
document, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
342. Whoever, being a clerk, officer or servant, or employed or acting in the capacity
of a clerk, officer or servant, wilfully, and with intent to defraud, destroys, alters, mutilates or
falsifies any book, electronic record, paper, writing, valuable security or account which
belongs to or is in the possession of his employer, or has been received by him for or on
behalf of his employer, or wilfully, and with intent to defraud, makes or abets the making of
any false entry in, or omits or alters or abets the omission or alteration of any material
particular from or in, any such book, electronic record, paper, writing, valuable security or
account, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.– It shall be sufficient in any charge under this section to allege a general
intent to defraud without naming any particular person intended to be defrauded or specifying
any particular sum of money intended to be the subject of the fraud, or any particular day on
which the offence was committed.
Of  Property marks
343. (1) A mark used for denoting that movable property belongs to a particular person
is called a property mark.
(2) Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, package or other
receptacle containing movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other
receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to be
believed that the property or goods so marked, or any property or goods contained in any
such receptacle so marked, belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is said to use a
false property mark.
(3)Whoever uses any false property mark shall, unless he proves that he acted without
intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Counterfeiting
device or
mark used for
authenticating
documents
described in
section 336,
or possessing
counterfeit
marked
material.
Fraudulent
cancellation,
destruction,
etc., of will,
authority to
adopt, or
valuable
security.
Falsification
of accounts.
Property
mark.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

97
344. Whoever removes, destroys, defaces or adds to any property mark, intending or
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury to any person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.
345. (1) Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by any other person shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by a public servant, or any mark
used by a public servant to denote that any property has been manufactured by a particular
person or at a particular time or place, or that the property is of a particular quality or has
passed through a particular office, or that it is entitled to any exemption, or uses as genuine
any such mark knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
346. Whoever makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the
purpose of counterfeiting a property mark, or has in his possession a property mark for the
purpose of denoting that any goods belong to a person to whom they do not belong, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
347. Whoever sells, or exposes, or has in possession for sale, any goods or things
with a counterfeit property mark affixed to or impressed upon the same or to or upon any
case, package or other receptacle in which such goods are contained, shall, unless he proves—
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence
against this section, he had at the time of the commission of the alleged offence no
reason to suspect the genuineness of the mark; and
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the
information in his power with respect to the persons from whom he obtained such
goods or things; or
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine, or with both.
348. (1) Whoever makes any false mark upon any case, package or other receptacle
containing goods, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause any public servant or any
other person to believe that such receptacle contains goods which it does not contain or that
it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained in such
receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real nature or quality thereof, shall,
unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever makes use of any false mark in any manner prohibited under sub-section (1)
shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished as if he had
committed the offence under sub-section (1).
CHAPTER  XIX
O
F CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE, DEFAMATION, ETC.
349. (1) Whoever threatens by any means, another with any injury to his person,
reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is
interested, with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act
which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally
entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits criminal
intimidation.
Tampering
with property
mark with
intent to cause
injury.
Counterfeiting
a property
mark.
Making or
possession of
any instru-
ment for
counterfeiting
a property
mark.
Selling goods
marked with a
counterfeit
property
mark.
Making a false
mark upon
any receptacle
containing
goods.
Criminal
intimidation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

98
Explanation.—A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom the
person threatened is interested, is within this section.
Illustration.
A, for the purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a civil suit, threatens to
burn B’s house. A is guilty of criminal intimidation.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
 (3)  Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by treating to cause death
or grievous hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence
punishable with death or imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years, or to impute unchastity to a woman, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine,
or with both.
(4) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by an anonymous
communication, or having taken precaution to conceal the name or abode of the person from
whom the threat comes, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, in addition to the punishment provided for the offence under
sub-section (1).
350. Whoever intentionally insults in any manner, and thereby gives provocation to
any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause him to break
the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
351. (1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, false information,
rumour, or report, including through electronic means—
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier, sailor or
airman in the Army, Navy or Air Force of India to mutiny or otherwise disregard or fail
in his duty as such; or
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public, or
to any section of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence
against the State or against the public tranquility; or
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of
persons to commit any offence against any other class or community,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
(2) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing false
information, rumour or alarming news, including through electronic means, with intent to
create or promote, or which is likely to create or promote, on grounds of religion, race, place
of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings
of enmity, hatred or ill will between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or
castes or communities shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (2) in any place of worship
or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable
to fine.
Intentional
insult with
intent to
provoke
breach of
peace.
Statements
conducing to
public
mischief.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

99
Exception. —It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning of this section,
when the person making, publishing or circulating any such statement, false information ,
rumour or report, has reasonable grounds for believing that such statement, false information,
rumour or report is true and makes, publishes or circulates it in good faith and without any
such intent as aforesaid.
352. Whoever voluntarily causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything
which that person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he is legally
entitled to do, by inducing or attempting to induce that person to believe that he or any
person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered by some act of the offender
an object of Divine displeasure if he does not do the thing which it is the object of the
offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it is the object of the offender to
cause him to omit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A sits dharna at Z’s door with the intention of causing it to be believed that, by so
sitting, he renders Z an object of Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in
this section.
(b) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will kill one of A ’s own
children, under such circumstances that the killing would be believed to render Z an object
of Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
353. Whoever, in a state of intoxication, appears in any public place, or in any place
which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself in such a manner as to cause
annoyance to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to twenty-four hours, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with
both or with community service.
Of  Defamation
354. (1) Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by
visible representations, makes or publishes in any manner, any imputation concerning any
person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will
harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to
defame that person.
Explanation 1.—It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person,
if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be
hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives.
Explanation  2.—It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a
company or an association or collection of persons as such.
Explanation 3.—An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically,
may amount to defamation.
Explanation 4.—No imputation is said to harm a person’s reputation, unless that
imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual
character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his
calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that
person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful.
Illustrations.
(a) A says— “Z is an honest man; he never stole B’s watch”; intending to cause it to
be believed that Z did steal B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the
exceptions.
(b) A is asked who stole B’s watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed
that Z stole B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
Act caused
by inducing
person to
believe that he
will be rendered
an object of
the Divine
displeasure.
Misconduct in
public by a
drunken
person.
Defamation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

100
(c) A draws a picture of  Z running away with B’s watch, intending it to be believed that
Z stole B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
Exception 1.— It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any
person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether
or not it is for the public good is a question of fact.
Exception 2.— It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever
respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or
respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Exception 3.— It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever
respecting the conduct of any person touching any public question, and respecting his
character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Illustration.
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting Z’s
conduct in petitioning Government on a public question, in signing a requisition for a meeting
on a public question, in presiding or attending at such meeting, in forming or joining any
society which invites the public support, in voting or canvassing for a particular candidate
for any situation in the efficient discharge of the duties of which the public is interested.
Exception 4.––It is not defamation to publish substantially true report of the
proceedings of a Court, or of the result of any such proceedings.
Explanation.—A  Magistrate or other officer holding an enquiry in open Court
preliminary to a trial in a Court, is a Court within the meaning of the above section.
Exception 5.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever
respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court, or
respecting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or
respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appears in that conduct, and
no further.
Illustrations.
(a) A says— “I think Z’s evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be
stupid or dishonest.” A is within this exception if he says this in good faith, inasmuch as the
opinion which he expresses respects Z’s character as it appears in Z’s conduct as a witness,
and no further.
(b) But if A says— “I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to
be a man without veracity”; A is not within this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which
express of Z’s character, is an opinion not founded on Z’s conduct as a witness.
Exception. 6—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the
merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of the public, or
respecting the character of the author so far as his character appears in such performance,
and no further.
Explanation.—A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly
or by acts on the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the
public.
Illustrations.
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public.
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of the
public.
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or singing to
the judgment of the public.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

101
(d) A says of a book published by Z—“Z’s book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z’s
book is indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind.” A is within the exception, if he says this
in good faith, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z’s character only
so far as it appears in Z’s book, and no further.
(e) But if A says “I am not surprised that Z’s book is foolish and indecent, for he is a
weak man and a libertine.” A is not within this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which he
expresses of Z’s character is an opinion not founded on Z’s book.
Exception 7.—It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority,
either conferred by law or arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in
good faith any censure on the conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful authority
relates.
Illustration.
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court;
a head of a department censuring in good faith those who are under his orders, a parent
censuring in good faith a child in the presence of other children; a schoolmaster, whose
authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a pupil in the presence of other
pupils; a master censuring a servant in good faith for remissness in service; a banker censuring
in good faith the cashier of his bank for the conduct of such cashier as such cashier- are
within this exception.
Exception 8.—It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any
person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the
subject-matter of accusation.
Illustration.
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the
conduct of Z, a servant, to Z’s master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a
child, to Z’s father-A is within this exception.
Exception 9.— It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another
provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the
person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business—“Sell nothing to Z unless
he pays you ready money, for I have no opinion of his honesty.” A is within the exception, if
he has made this imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of his own interests.
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior officer, casts an imputation
on the character of Z. Here, if the imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good,
A is within the exception.
Exception 10.— It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person
against another, provided that such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom
it is conveyed, or of some person in whom that person is interested, or for the public good.
(2) Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both or with community service.
(3) Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason to believe
that such matter is defamatory of any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever sells or offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing
defamatory matter, knowing that it contains such matter, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

102
Of  breach of  contract to attend on and supply wants of  helpless person.
355. Whoever, being bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants
of any person who, by reason of youth, or of mental illness, or of a disease or bodily
weakness, is helpless or incapable of providing for his own safety or of supplying his own
wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both.
356. (1) The Indian Penal Code is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Code referred to in sub-section (1), it shall not
affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the Code so repealed or anything duly done or
suffered thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred
under the Code so repealed; or
(c) any penalty, or punishment incurred in respect of any offences committed
against the Code so repealed; or
(d) any investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty, or punishment; or
(e) any proceeding, investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty or
punishment as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and any such penalty may be imposed as if that Code had not
been repealed.
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Code shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of
this Sanhita.
(4) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or
affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act,1897 with regard to the
effect of the repeal.
Breach of
contract to
attend on and
supply wants
of helpless
person.
Repeal and
savings.
45 of 1860.
10 of 1897.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the year 1834, the first Indian Law Commission was constituted under the Chairman-
ship of Lord Thomas Babington Macaulay to examine the jurisdiction, power and rules of the
existing Courts as well as the police establishments and the laws in force in India.
2. The Commission suggested various enactments to the Government. One of the
important recommendations made by the Commission was on, Indian Penal Code which was
enacted in 1860 and the said Code is still continuing in the country with some amendments
made thereto from time to time.
3. The Government of India considered it expedient and necessary to review the
existing criminal laws with an aim to strengthen law and order and also focus on simplifying
legal procedure so that ease of living is ensured to the common man. The Government also
considered to make existing laws relevant to the contemporary situation and provide speedy
justice to common man. Accordingly, various stakeholders were consulted keeping in mind
contemporary needs and aspirations of the people and with a view to create a legal structure
which is citizen centric and to secure life and liberty of the citizens.
4. Now, it is proposed to enact a new law, namely, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill,
2023 by repealing the Indian Penal Code to streamline provisions relating to offences and
penalties. It is proposed to provide first time community service as one of the punishments
for petty offences. The offences against women and children, murder and offences against
the State have been given precedence. The various offences have been made gender neutral.
In order to deal effectively with the problem of organised crimes and terrorist activities, new
offences of terrorist acts and organised crime have been added in the Bill with deterrent
punishments. A new offence on acts of secession, armed rebellion, subversive activities,
separatist activities or endangering sovereignty or unity and integrity of India has also been
added. The fines and punishment for various offences have also been suitably enhanced.
5. The Notes on Clauses explains the various provisions of the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The 9th August, 2023.
103

NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to provide short title, commencement and application of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to define certain words and expressions used in the proposed
legislation such as act, omission, counterfeit, dishonestly, gender, good faith, offence,
voluntarily, etc.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide general explanations and expressions enumerated
in the proposed legislation subject to the exceptions contained in the "General Exceptions",
Chapter.
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide punishments for various offences provided under
the provisions of the proposed Bill.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to empower the appropriate Government to commute the
sentence of death or imprisonment for life.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide fractions of terms of punishment of imprisonment
for life  as equivalent to twenty years unless otherwise provided.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide for sentence which may be either wholly or partly
rigorous or simple.
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to provide for amount of fine in default of payment of fine and
imprisonment in default of payment of fine.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide for the limit of punishment for several offences.
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to provide for lowest  punishment provided for an offence
where it is doubtful among  the commission of several offences.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide  the power to court for solitary confinement.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to provide for limit of  solitary confinement in certain cases.
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to provide for enhanced punishment for certain offences
after previous conviction.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to exempt a person who acts by mistake of fact and not by
mistake of law in good faith believing himself to be bound by law to do it.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to  provide that nothing is an  offence which is done by  a
Judge when acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he
believes to be, given to him by law.
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to  exempt a person  from an offence when acting under a
judgment or order notwithstanding  that the Court had  no jurisdiction to pass such judgment
or order, provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such
jurisdiction.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing is an offence which is done by any
person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a
mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in doing it.
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing is an offence which is done by
accident or misfortune, and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a
lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution.
104

105
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing is an offence merely by reason of its
being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause harm, if it be done without any
criminal intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of preventing or avoiding
other harm to person or property.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to provide  that nothing is an offence which is done by a
child under seven years of age.
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to provide  that nothing is an offence which is done by a
child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of
understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to provide  that nothing is an offence which is done by a
person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of mental illness, is incapable of knowing the
nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to provide  that nothing is an offence which is done by a
person under intoxication unless that the thing which intoxicated him was administered to
him without his knowledge or against his will.
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide  that in cases where an act done is not an offence
unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person who does the act in a state of
intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with as if he had the same knowledge as he would have
had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated him was administered
to him without his knowledge or against his will.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to provide  that nothing is an offence  which is not intendent
to cause death, or grievous hurt when the harm done with consent of a person above
eighteen years of age whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any
harm which it may be known by the doer to be likely to cause to any such person who has
consented to take the risk of that harm.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing is an offence when  the act  not
intended to cause death done by consent in good faith  and for persons' benefit.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to provide that  nothing is an offence when an act is done
in good faith for benefit of child or person with mental illness, by or by consent of guardian.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to provide that  the consent  is not a consent as intended by
the proposed legislation when it is given under fear or misconception or by a person under
twelve years of age.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to provide that  exceptions in sections 21, 22  and 23 do not
extend to acts which are offences independently of any harm which they may cause, or be
intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent, or on
whose behalf the consent is given.
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to provide that  nothing is an offence when  act done in
good faith for benefit of a person without consent if the circumstances are such that it is
impossible for that person to signify consent, or if that person is incapable of giving consent,
and has no guardian or other person in lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to
obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit.
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to provide that no communication made in good faith is an
offence by reason of any harm to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit
of that person.
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing is an offence done by a person
except murder, and offences against the State punishable with death, which is done by a
person who is compelled to do it by threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonably cause
the apprehension that instant death to that person will otherwise be the consequence.

106
 Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing is an offence by reason that it
causes, or that it is intended to cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that
harm is so slight that no person of ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm.
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to provide that  nothing is an offence which is done in the
exercise of the right of private defence.
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to provide that  every person has a right of private defence
of the body and of property subject to the restrictions contained in the Bill.
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing is an offence,  when an act is done
in exercise of right of  private defence,  due to  want of maturity of understanding, the mental
illness or the intoxication of the person doing that act, or by reason of any misconception on
the part of that person, however,  every person has the same right of private defence against
that act which he would have if the act were that offence.
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to provide certain acts against which the  right of private
defence does not extend.
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to provide for certain circumstances where the right of
private defence of the body extends to causing death.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to provides for certain circumstances when the right of
taking private defence extends to causing harm other than death.
  Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to provide that the  right to private defence of the body
starts as soon as reasonable apprehension of danger to the body arises and continues as
long as such apprehension continues.
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to provides for certain circumstances when the right of
private defence of property extends to causing death.
 Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to provide the circumstances when  the right of private
defence of property extends to causing any harm other than death.
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to provide that the right of private defence of property
starts as soon as  reasonable apprehension  of danger to the property commences and
continues  as  long as such apprehension continues.
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to provide that if in the exercise of the right of private
defence against an assault which reasonably causes the apprehension of death and the
defender is so situated that he cannot effectually exercise that right without risk of harm to an
innocent person, his right of private defence extends to the running of that risk.
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to provide the meaning of  abetment to mean that instigation
by any person to do a thing, or engages with one or more other person or persons in any
conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance
of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing, intentionally aids, by any act or
illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to provide that  a person abets an offence, who abets either
the commission of an offence, or the commission of an act which would be an offence, if
committed by a person capable by law of committing an offence with the same intention or
knowledge as that of the abettor.
Clause 47 of the Bill seeks  to provide that a person abets an offence within the
meaning of this Sanhita who, in India, abets the commission of any act without and beyond
India which would constitute an offence if committed in India.
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that a person abets an offence within the
meaning of this Sanhita who, without and beyond India, abets the commission of any act in
India which would constitute an offence if committed in India.

107
Clause 49 of the Bill seeks  to provide  for the punishment of abetment if the act abetted
is committed in consequence and where no express provision is made for its punishment.
Clause 50 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that punishment of abetment if person abetted
does act with different intention from that of abettor.
Clause 51 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that when an Act is abetted and a different act
is done, the abettor is liable for the act done, in the same manner and to the same extent as if
he had directly abetted it,  provided that the act done was a probable consequence of the
abetment, and was committed under the influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in
pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the abetment.
Clause 52 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that if the act for which the abettor is liable under
section 51 is committed in addition to the act abetted, and constitute a distinct offence, the
abettor is liable to punishment for each of the offences.
Clause 53 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that liability of abettor for an effect caused by
the act abetted different from that intended by the abettor.
Clause 54 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that whenever any person, who is absent would
be liable to be punished as an abettor, is present when the act or offence for which he would
be punishable in consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have
committed such act or offence.
Clause 55 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that when no express provision is made under
this Sanhita for the punishment  of abetment relating to an offence punishable with  death or
imprisonment for life, the person shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to
seven years, and  also liable to fine.
Clause 56 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that if the offence abetment is not committed
and no express provision is made for punishment, is shall be punished for imprisonment
provided for that purpose for a term which may extend so one fourth part of the longest term
provided that for that offence or  with fine provided for that offence.
Clause 57 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that whoever abets the commission of an
offence by the public generally or by any number or class of persons exceeding ten, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years
and with fine.
Clause 58 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that concealing design to commit offence
punishable with death or imprisonment for life.
Clause 59 of the Bill seeks  to provide  for punishment to the  public servant for
concealing design of offence and thereby  intending  to facilitate  such offence  which it is his
duty as such public servant to prevent the said offence.
Clause 60 of the Bill seeks  to provide  for punishment  where a person intending to
facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence
punishable with imprisonment, voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the
existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any representation which he knows
to be false respecting such design.
Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to provide that when two or more persons agree to do, or
cause to be done an illegal act, or an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an
agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy.
Clause 62 of the Bill seeks  to provide for punishment for  attempting to commit
offences, which is punishable with imprisonment for life or other imprisonment, for a term
which may extend to  one-half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one half of
the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided
for the offence, or with both.

108
Clause 63 of the Bill seeks  to provide for definition of rape and various circumstances
under which the offence shall be treated as rape.
 Clause 64 of the Bill seeks  to provide for punishment for rape  when committed by
persons such as police officer, public servant, being a member of armed forces,  staff of jail
etc., which may extend to  for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 65 of the Bill seeks  to provide for punishment for rape  in certain cases such as
woman  under sixteen years of age.
Clause 66 of the Bill seeks  to provide for punishment for rape, if in the course of
commission of rape inflicts an injury which causes the death of the woman or causes the
woman to be in a persistent vegetative state, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which
shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, or with death.
Clause 67 of the Bill seeks  to provide  for punishment of a person to two years which
may extend to seven years and also liable for fine if such person commits sexual intercourse
with his own wife during separation whether under a decree of separation or otherwise,
without her consent.
Clause 68 of the Bill seeks  to provide  for punishment of rape, when committed by a
person who is in a position of authority such as public servant, superintendent or manager
of jail, staff under the management of hospital etc., for term which shall not less than five
years but may extend to ten years and also with fine.
Clause 69 of the Bill seeks  to provide  that whoever, by deceitful means or making by
promise to marry to a woman without any intention of fulfilling the same, and has sexual
intercourse with her, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years
and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 70 of the Bill seeks to provide  for punishment for gang rape, by one or more
persons, to rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but
which may extend to life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's
natural life, and with fine and also provide for punishment  for imprisonment for life or with
death when a gang rape is committed with a woman under eighteen years of age.
Clause 71 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for a repeat offender, previously
convicted of an offence punishable under section 63 or section 64 or section 65 or section 66
or section 67 and is subsequently convicted for said sections, with imprisonment for life
which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, or with death.
Clause 72 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment to offender who prints or
publishes, the name or any matter which may make known the identity of any person against
whom an offence under section 63 or section 64 or section 65 or section 66 or section 67 or
section 68 is alleged or found to have been committed (hereafter in this section referred to as
the victim), with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years
and shall also be liable to fine subject to certain conditions.
Clause 73 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for assaults or uses criminal
force, to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will there by
outrage her modesty, with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than one year but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 74 of the Bill seeks to provide punishment for sexual harassment,   such as
physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; or  a
demand or request for sexual favours; or showing pornography against the will of a woman;

109
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both and for  making sexually coloured remarks, with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Clause 75 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever assaults or uses criminal force to
any woman or abets such act with the intention of disrobing or compelling her to be naked,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than three years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 76 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for voyeurism, such as  watching
or capturing the image of a woman engaging in a private act in circumstances where she
would usually have the expectation of not being observed either by the perpetrator or by any
other person, at the behest of the perpetrator or disseminates such image and punishment
thereof.
Clause 77 of the Bill seeks to provide for  stalking such as follows a woman and
contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster personal interaction repeatedly despite
a clear indication of disinterest by such woman; etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 78 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for intending to insult the
modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any
object in any form, intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture or
object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the privacy of such woman, with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine.
Clause 79 of the Bill seeks to provide punishment for dowry death,  which shall be with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life.
Clause 80 of the Bill seeks to provide punishment for cohabitation or sexual intercourse
by a man deceitfully inducing a woman to belief of lawful marriage, with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 81 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever, having a husband or wife living,
marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life
of such husband or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 82 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever, dishonestly or with a fraudulent
intention, goes through the ceremony of being married, knowing that he is not thereby
lawfully married, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 83 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever takes or entices away any woman
who is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of any other man, with
intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any person, or conceals or detains with that
intent any such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Clause 84 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever, being the husband or the relative
of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 85 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for kidnapping abducting or
inducing woman to compel her marriage against her will for illicit intercourse, with an
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 86 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for causing  voluntary miscarriage
if not caused for good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if the woman be
quick with child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

110
Clause 87 of the Bill seeks to provide punishment for  miscarriage without consent of
woman, for a term which may extend to ten years and also for fine.
Clause 88 of the Bill seeks to provide  that punishment whoever, with intent to cause
the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any act which causes the death of such woman,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and when done without the consent of woman with
imprisonment for life or which may extend to ten years or with fine.
Clause 89 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever before the birth of any child does
any act with the intention of thereby preventing that child from being born alive or causing
it to die after its birth, and does by such act prevent that child from being born alive, or
causes it to die after its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of
saving the life of the mother, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both.
Clause 90 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever does any act under such
circumstances, that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of culpable homicide, and
does by such act cause the death of a quick unborn child, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 91 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever being the father or mother of a
child under the age of twelve years, or having the care of such child, shall expose or leave
such child in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning such child, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with
fine, or with both.
Clause 92 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever, by secretly burying or otherwise
disposing of the dead body of a child whether such child die before or after or during its
birth, intentionally conceals or endeavours to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both
Clause 93 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever hires, employs or engages any
person below the age of eighteen years to commit an offence shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description or fine provided for that offence as if the offence has been
committed by such person himself.
Clause 94 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever, by any means whatsoever,
induces any child below the age of eighteen years to go from any place or to do any act with
intent that such child below the age of eighteen years may be, or knowing that it is likely that
such child will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 95 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever kidnaps or abducts any child
under the age of ten years with the intention of taking dishonestly any movable property
from the person of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 96 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise
disposes of child below eighteen years of age with intent that such child shall at any age be
employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for
any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age
be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 97 of the Bill seeks to provide  that whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains
possession of any child  below the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall
at any age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any
person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such child will

111
at any age be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which  may
extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 98 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever causes death by doing an act with
the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely
to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits
the offence of culpable homicide.
Clause 99 of the Bill seeks to provide   various circumstances under which the culpable
homicide is murder.
Clause 100 of the Bill seeks to define culpable homicide by causing death of person
other than person whose death was intended.
Clause 101 of the Bill seeks to provide punishment for murder which shall be death or
imprisonment for life, and also fine. Sub-Clause (2) further provides that when a murder is
committed by  a group of five or more persons acting in concert on the ground of race, caste
or community, sex, place of birth, language,  personal belief or any other ground each member
of such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 102 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever, being under sentence of
imprisonment for life, commits murder, shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for
life, which shall mean the remainder of that person's natural life.
Clause 103 of the Bill seeks to provide the punishment for  culpable homicide not
amounting to murder.
Clause 104 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever causes the death of any person by
doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also
be liable to fine. It further provides that whoever causes death of any person by doing any
rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide and escapes from the scene of
incident or fails to report the incident to a Police officer or Magistrate soon after the incident,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description of a term which may extend to ten
years and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 105 of the Bill seeks to provide that if any person under eighteen years of age,
with mental illness, any delirious person or any person in a state of intoxication, commits
suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Clause 106 of the Bill seeks to provide that if any person commits suicide, whoever
abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Clause 107 of the Bill seeks to provide punishment for attempt to murder and if by that
death is caused, he would be guilty of murder and shall be punished with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years and also for fine and further provides that  if hurt is caused by
such act the punishment shall be imprisonment for life, or with fine, or with both.
 Clause 108 of the Bill seeks to define attempt to commit culpable homicide not
amounting to murder and provides for punishment which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both; and, if hurt is caused to any person by such act, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine,
or with both.
Clause 109 of the Bill seeks to define organised crime to mean that continuing unlawful
activity including kidnapping, robbery, vehicle theft, extortion, land grabbing, contract killing,

112
economic offences, cyber-crimes having severe consequences, trafficking in people, drugs
etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 110 of the Bill  seeks to define petty organised crime as any crime that causes
general feelings of insecurity among citizens relating to theft of vehicle or theft from vehicle,
domestic and business theft, trick theft, cargo crime, theft (attempt to theft, theft of personal
property),etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 111 of the Bill  seeks to  provide that a terrorist act  shall mean  using bombs,
dynamite or other explosive substance to cause damage or loss due to damage or destruction
of property  or to cause extensive interference with, damage or destruction to critical
infrastructure, etc., with the intention to threaten the unity, integrity and security of India, to
intimidate the general public or a segment thereof, or to disturb public order.
Clause 112 of the Bill  seeks to  provide whoever causes bodily pain, disease or
infirmity to any person is said to cause hurt.
Clause 113 of the Bill  seeks to  define voluntarily causing hurt  and punishment
thereof.
Clause 114 of the Bill  seeks to   provide that hurt namely, emasculation, permanent
privation of the sight of either eye, permanent privation of the hearing of either ear privation
of any member or joint, destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or
joint, permanent disfiguration of the head or face, fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth,
and any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be during the space of
fifteen days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits are grievous hurt.
Clause 115 of the Bill  seeks to   define voluntarily causing  grievous hurt  and
punishment thereof.
Clause 116 of the Bill  seeks to  define voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt by
dangerous weapons or means and punishment thereof.
Clause 117 of the Bill  seeks to  define voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to
extort property, or to constrain to an illegal to an act and punishment thereof.
Clause 118 of the Bill  seeks to  define voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to
extort confession, or to compel restoration of property and punishment thereof.
Clause 119 of the Bill  seeks to  define voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to
deter public servant from his duty and punishment thereof.
Clause 120 of the Bill  seeks to  define voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt on
provocation and punishment thereof.
Clause 121 of the Bill  seeks to  define causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with
intent to commit an offence  and punishment thereof.
Clause 122 of the Bill  seeks to  define voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid,
etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 123 of the Bill  seeks to  define act endangering life or personal safety of others
and punishment thereof.
Clause 124 of the Bill  seeks to  define wrongful restraint and punishment thereof.
Clause 125 of the Bill  seeks to  define wrongful confinement and punishment thereof
.Clause 126 of the Bill  seeks to  define  force.
Clause 127 of the Bill  seeks to  define  criminal force.
 Clause 128 of the Bill  seeks to  define assault.
Clause 129 of the Bill  seeks to  provide punishment for assault or criminal force
otherwise than on grave provocation.

113
Clause 130 of the Bill  seeks to  provide punishment for assault or criminal force to
deter public servant from discharge of his duty.
Clause 131 of the Bill  seeks to  provide punishment for assault or criminal force with
intent to dishonour person, otherwise than on grave provocation.
Clause 132 of the Bill  seeks to  provide punishment assault or criminal force in attempt
to commit theft of property carried by a person.
Clause 133 of the Bill  seeks to  provide punishment assault or criminal force in attempt
wrongfully to confine a person.
Clause 134 of the Bill  seeks to  provide punishment assault or criminal force on grave
provocation.
Clause 135 of the Bill  seeks to  define kidnapping and punishment thereof.
Clause 136 of the Bill  seeks to  provide that whoever by force compels, or by any
deceitful means induces, any person to go from any place, is said to abduct that person.
Clause 137 of the Bill  seeks to  define  kidnapping or maiming a child for purposes of
begging and punishment thereof.
Clause 138 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for kidnapping or abducting in order to murder
or for ransom, etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 139 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for importation of girl or boy from foreign
country and punishment thereof.
Clause 140 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for wrongfully concealing or keeping in
confinement, kidnapped or abducted person punishment thereof.
Clause 141 of the Bill  seeks to  provide  for trafficking of person and punishment
thereof.
Clause 142 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for exploitation of a trafficked person and
punishment thereof.
Clause 143 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for habitual dealing in slaves and punishment
thereof.
 Clause 144 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for unlawful compulsory labour  and punishment
thereof.
 Clause 145 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for waging, or attempting to wage war, or
abetting waging of war, against the Government of India  and punishment thereof.
Clause 146 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for conspiracy to commit offences punishable
by section 145 and punishment thereof.
Clause 147 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for collecting arms, etc., with intention of
waging war against the Government of India and punishment thereof.
Clause 148 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for concealing with intent to facilitate design
to wage war and punishment thereof.
Clause 149 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for assaulting President, Governor, etc., with
intent to compel or restrain the exercise of any lawful power and punishment thereof.
Clause 150 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for acts endangering  sovereignty unity and
integrity of India and punishment thereof.
Clause 151 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for waging war against Government of any
foreign State at peace with the Government of India and punishment thereof.
Clause 152 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for  committing depredation on territories of
foreign State at peace with the Government of India and punishment thereof.

114
Clause 153 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for  receiving property taken by war or
depredation mentioned in sections 151 and 152 and punishment thereof.
Clause 154 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for  public servant voluntarily allowing
prisoner of state or war to escape  and punishment thereof.
Clause 155 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for  public servant negligently suffering such
prisoner to escape  and punishment thereof.
Clause 156 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for  aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring
such prisoner and punishment thereof.
Clause 157 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for  abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce
a soldier, sailor or airman from his duty and punishment thereof.
Clause 158 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for  abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed
in consequence thereof and punishment thereof.
Clause 159 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for  abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or
airman on his superior officer, when in execution of his office and punishment thereof.
Clause 160 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for   abetment of such assault, if the assault
committed and punishment thereof.
Clause 161 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for   abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or
airman and punishment thereof.
Clause 162 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for   harbouring deserter and punishment
thereof.
Clause 163 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for deserter concealed on board merchant
vessel through negligence of master and punishment thereof.
Clause 164 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for abetment of act of insubordination by
soldier, sailor or airman  and punishment thereof.
Clause 165 of the Bill  seeks to  provide that no person subject to the Army Act, 1950,
the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934, the Air Force Act, 1950, shall be subject to punishment
under the Bill for any of the offences defined under Chapter VIII.
Clause 166 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for wearing garb or carrying token used by
soldier, sailor or airman and punishment thereof.
Clause 167 of the Bill  seeks to  define "candidate"  and "electoral right".
Clause 168 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for bribery.
Clause 169 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for undue influence at elections.
Clause 170 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for personation at elections.
Clause 171 of the Bill  seeks to  provide punishment for bribery.
Clause 172 of the Bill  seeks to  provide punishment for undue influence or personation
at an election.
Clause 173 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for false statement in connection with an
election and punishment thereof.
Clause 174 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for illegal payments in connection with an
election and punishment thereof.
Clause 175 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for failure to keep election account and
punishment thereof.
Clause 176 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for counterfeiting coin, government stamps,
currency-notes or bank-notes and punishment thereof.

115
Clause 177 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for using as genuine, forged or counterfeit
coin, Government stamp, currency-notes or bank-notes and punishment thereof.
Clause 178 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for possession of forged or counterfeit coin,
Government stamp, currency-notes or bank-notes and punishment thereof.
Clause 179 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for making or possessing instruments
or materials for forging or counterfeiting coin, Government stamp, currency notes or
bank-notes and punishment thereof.
Clause 180 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for making or using documents resembling
currency-notes or bank-notes and punishment thereof.
Clause 181 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for effacing writing from substance bearing
Government stamp, or removing from document a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss
to Government and punishment thereof.
Clause 182 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for using Government stamp known to have
been before used and punishment thereof.
Clause 183 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for erasure of mark denoting that stamp has
been used and punishment thereof.
Clause 184 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for prohibition of fictitious stamps  and
punishment thereof.
Clause 185 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for person employed in mint causing coin to be
of different weight or composition from that fixed by law and punishment thereof.
Clause 186 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for unlawfully taking coining instrument from
mint and punishment thereof.
Clause 187 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for unlawful assembly and punishment thereof.
Clause 188 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for every member of unlawful assembly guilty
of offence committed in prosecution of common object.
Clause 189 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for rioting and punishment thereof.
Clause 190 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for want only giving provocation with intent
to cause riot- if rioting be committed; if not committed and punishment thereof.
Clause 191 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for liability of owner, occupier, etc., of land on
which an unlawful assembly or riot takes place and punishment thereof.
Clause 192 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for affray and punishment thereof.
Clause 193 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for assaulting or obstructing public servant
when suppressing riot, etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 194 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for promoting enmity between different groups
on ground of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial
to maintenance of harmony and punishment thereof.
Clause 195 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for imputations, assertions prejudicial to
national integration and punishment thereof.
Clause 196 of the Bill  seeks to  provide for public servant disobeying law, with intent
to cause injury to any person  and punishment thereof.
Clause 197 of the Bill seeks to provide for public servant disobeying direction under
law and punishment thereof.
Clause 198 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for non-treatment of victim and
punishment thereof.

116
Clause 199 of the Bill seeks to provide for public servant framing an incorrect document
with intent to cause injury and punishment thereof.
Clause 200 of the Bill seeks to provide for public servant unlawfully engaging in trade
and punishment thereof.
Clause 201 of the Bill seeks to provide for public servant unlawfully buying or bidding
for property and punishment thereof.
Clause 202 of the Bill seeks to provide for personating a public servant and punishment
thereof.
Clause 203 of the Bill seeks to provide for wearing garb or carrying token used by
public servant with fraudulent intent and punishment thereof.
Clause 204 of the Bill seeks to provide for absconding to avoid service of summons or
other proceeding and punishment thereof.
Clause 205 of the Bill seeks to provide for preventing service of summons or other
proceeding, or preventing publication thereof and punishment thereof
Clause 206 of the Bill seeks to provide for non-attendance in obedience to an order
from public servant and punishment thereof.
Clause 207 of the Bill seeks to provide for non-appearance in response to a proclamation
under section 84 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and punishment thereof.
Clause 208 of the Bill seeks to provide for omission to produce document to public
servant by person legally bound to produce it and punishment thereof.
Clause 209 of the Bill seeks to provide for omission to give notice or information to
public servant by person legally bound to give it and punishment thereof.
Clause 210 of the Bill seeks to provide for furnishing false information and punishment
thereof.
Clause 211 of the Bill seeks to provide for refusing oath or affirmation when duly
required by public servant to make it and punishment thereof.
Clause 212 of the Bill seeks to provide for refusing to answer public servant authorised
to question and punishment thereof.
Clause 213 of the Bill seeks to provide for refusing to sign statement and punishment
thereof.
Clause 214 of the Bill seeks to provide for false statement on oath or affirmation to
public servant or person authorised to administer an oath or affirmation and punishment
thereof.
Clause 215 of the Bill seeks to provide for false information, with intent to cause public
servant to use his lawful power to the injury of another person and punishment thereof.
Clause 216 of the Bill seeks to provide for resistance to the taking of property by the
lawful authority of a public servant and punishment thereof.
Clause 217 of the Bill seeks to provide for obstructing sale of property offered for sale
by authority of public servant and punishment thereof.
Clause 218 of the Bill seeks to provide for illegal purchase or bid for property offered
for sale by authority of public servant and punishment thereof.
Clause 219 of the Bill seeks to provide for obstructing public servant in discharge of
public functions and punishment thereof.
Clause 220 of the Bill seeks to provide for omission to assist public servant when
bound by law to give assistance and punishment thereof.

117
Clause 221 of the Bill seeks to provide for disobedience to order duly promulgated by
public servant and punishment thereof.
Clause 222 of the Bill seeks to provide for threat of injury to public servant and
punishment thereof.
Clause 223 of the Bill seeks to provide for threat of injury to induce person to refrain
from applying for protection to public servant and punishment thereof.
Clause 224 of the Bill seeks to provide for attempt to commit suicide to compel or
restraint exercise of lawful power and punishment thereof.
Clause 225 of the Bill seeks to provide for giving false evidence.
Clause 226 of the Bill seeks to provide for fabricating false evidence.
Clause 227 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for false evidence.
Clause 228 of the Bill seeks to provide for giving or fabricating false evidence with
intent to procure conviction of capital offence and punishment thereof.
Clause 229 of the Bill seeks to provide for giving or fabricating false evidence with
intent to procure conviction of offence punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment
and punishment thereof.
Clause 230 of the Bill seeks to provide for threatening any person to give false evidence
and punishment thereof.
Clause 231 of the Bill seeks to provide for using evidence known to be false and
punishment thereof.
Clause 232 of the Bill seeks to provide for issuing or signing false certificate and
punishment thereof.
Clause 233 of the Bill seeks to provide for using as true a certificate known to be false
and punishment thereof.
Clause 234 of the Bill seeks to provide for false statement made in declaration which is
by law receivable as evidence and punishment thereof.
Clause 235 of the Bill seeks to provide for using as true such declaration knowing it to
be false and punishment thereof.
Clause 236 of the Bill seeks to provide for causing disappearance of evidence of
offence, or giving false information to screen offender and punishment thereof.
Clause 237 of the Bill seeks to provide for intentional omission to give information of
offence by person bound to inform and punishment thereof.
Clause 238 of the Bill seeks to provide for giving false information respecting an
offence committed and punishment thereof.
Clause 239 of the Bill seeks to provide for destruction of document to prevent its
production as evidence and punishment thereof.
Clause 240 of the Bill seeks to provide for false personation for purpose of act or
proceeding in suit or prosecution and punishment thereof.
Clause 241 of the Bill seeks to provide for fraudulent removal or concealment of
property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution and punishment thereof.
Clause 242 of the Bill seeks to provide for fraudulent claim to property to prevent its
seizure as forfeited or in execution and punishment thereof.
Clause 243 of the Bill seeks to provide for fraudulently suffering decree for sum not
due and punishment thereof.

118
Clause  244 of the Bill seeks to provide for dishonestly making false claim in Court and
punishment thereof.
Clause 245 of the Bill seeks to provide for fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not
due and punishment thereof.
Clause 246 of the Bill seeks to provide for false charge of offence made with intent to
injure and punishment thereof.
Clause 247 of the Bill seeks to provide for harbouring offender and punishment thereof.
Clause 248 of the Bill seeks to provide for taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from
punishment and punishment thereof.
Clause 249 of the Bill seeks to provide for offering gift or restoration of property in
consideration of screening offender and punishment thereof.
Clause 250 of the Bill seeks to provide for taking gift to help to recover stolen property,
etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 251 of the Bill seeks to provide for harbouring offender who has escaped from
custody or whose apprehension has been ordered and punishment thereof.
Clause 252 of the Bill seeks to provide for penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits
and punishment thereof.
Clause 253 of the Bill seeks to provide for public servant disobeying direction of law
with intent to save person from punishment or property from forfeiture and punishment
thereof.
Clause 254 of the Bill seeks to provide for public servant framing incorrect record or
writing with intent to save person from punishment or property from forfeiture and punishment
thereof.
Clause 255 of the Bill seeks to provide for public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly
making report, etc., contrary to law and punishment thereof.
Clause 256 of the Bill seeks to provide for commitment for trial or confinement by
person having authority who knows that he is acting contrary to law and punishment thereof.
Clause 257 of the Bill seeks to provide for intentional omission to apprehend on the
part of public servant bound to apprehend and punishment thereof.
Clause 258 of the Bill seeks to provide for intentional omission to apprehend on the
part of public servant bound to apprehend person under sentence or lawfully committed and
punishment thereof.
Clause 259 of the Bill seeks to provide for escape from confinement or custody
negligently suffered by public servant and punishment thereof.
Clause 260 of the Bill seeks to provide for resistance or obstruction by a person to his
lawful apprehension and punishment thereof.
Clause 261 of the Bill seeks to provide for resistance or obstruction to lawful
apprehension of another person and punishment thereof.
Clause 262 of the Bill seeks to provide for omission to apprehend, or sufferance of
escape, on part of public servant, in cases not otherwise, provided for and punishment
thereof.
Clause 263 of the Bill seeks to provide for resistance or obstruction to lawful
apprehension or escape or rescue in cases not otherwise provided for and punishment
thereof.
Clause 264 of the Bill seeks to provide for violation of condition of remission of
punishment and punishment thereof.

119
Clause 265 of the Bill seeks to provide for intentional insult or interruption to public
servant sitting in judicial proceeding and punishment thereof.
Clause 266 of the Bill seeks to provide for personation of an assessor and punishment
thereof.
Clause 267 of the Bill seeks to provide for failure by person released on bail or bond to
appear in court and punishment thereof.
Clause 268 of the Bill seeks to provide for public nuisance.
Clause 269 of the Bill seeks to provide for negligent act likely to spread infection of
disease dangerous to life and punishment thereof.
Clause 270 of the Bill seeks to provide for malignant act likely to spread infection of
disease dangerous to life and punishment thereof.
Clause 271 of the Bill seeks to provide for disobedience to quarantine rule and
punishment thereof.
Clause 272 of the Bill seeks to provide for adulteration of food or drink intended for
sale and punishment thereof.
Clause 273 of the Bill seeks to provide for sale of noxious food or drink and punishment
thereof.
Clause 274 of the Bill seeks to provide for adulteration of drugs and punishment
thereof.
Clause 275 of the Bill seeks to provide for sale of adulterated drugs and punishment
thereof.
Clause 276 of the Bill seeks to provide for sale of drug as a different drug or preparation
and punishment thereof.
Clause 277 of the Bill seeks to provide for fouling water of public spring or reservoir
and punishment thereof.
Clause 278 of the Bill seeks to provide for making atmosphere noxious to health and
punishment thereof.
Clause 279 of the Bill seeks to provide for rash driving or riding on a public way and
punishment thereof.
Clause 280 of the Bill seeks to provide for rash navigation of vessel and punishment
thereof.
Clause 281 of the Bill seeks to provide for exhibition of false light, mark or buoy and
punishment thereof.
Clause 282 of the Bill seeks to provide for conveying person by water for hire in unsafe
or overloaded vessel and punishment thereof.
Clause 283 of the Bill seeks to provide for danger or obstruction in public way or line
of navigation and punishment thereof.
Clause 284 of the Bill seeks to provide for negligent conduct with respect to poisonous
substance and punishment thereof.
Clause 285 of the Bill seeks to provide for negligent conduct with respect to fire or
combustible matter and punishment thereof.
Clause 286 of the Bill seeks to provide for negligent conduct with respect to explosive
substance and punishment thereof.
Clause 287 of the Bill seeks to provide for negligent conduct with respect to machinery
and punishment thereof.

120
Clause 288 of the Bill seeks to provide for negligent conduct with respect to pulling
down, repairing or constructing buildings, etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 289 of the Bill seeks to provide for negligent conduct with respect to animal
and punishment thereof.
Clause 290 of the Bill seeks to provide punishment for public nuisance in cases not
otherwise provided for.
Clause 291 of the Bill seeks to provide for continuance of nuisance after injunction to
discontinue and punishment thereof.
Clause 292 of the Bill seeks to provide for sale, etc., of obscene books, etc., and
punishment thereof.
Clause 293 of the Bill seeks to provide for sale, etc., of obscene objects to  child and
punishment thereof.
Clause 294 of the Bill seeks to provide for obscene acts and songs and punishment
thereof.
Clause 295 of the Bill seeks to provide for keeping lottery office and punishment
thereof.
Clause 296 of the Bill seeks to provide for injuring or defiling place of worship, with
intent to insult the religion of any class and punishment thereof.
Clause 297 of the Bill seeks to provide for deliberate and malicious acts, intended to
outrage religious feelings of any class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs and
punishment thereof.
Clause 298 of the Bill seeks to provide for disturbing religious assembly and punishment
thereof.
Clause 299 of the Bill seeks to provide for trespassing on burial places, etc., and
punishment thereof.
Clause 300 of the Bill seeks to provide for uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to
wound religious feelings and punishment thereof.
Clause 301 of the Bill seeks to define the offence theft and punishment thereof.
Clause 302 of the Bill seeks to define the offence snatching and punishment thereof.
Clause 303 of the Bill seeks to provide for theft in a dwelling house, or means of
transportation or place of worship, etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 304 of the Bill seeks to provide for theft by clerk or servant of property in
possession of master and punishment thereof.
Clause 305 of the Bill seeks to provide for theft after preparation made for causing
death, hurt or restraint in order to the committing of theft and punishment thereof.
Clause 306 of the Bill seeks to define the offence extortion and punishment thereof.
Clause 307 of the Bill seeks to define the offence robbery and punishment thereof.
Clause 308 of the Bill seeks to define the offence dacoity and punishment thereof.
Clause 309 of the Bill seeks to provide for robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause
death or grievous hurt and punishment thereof.
Clause 310 of the Bill seeks to provide for attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when
armed with deadly weapon and punishment thereof.

121
Clause 311 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for belonging to gang of
robbers, dacoits, etc.
Clause 312 of the Bill seeks to provide for dishonest misappropriation of property and
punishment thereof.
Clause 313 of the Bill seeks to provide for dishonest misappropriation of property
possessed by deceased person at the time of his death and punishment thereof.
Clause 314 of the Bill seeks to provide for criminal breach of trust  under various
circumstances and punishment thereof.
Clause 315 of the Bill seeks to define stolen property and  punishment thereof if
received  under various circumstances.
Clause 316 of the Bill seeks to define cheating and punishment thereof.
Clause 317 of the Bill seeks to define cheating by personation and punishment thereof.
Clause 318 of the Bill seeks to provide for dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property to prevent distribution among creditors and punishment thereof.
Clause 319 of the Bill seeks to provide for dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt
being available for creditors and punishment thereof.
Clause 320 of the Bill seeks to provide for dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of
transfer containing false statement of consideration and punishment thereof.
Clause 321 of the Bill seeks to provide for dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property and punishment thereof.
Clause 322 of the Bill seeks to define mischief and punishment thereof.
Clause 323 of the Bill seeks to provide for mischief by killing or maiming animal and
punishment thereof.
Clause 324 of the Bill seeks to provide for mischief by injury, inundation, fire or
explosive substance, etc., and punishment thereof.
Clause 325 of the Bill seeks to provide for mischief with intent to destroy or make
unsafe a rail, aircraft, decked vessel or one of twenty tons burden and punishment thereof.
Clause 326 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for intentionally running vessel
aground or ashore with intent to commit theft, etc. and punishment thereof.
Clause 327 of the Bill seeks to provide for criminal trespass and house-trespass and
punishment thereof.
Clause 328 of the Bill seeks to provide for house-trespass and house-breaking.
Clause 329 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for house-trespass or house
breaking and punishment thereof.
Clause 330 of the Bill seeks to provide for house-trespass in order to commit offence
and punishment thereof.
Clause 331 of the Bill seeks to provide for house-trespass after preparation for hurt,
assault or wrongful restraint and punishment thereof.
Clause 332 of the Bill seeks to define dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing
property.
Clause 333 of the Bill seeks to define making a false document.
Clause 334 of the Bill seeks to provide for forgery and punishment thereof.
Clause 335 of the Bill seeks to provide for forgery of record of Court or of public
register, etc. and punishment thereof.

122
Clause 336 of the Bill seeks to provide for forgery of valuable security, will, etc., and
punishment thereof.
Clause 337 of the Bill seeks to provide for having possession of document specified in
section  335 or 336, knowing it to be forged and intending to use it as genuine and punishment
thereof.
Clause 338 of the Bill seeks to provide for forged document or electronic record and
using it as genuine and punishment thereof.
Clause 339 of the Bill seeks to provide for making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc.,
with intent to commit forgery punishable under section 336 and punishment thereof.
Clause 340 of the Bill seeks to provide for counterfeiting device or mark used for
authenticating documents described in section 336, or possessing counterfeit marked material
and punishment thereof.
Clause 341 of the Bill seeks to provide for fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of
will, authority to adopt, or valuable security and punishment thereof.
Clause 342 of the Bill seeks to provide for falsification of accounts and punishment
thereof.
Clause 343 of the Bill seeks to provide for property mark and punishment thereof.
Clause 344 of the Bill seeks to provide for tampering with property mark with intent to
cause injury and punishment thereof.
Clause 345 of the Bill seeks to provide for counterfeiting a property mark and punishment
thereof.
Clause 346 of the Bill seeks to provide for making or possession of any instrument for
counterfeiting a property mark and punishment thereof.
Clause 347 of the Bill seeks to provide for selling goods marked with a counterfeit
property mark and punishment thereof.
Clause 348 of the Bill seeks to provide for making a false mark upon any receptacle
containing goods and punishment thereof.
Clause 349 of the Bill seeks to provide for criminal intimidation and punishment thereof.
Clause 350 of the Bill seeks to provide for intentional insult with intent to provoke
breach of peace and punishment thereof.
Clause 351 of the Bill seeks to provide for statements conducing to public mischief
and punishment thereof.
Clause 352 of the Bill seeks to provide for act caused by inducing person to believe
that he will be rendered an object of the divine displeasure and punishment thereof.
Clause 353 of the Bill seeks to provide for misconduct in public by a drunken person
and punishment thereof.
Clause 354 of the Bill seeks to define defamation and punishment thereof.
Clause 355 of the Bill seeks to provide for breach of contract to attend on and supply
wants of helpless person and punishment thereof.
Clause 356 of the Bill seeks to provide for repeal and savings of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, if enacted, is not likely to involve any expenditure,
either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
123

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the provisions relating to offences and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation )
MGIPMRND—278LS—10.08.2023.

Annexure-II 
List of Domain Experts 
1.  Shri Praveen Sinha, Ex-Special Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
2.  Dr. Padmini Singh, Joint Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 
3.  Smt. Anupama Nilekar Chandra, Additional Director General (ADG), Bureau of 
Police Research & Development (BPR&D) 
4.  Dr. Vikram Singh, Former Director General of Police (DGP) 
5.  Prof. Naveen Chaudhary, National Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat 
6.  Ms. Sonia Mathur, Senior Advocate 
7.  Shri Jagdish Rana, Advocate 
8.  Shri Anand Dey, Advocate 
9.  Dr. Pinky Anand, Senior Advocate and Former Additional Solicitor General of India 
10.  Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi, Chairman, Law Commission of India 
11.  Dr. Adish C. Aggarwala, Senior Advocate, President, Supreme Court Bar Association 
12.  Justice (Retd.) Satish Chandra 
13.  Shri Utkarsh Sharma, Advocate 
14.  Shri K.L. Janjani, Senior Advocate 
15.  Shri Sanjeev Deshpande, Senior Advocate 
16.  Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa, Former Vice-Chancellor, National Academy of Legal 
Studies and Research (NALSAR) 
17.  Dr. Aditya Sondhi, Senior Advocate  
18.  Shri Amit Desai, Senior Advocate 
19.  Shri Priyank Kanoongo, Chairperson, National Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights (NCPCR) 
 