PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
  
EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
LOKPAL BILL, 2001 
  
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 31ST DECEMBER, 2001) 
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 31ST DECEMBER, 2001) 
  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA ON 7TH MARCH, 2002) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26TH FEBRUARY, 2002) 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2001/PAUSA, 1923 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
  
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2001)                                                        
  
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                             
3.         REPORT                                                                                                                         
  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMEDNATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
                                                                                                                                                    
5.         RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                  
  
6.          ANNEXURE 
  
I           The Lokpal Bill, 2001                                                                            
  
            II          The Chronological events indicating the various Lokpal Bills introduced in the Lok 
Sabha                                                            
  
            III        Amendments moved by Shri Anadi Sahu, M.P. (LS) and Member of the 
Committee                                                                               
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2001) 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukher
jee-   Chairman
Page 1 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

            RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3.         Shri Hiphei 
4.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh 
5.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
6.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
7.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
8.         Shri K.M, Saifullah 
9.         Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
φ 10.    Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
11.       Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
12.       Shri Drupad Borgohain 
13.       Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
* 14.    Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta 
15.       Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
©16.    Shri Pritish Nandy 
®17.    Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
            
LOK SABHA 
18.       Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
19.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
 ♠20.                                              Shrimati  Nisha Chaudhary 
**21.                                              Shri Samar Chaudhary 
22.       Shri M.O.H. Farook 
# 23.    Shri Vijay Goel 
24.       Shri Rajen Gohain  
25.       Shri  Suresh Ramrao Jadhav 
26.       Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.       Shri Arun Kumar 
28.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
29.       Shri P.H. Pandian 
30.       Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel 
31.       Shri Shriniwas Patil 
   ***32.                                        Shri Jitendra Prasada 
33.       Shri Subodh Ray 
34..      Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
35.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
____________________________________________________________________ 
φ     Ceased  to be Member   w.e.f. 1 March, 2001. 
*     Ceased to be Member w.e.f 14 June, 2001 on expiry of term as Member of Rajya Sabha. 
©    Nominated w.e.f. 3 August,  2001. 
®    Nominated w.e.f. 20 August, 2001. 
♠    Expired on 30 January,2001. 
**   Expired on  10 September, 2001. 
#    Ceased to be Member w.e.f 1 September,  2001 on being appointed Minister. 
*** Expired on 16 January, 2001. 
36.       Shri Anadi  Sahu 
37.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
38.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
39.       Shri Ra
ghuraj Singh Shakya 
Page 2 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

$ 40.    Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma 
41.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
42.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
43.       Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi  
φ 44.   Dr. S. Venugopal 
45.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma 
46.       Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha 
   ♦ 47.                Shri  Harin Pathak 
   ♥ 48.                Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
##49.               Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil 
  
SECRETARIAT
 
  
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
$   Expired on 27 November, 2001. 
φ   Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19 March, 2001 on being nominated to Committee on  Human Resource 
Development. 
♦  Ceased to be Member  w.e.f 15  October, 2001on being appointed as Minister. 
♥  Nominated w.e.f. 8 March, 2001. 
## Nominated w.e.f. 21 November 2001. 
INTRODUCTION 
            I, the Chairman of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Home Affairs 
having been authorised by the Co mmittee to submit the Report on its behalf, do he reby present this
Eighty-fourth Report of the Committee on the Lokpal Bill, 2001*.  
2.         In pursuance of the Rules relati ng to the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sa bha in consultation with the Sp eaker, Lok Sabha referred ** the
Lokpal Bill, 2001, as introduced in the Lok Sabha  on 14 August, 2001 and pe nding therein, to the
Committee for examination and report. 
3.0       The Committee considered the Bill in six sittings held on 15 and 19 October, 1 November and 4,
11 and 19 December 2001. 
3.1       The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions in its sitting held on 15 October 2001. 
3.2       In its sittings held on 19 October, 1 November and 4 and 11 December 2001, the Committee had
internal deliberations on the various provisions of the Bill. 
3.3       In its sitting held on 11 December 2001, the Committee took up clause -by-clause consideration 
of the Bill.  
3.4       The Committee considered the draft Re port in its sitting held on 19 December 2001 and adopted
the same.  It also decided that the evidence tende red before the Committee ma y be laid on the Table o f
both the Houses of Parliament. 
4.0       In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the Background note on the
Bill received from the Ministr y of Personnel, Public  Grievances and Pensions, Note on the Lok pal Bill,
Page 3 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

2001 received from Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj, M.P., Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice Twenty-second 
Edition, Butter worth, London, 1997, First Report of the Committee on Standards in Public Life (Nolan
Committee) 1995, Seventh Report of the Committe e on Standards in Publ ic Life (Neil Committee)
2000. The Committee took note of the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fortieth
Report (1997) on Lokpal Bill, 1996 and Fiftieth Report (1999) on Lokpal  Bill, 1998,  replies to queries
raised by the Members on the Bill in the meet ings, submitted by Minist ry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions,  Interim Report of Administrative Reforms Commission on Problems o f
Redress of Citizens’ Grievances, (October, 1966), Background Note on  Lokpal (Ombudsman) for India, 
Lok Sabha Secretariat (August 2001).   The Preven tion of Corruption Act,  1988, The Commissions o f
Inquiry Act, 1952, First (1998) and Second (1999) Reports of Ethics Committee (Rajya Sabha), Report
on Ethics, Standards in Public Li fe, Privileges, Facilities to Memb ers and other Re lated Matters o f
Committee on Privileges (Lok Sabha) (November, 1997) and Supreme Court Judge ments in the case o f
K. Veeraswamy versus Union of India and others (1991)3 Supreme Court cases 655 and P.V. Narsimha
Rao versus State JT 1998(3)S.C 318.  
5.         For facility of reference and conveni ence, observations and recomm endations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.     
  
______________________________________________________________________________ 
* Bill Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 14 August, 2001. 
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.39150 dated 7 September 2001. 
REPORT 
The Lokpal Bill, 2001 ( See Annexure-I) proposes to put in place a special statutory institution
called Lokpal to inquire into allegations made in complaints against certain categories of public servants
(i.e. Prime Minister, presen t and past Ministers, Mini sters   of State and Deput y Ministers of the Union
and present and past Members of Parliament) defined as   public functionaries. 
2.0       The term “Lokpal” is the Indian version of “Ombudsman”.  Ombudsman is a Swedish term 
meaning “one who represen ts someone else”.  In other words, the term means a ‘grievance man’.  
Ombudsman is an official who is appoint ed to investigate complaints ag ainst the administration.  More 
specifically, he is an officer who investigates complaints of citize ns of unfair treatment meted out to
them by Government Departments and suggests remedy thereof, if he finds that a complaint is justified. 
2.1       The concept has Scandinavian origin.  Sweden is the first country  to have institution o f
ombudsman, established by legislature 1 in 1809.  Other Scandinavian co untries followed the model o f 
Sweden almost after a centu ry.  Amongst other countries 2, New Zealand was the first country outside 
Scandinavia to institute an ombudsman in 1962. 
2.2       Office of ombudsman was established under the provisions of  constitutional law in Austria, 
Burkina Faso, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Pola nd, Portugal, Spain and Sweden.  While in the
countries3 belonging to Anglo-Saxon legal tr aditions, the office is gene rally regulated under ordinary 
statute law. 
3.0       The genesis of Indian Ombudsman goes back to 3 April 1963, when Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
(currently   Member of Rajya Sabha and a member  of the Committee) participating in the discussion on
NEW DELHI; 
December 19, 2001 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
                                                                                                                                
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs 
Page 4 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Law and Justice stressed 4 the need for setting up of some sort o f 
a Parliamentary Commission on the pattern of Ombudsman  in Scandinavian countries. 
3.1       Dr Gajendragadkar, the then Chief Justice of  India in his conv ocation address at Indian Institute
of Public Administration (IIP A) in July 1963 had highlighted 5 the need for Ombudsman for ventilation 
of citizen’s grievances. 
3.2       The terms “ Lokpal” and “ Lokayukta” were coined by Dr. L.M. Si nghvi as the Indian model o f 
Ombudsman for redressal of public grievances. 
  
3.3.0    The proposed legislation on Lokpal has a chequered history, beginning from the year 1966, when
the Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) was set up6 by the then President of India. 
  
3.3.1    One of the ten listed terms of reference of the ARC was “problem of redress of citizens’ 
grievances”.  The Commission which was chaired by late Shri Morarji Desai presented its interim7 
report on Problems of Redress of Citizen’s Grievances on 20 October, 1966.  A draft Bill titled as 
“Lokpal Bill, 1966” containing ten clauses on the basis of its recommendations was appended to the said 
report. 
  
3.3.2    The Commission had recommended a two-tier mechanism designated as Lokpal at centre 
and one Lokayukta each at State level for redressal of citizens’ grievances.  As per the system 
recommended by the ARC, the Lokpal should look into complaints against administrative acts of 
Ministers and Secretaries to Government at the Centre as well as the States and the Lokayukta, 
one in each State and one at the Centre to look into complaints against the administrative acts of 
other officials.8 
  
3.4.0    As a follow up action to  the aforesaid recommendations of ARC, the Union Government has
made seven attempts to introduce the legislation on  Lokpal.  All the proposed  legislations that are
precursors to the Lokpal Bill, 2001, were introduc ed in the Lok Sabha in the years 1968, 1971, 1977,
1985, 1996 and 1998. ( See Annexure-II for chronological events of various Bills as received from the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Gr ievances and Pensions).  Except the Bill introduced in the year 1985
(i.e. Lokpal Bill, 1985), which wa s withdrawn upon its introduction, a ll other Bills lapsed on the
dissolution of concerned Lok Sabhas. 
  
3.4.1    Out of seven Bills, five Bi lls were referred to the Committees  of Parliament - three to Joint 
Select Committee9 and two to the predecessor Committees on Home Affairs10.  
  
4.0       Though the attempts at federal level to institute Lokpal were unsu ccessful for one  reason o r
other, some State Governments have set up L okayuktas/Upa-Lokayuktas for redressal  of public 
grievances against administrative acts of that Government in pursu ance of the recommendations o f
ARC.  The States like Orissa, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Bihar we re the leading States 11 in setting up 
the institution of Lokayuktas.  As per the  informat ion made available to th e Committee by the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances a nd Pensions, at present  the inst itution of Lokayukta/Upa-Lokayuktas 
are functioning in fifteen States 12.  The issue relating to  establishment of the institution of Lokayuktas
in the remaining States has been raised in the Writ petition No.26 of 1995 filed by Shri H.D. Shourie,
Director, Commoncause vs Union of India filed befo re Supreme Court and pendi ng with it and is thus
sub judice. 
Page 5 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
4.1.0    It may be highlighted that  Lokayukta legislation is not uniform  in India.  The jurisdiction o f
Lokayuktas over the Members of Stat e Legislatures and Chie f Ministers is not al so uniform and can be
observed from the accompaying Table 
  
TABLE  - I
  
(Source: Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions) 
  
5.0       The Lokpal Bill, 2001 has thirty clauses divi ded into four chapters a nd a Schedule.  Following
are the salient features of the Lokpal Bill, 2001: - 
  
(i)                  Setting up the office of Lokpal for a fixed tenure.  The Lokpal is a plural body 
consisting of- 
  
(a)        a Chairperson who is or has been a Chief Justice or a Judge of the 
Supreme Court; and  
(b)        two Members who are or have been the Judges of the Supreme Court  or 
the Chief Justices of the High Courts. 
  
(ii)        With a view to ensuring that the Lokpal is able to act independently and discharge its
functions without fear or fav our, the Bill provides that the Chairperson or a Member o f
Lokpal shall not be removed from his office, except by an order made by the President on
the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapac ity, after an inquiry made by a Committee
consisting of the Chief Justi ce of India, two other Judges of the Supreme Court next to
the Chief Justice in seniority in which the Chairman or Member, as the case may be, had
been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in respect of those charges. 
(iii)       To enable the L okpal to function effectiv ely and in a quasi-judici al manner, the powers 
of the civil court in respect of summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath, requiring the disc overy and production of any document and
receiving evidence, etc. have been conferred on the Lokpal.
Sl.No. Name of the State Whether elected 
representatives 
covered or not
Whether Chief 
Minister covered 
or not. 
1. Assam Yes No 
2. Andhra Pradesh Yes No 
3. Biha r No No 
4. Gu jarat No Yes 
5. Har yana Yes Yes 
6. Himachal Pradesh Yes Yes 
7. Karnatak a Yes Yes 
8. Keral a Yes Yes 
9. Madh ya Pradesh No Yes 
10. Maharashtra No No 
11. Orissa No Yes 
12. Punjab (with nomenclature as 
“Lokpal”) 
Yes Yes 
13. Ra jasthan No No 
14. Uttar Pradesh Yes No 
15. National Ca pital Territory of Delhi Yes Yes 
Page 6 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

(iv)              The Chairperson and other Members shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recommendations of a Screening  Committee consisting of
the Vice-President of India, as Chairman, pr ime Minister, Speaker of the House of the
People, the Minister in charge of the Mini stry of Home Affairs in the Government o f
India, Leader of the House other than the House in which the Prime Minister is a Member
of Parliament, the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People and Leader o f
Opposition in Council of States, as members. 
(v)                The Members of Parliament, Prime Minister and Ministers have been brought within the
purview of the Bill but other constitutional functionaries su ch as Judges of the Supreme
Court, the Chief Election Co mmissioner, Election Commissi oners; etc. have been kept
out of the purview of the Bill. 
(vi)              The Lokpal will inquire into complaints alle ging that a public functi onary as defined in 
the Bill has committed an offence punishable under the Pr evention of Corruption Act,
1988 and the expression “public functionary” covers the Prim e Minister, the Ministers, 
the Ministers of State, the Deputy Ministers and the Members of Parliament.   
(vii)             The Bill also seeks to make special provisions for discouraging frivolous, and false 
complaints.  
5.1.0    The Lokpal Bill, 2001 is modelled on the basis of reco mmendations/observations of the
Committee as contained in its Fiftieth Report on Lokpal Bill, 1998. 
5.1.1    The earlier Committee had suggested re-examina tion   of seven clauses out  of thirty two clauses
of the Lokpal Bill, 1998.  The basic issues raised in that Report hovered around the following points: -   
(i)                  Rationality of bringing Members of Parliame nt within the purview of the Lokpal, in
view of the Supreme Court j udgement in the case of Shri P.V. Narsimha Rao Vs. State,
wherein the court has held MPs and MLAs as  public servants who could be prosecuted
under the Prevention of Corruption (PC) Act, 1988; 
(ii)                Views and recommendations of the Committe e of Privileges of Lok Sabha regarding 
procedure to be followed by Lokpal in investigating cases of corruption against Members
of Parliament under the PC Act; and 
(iii)               Views of Ethics Committee of  the Rajya Sabha wherein it had not favoured the idea o f
subjecting the Members to the disciplinary authority of an agency outside the jurisdiction
of the House. 
5.1.2    The Secretary (Personnel) in his deposition before the Committee on 15 October 2001 had stated
that the Government while finali sing Lokpal Bill, 2001 on the lines of Lokpal Bill, 1998, constituted a
Group of Ministers (GOM) to consider certain issues i. e. implications of the inclusion of Prime Minister
within the purview of Lokpal and the question of bringing Members of Parliament within the ambit o f
the Lokpal.  The Government also took into consider ation the three basic issues mentioned in para 5.1.1
and decided that clause 18 of Lokpal Bill, 1998 relati ng to declaration of asse ts and liabilities by the
Members of Parliament should not be included in the 2001  Bill and other consequential  amendments
have also been reflected in Lokpal Bill, 2001. 
5.1.3    The Committee of Privileges (Eleventh Lok Sabha) (under the Chairmanship of Dr. Mallikarjun)
in its Report on “Ethics, Standard s in Public Life, Privileges, Faci lities to Members and Other Related 
Matters” (1997) was of the opinion that Lokpal may be empowered to deal with only those complaints
falling under the provisions of Pr evention of Corruption Act, 1988.  After investig ation on those
complaints, Lokpal may forward its Report to the Sp eaker, Lok Sabha, who may refer the same to the
Committees on Ethics and Privileg es for suggesting action.  The Com mittee in turn may report back to
the Speaker with its suggestion and actions in such matters.   The said report had not been adopted by
the Lok Sabha.   
Page 7 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

5.1.4    The First Report of Ethi cs Committee of Rajya Sabha was presented to that House on 8
December 1988.  The Report had been adopted by th e Rajya Sabha 15 December 1999.  The Committee
did not favour the idea of subjecting the Members to any disciplinary  authority of an agency outside the
jurisdiction of the House.  Moreover, the Committee was in favour of  making the Ethics Committee  a
permanent institution of the Rajya Sabha . 
5.1.5    In regard to the issue of  the rationality of bri nging MPs within the purview of Lokpal, the
Secretary informed the Committee that the ma tter was deliberated upon by the Group of Ministers,
which recommended exclusion of the MPs from the purview of Lokpal to th e Government.  But the
Cabinet decided to retain the MPs alongwith the Prime Minister within  the ambit of Lokpal.  However,
the Cabinet in conformity with the recommendati on of the Group of Ministers had agreed to delete
Clause 18 of Lokpal Bill, 1998 wh ich has the provision about the decl aration of assets by the Members
of Parliament.              
6.0       The Lokpal Bill, 2001 is the eight h attempt in a series by the Government 13  to establish the 
institution of Lokpal at the federa l level  during the last four deca des.  Upon a  perusal of all eight
Government  Bills, it appears to th e Committee that there is perceptible  shift in th e central focus of the
legislation from the issue of  redr essal of public grievances to  co rruption at high places.  This radical
departure can be observed from the Lokpal Bill, 1977 and Bills intr oduced thereafter  which have  no
provision for redressal of ci tizens’ grievances and thereby stripped off Lokpal its intrinsic  concept.  In
the first two Bills (Lokpal and L okayuktas Bill, 1968 and Lokpal and Lokayktas Bill, 1971) clause 2
contained definition of the term s ‘grievance’ and ‘maladministra tions’ which were conspicuously 
missing in the proposed legislations  introduced from 1977 onwards.  Rest of the Bills in their clause 2
had inter-alia the definition of the terms ‘complaint’ or  ‘corruption’ instea d of ‘grievance’ o r 
‘maladministration’. 
6.1       The Committee posed the query to know the reason for such shift in the subsequent proposed 
legislations, from the Ministry.  Th e Ministry in its reply has recoun ted the functions of three existing
grievances mechanisms i.e. (i) Internal Grievance Redressal Ma chinery within each
Ministry/Department (ii) External Grievance  Redressal Machinery in the Department of Administrative 
Reform and Public Grievances;  a nd (iii) Directorate of Public Grievances, Cabinet Secretariat, without
answering the query of the Committee.  
6.2.0    With the shift in focus from redressal of public grievances against injustice caused by
maladministration, Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative Assemblies of Union Territories, in
addition to Ministers of the Un ion, were brought within the ambi t of Lokpal  whilst Government
Servants were excluded from its purview, as   clearly envisaged in the 1977 Bill. 
6.2.1    It may be  highlighted that  the first two Bills (1968, 1971) had the provisions for keeping
Ministers of the Union and Govern ment Servants under the purview of   Lokpal and the term “public 
servant” was used to denote  them.  Bu t the 1977 Bill used the term ‘public man’ inter alia to denote 
Ministers, MPs and Ch ief Ministers.  In subseque nt Bills, the term “public  functionary” was used to 
denote Ministers, MPs and even th e Prime Minister.  Whether the pur view of Lokpal extends  to the
Prime Minister  and the Members of Parliament  has been  given in the accompanying table  Bill-wise:- 
  
TABLE – II
Inclusion/Exclusion of the Prime Minister and Members of Parliament 
within the ambit of Lokpal ( Bill-wise) 
  
Sl.No. Title of the Bill Whether Prime 
Minister covered 
or not
Whether MPs 
covered or 
not 
Page 8 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

            (Source: Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and pensions) 
6.3.0    The Committee wishes to point out   that the Members of Parliament have been declared as 
public servants in the case P.V. Narasimha  Rao  versus State, JT 1998(3) S.C.318,  by the Supreme 
Court  although the definition laid down in Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code or in Section 2(c) of the 
Prevention of  Corruption  (PC) Act, 1988 implicitely mention about them.  The Committee wanted to 
know  the rationale  for using the term “public functionary” for the Members of Parliament, who have 
been    declared as public servant  by the Supreme Court and can be tried under the  P.C. Act, 1988, like 
other Government Servants,  by the ordinary Court of Law.  So, in the Committee’s view,  the Members 
of Parliament,  as a consequence, would be subjected to one more  enquiring  agency i.e. Lokpal,  in 
addition to   the Central Bureau of Investigation/Police, Ethics/Privileges Committee of respective  
Houses, whereas public servant committing offences  under P.C. Act, 1988 would be  subjected to only 
one investigating agency i.e. Police/CBI.  From that angle, the Committee wanted to know whether 
subjecting Members of Parliament  to multiplicity of authorities would not violate the principle  of 
equality before  law (Article 14)or whether  it would not run contrary to the spirit of Article 20 of the 
Constitution. 
6.3.1    The Ministry  in its written submission has stated that the term “public functionary” is used in 
the Bill to distinguish certain category of public servants from the rest of the public servants.  The term 
“public  functionary” is used  for limited purpose of conducting enquiries by Lokpal.  Further, Lokpal is 
not a  prosecuting  agency  rather it is a fact-finding body.  The appropriate action is to be taken as per 
the normal law of the land after  Lokpal submits its inquiry report to the competent authority as 
prescribed in the Bill.  Therefore, the inquiry by Lokpal into the allegations against Members of 
Parliament is not violative  of the principle of equality. 
6.3.2    Though the Committee understands that Members of  Parliament  are public servants  sui 
genesis , yet on the issue of keeping the Members of Parliament  within the ambit of the Lokpal, 
divergent views were expressed.  One strand of view was that the Members of  Parliament should not be 
brought within the ambit of Lokpal as 
(i)                  it would subject them to the authority of an agency, other than the House, which 
enjoyed broad autonomy  under the scheme of Constitution and may amount to 
encroachment  upon the authority, autonomy, privileges and dignity of Parliament; 
(ii)        it would make them subject to multiplicity  of authorities –Ethics/Privileges  
Committees  of the House, Police/CBI, Court of Law, Lokpal; 
(iii)       they may be made  to  appear before Second Class  Magistrate as the Supreme Court has 
power  to transfer cases  from the Lokpal to the Court of Sessions in accordance with 
clause 22 of  the Bill, which may impinge upon the dignity and privileges of Members 
and thereby of the House; and  
(iv)              the proposed legislation does not provide safeguards nor any safeguard exists to protect 
the Members of Parliament from simultaneous  investigation  by Police/ CBI and inquiry  
by Lokpal for the same offence. 
This strand of opinion was supported by the suggestion that instead of keeping Members of Parliament 
1. The Lok pal and Lokayuktas Bill, 1968 No No 
2. The Lok pal and Lokayuktas Bill, 1971 No No 
3. The Lok pal Bill, 1977 No Yes 
4. The Lok pal Bill, 1985 No No 
5. The Lok pal Bill, 1989 Yes No 
6. The Lok pal Bill, 1996 Yes Yes 
7. The Lok pal Bill, 1998 Yes Yes 
8. The Lok pal Bill, 2001 Yes Yes 
Page 9 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

within the ambit of Lokpal, they should be under the Privileges/ Ethics Committees of their respective 
Houses as precedents galore where the functioning of those Committees were better than any 
Commissions of Inquiry.   
6.3.3    The other strand of opinion was that the Members of Parliament were accountable to the public 
and should be brought within the ambit of the Lokpal.  They felt the need for Lokpal due to the 
following  reasons : 
(i)                  general perception about  prevalence of corruption amongst Members of Parliament  
especially after Jharkhand Mukti Morcha  bribery case is undisputedly low  and are held 
so in public esteem.. 
(ii)                by instituting the institution of Lokpal, the supremacy of Parliament would not be 
eroded as it  is the creation of Parliament and would help the latter, being an expert body. 
6.4.0        The office of Prime Minister was brought within the ambit of Lokpal by the Government 
headed   by Shri V.P. Singh through the Lokpal Bill, 1989.  In the subsequent   legislations , the Prime 
Minister have been proposed to be placed under the purview of Lokpal. 
6.4.1    The Committee underscores the point that though the Prime Minister is primus inter pares (first 
amongst equals), virtually, he is more than that and enjoys the highest authority in Indian democratic 
system as long as he enjoys the confidence of the House of the People.  The Committee deliberated at 
length on the implications of bringing the institution of Prime Minister within the purview of Lokpal, 
which privy to so many secret  and sensitive issues of national importance/interest. 
6.4.2    One group of opinion was that the Prime Minister being privy to vital information should not be 
brought under the jurisdiction of Lokpal, as the constitutional process i.e. no confidence motion is 
available   in the Lok Sabha for removing  him.  They wondered  how the Prime Minister could 
function, when allegations were brought to the notice of Lokpal and that body initiates injury.  
Furthermore , situations may arise, where opposition may demand the resignation  of the Prime Minister 
pending inquiry by Lokpal.  That would bring instability to the democratic set up evolved during last 
fifty two years. 
6.4.3    The other strand of opinion was that no one is above the law of the land and the Prime Minister, 
thus, should be brought within the purview of Lokpal.  A view amongst this section was that the Prime 
Minister may be brought  within the ambit of Lokpal with some sort of checks and balances – providing 
concurrence of the President of India for initiating inquiry against him by Lokpal. 
6.5.0    The Committee also deliberated on the issue of extending the jurisdiction of Lokpal to the 
judiciary.  The Committee feels that the judiciary is not as clean and as respectable as it used to be in the 
past.  Their accountability has been insulated by the deterrence of the inherent  power of judiciary i.e. 
contempt of the Court.  The Supreme Court has evolved safeguards for the judges with the 
pronouncement of its judgment in K. Veeraswamy vs Union of India and others  (1999) , in terms  of 
which no FIR could be registered against a Judge of a High Court, Chief Justice of a High Court or 
Judge of the Supreme Court without the clearance of the Chief Jusitce of India and sanctions for 
launching prosecution against them could not be granted by the President of India without the 
concurrence of the Chief  Justice of India.  In the light thereof, the Committee is of the view that 
judiciary ought to be made accountable to the public for their conduct. 
6.5.1    While referring to one of the observations of the ARC that in the discretionary field, matters 
involving acts of justice or injustice, corruption or  favoritism were to be inquired into by the Lokpal, a 
view was expressed that  since the judiciary had been at times passing orders in a discretionary manner, 
it should be brought under the Lokpal.  One section of opinion was that the ambit of Lokpal should be 
broadbased enough to cover Judges including Chief Justice of India.   It was also felt that the Chief 
Justice of India may be brought within the ambit of Lokpal with some checks and balances i.e. by 
making the President of India as sanctioning authority for granting permission for initiation of inquiry 
Page 10 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

by Lokpal.   
6.5.2    The other section of opinion desires that since in the scheme of the present Bill, Judges would 
not fit in, another piece of legislation may be brought to make the Judges accountable. 
6.5.3    The Committee was, however, of the unanimous view that a separate legislation may be brought 
forward to set up appropriate institutional  mechanism to ensure accountability of Judges. 
7          Be that as it may, the Committee regards the Bill as an half -baked measure and which contains 
the following serious anomalies and inconsistencies which needed to be addressed before enacting the 
law on Lokpal:- 
(i)         Connotations of the two terms i.e. ‘Public functionary’ and ‘complaint’ detailed   in 
clause 2 of the Bill are incoherent with the scheme of Bill to the extent that complaint 
against the offences under the PC Act, 1988 have to be investigated not inquired.  Further 
inquisitioning of the said offences committed by public functionaries  (who have been 
declared  as public  servant by the Supreme Court) by the Lokpal put the public 
functionaries in  double jeopardy vis-a-vis public servant  (bureaucrats ), and is therefore, 
against the   principle of equality before the law. 
(ii)        The term “public functionary” in the Bill included those who have been declared as 
‘public servant’ by the Supreme Court and has not been explained, rationale of using the 
term ‘public functionary’ in the place of ‘public servant’. 
(iii)               The term ‘inquiry’ had not been defined in the Bill whereas the inquiry as defined by 
Cr.P.C. meant inquiry by a Magistrate. 
(iv)              Inquiry into the complaint under the PC Act, 1988 by Lokpal as envisaged under clause 
10 of the Bill may create a situation where two parallel authorities would be inquiring 
and investigating into the same offence as the Magistrate and Police were not duty bound 
to keep the complaint pending till the matter was finalised by the Lokpal and the 
provisions of Chapters XII and XV of the Cr. P.C. could not be kept in abeyance during 
that period. 
(v)                Provisions in the Bill particularly in Clauses 10 to 17 were a queer mixture of provisions 
of Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 and Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  It amounted to 
civil trial of corruption cases by an inquiry officer which ought to have been done by an 
investigating officer. 
(vi)              Taking evidence on oath at i nquiry stage by the Lokpal  (whi ch is usually done at the 
time of trial) amounts to putting the cart before the horse. 
(vii)             Further the Lokpal cannot compel  a person who is not willin g to appear before him but
is willing to give evidence before the Court of Law. 
(viii)      The Legislati on has dangerous port end by clubbing provisions  of Commissions o f
Inquiry Act with the provision of Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(ix)       The Lokpal has no nexus with Pa rliament as has been the Swedish Ombudsman and
Parliamentary Commissioner in U.K. 
(x)                The Legislation does not   a ddress public grievances; rath er focusses its attention on
bribery and corruption at high places, 
(xi)       Ranks of Officers to assist Lokpal in conducting inquiry are not specified in the Bill.  
8.0       The Committee considered amendments ( See Annexure –III ) moved  by a member of the 
Committee, while taking up clause-b y-clause  consideration of th e Bill in its sitting held on 11 
December 2001 in the presentation of Secretary (P ersonnel) and representatives of Legislative 
Department and  Department of Legal Affairs who clarified certain  queries of the Committee.
Page 11 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

Clause 2 
8.1.0        The clause seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill. 
8.1.1    While drawin g attention to the justification given b y the Ministr y for not includin g the
judiciary within the ambit of the de finition of public functionary that since the Lokpal was a fact -
finding and a non -constitutional bod y, the constitutional functionaries  (Jud ges) could not be
brought within the purview of Lokpal, a point was raised whether the MPs, the PM were
constitutional bodies or not.  The Secretar y (Personnel) in repl y has stated that the Bill was not
exhaustive as far as public func tionaries were concerned.  It covered  some of the constitutional
bodies included in the definition of public functionaries. The replies of the Ministry are incoherent
and do not convince the Committee.    
8.1.2    The Committee, however, adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 3
8.2       The clause seeks to provide for the establishment of the institution of Lokpal and its composition
and qualifications for the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal. 
8.2.1    A point was raised  as to the desirabilit y of appointment of a sittin g Jud ge of Supreme
Court or Chief Justice of a Hi gh Court,  as members of Lokpal in the present scenario of hu ge
pendency of  cases.  Another   quer y was raised as to the rationalit y of appointin g retired Jud ges
as members of Lokpal.  The Secretar y (Personnel) clarified that considerin g  retired Jud ges
alongwith sitting Judges to be  members of Lokpal was to have a wider choice and appointment of
serving Judges would not affect pendency of cases. 
8.2.2    The Committee, however, adopted  the clause without any change. 
Clause 4
8.3.0    The clause seeks to provide  for  the appointment of Chairper son and Members of Lokpal,   on
the basis of recommendations of a high profile screening  Committee consisting of the Vice-President of 
India, the Prime Minister, the Speake r of the House of the People, the Minister in-charge of Ministry o f 
Home Affairs in the Government of  India, the Leader of the House other than the House in which the
Prime Minister is a member of Parliament, the Lead er of the Opposition in th e House of the People and
the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States. 
8.3.1    A point was raised  about  the necessity of consultation with the  Chief Justice of India in the 
case of appointment  of Lokpal , as the high profile collegium headed by the second  citizen of the 
country would make recommendations for the appointment of the same. 
  
8.3.2   The Secretary clarified that  the screening committee had no re presentation from Judiciary and 
the consultation with Chief Justice of  India was required in case of a ppointment of sitting Judges of the 
Supreme Court or Chief Justice of High Court, as Chairperson or members of Lokpal.  
  
8.3.3.      The Committee, however, adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 5
8.4.0    The clause seeks to provid e that the Chairperson and the Memb ers shall be ineligible to hold
other offices. 
8.4.1        The Committee  adopted  the clause without any change. 
Clause 6 
8.5.0    The clause deals with the te rm of office and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and
Members of the Lokpal.  The conditions of service, salary, allowances and pension of the Chairperson
shall be the same as those of the Chief Justice of India and of other Me mbers as those of a Jud ge of the
Page 12 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

Supreme Court. 
8.5.1        The Committee  adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 7
8.6.0        The clause  deals with the removal of Chairperson and Members. 
8.6.1     The Committee  adopted  the clause without any change. 
Clause 8
8.7.0    The clause seeks to provi de that the senior-most Member shall act as the Chairperson o r 
discharge his functions in certain circumstances. 
8.7.1        The Committee  adopted  the clause  without  any change. 
Clause 9
8.8.0    The clause deals with the staff of the Lokpal and the powers of the Lokpal to utilize the services,
inter alia,  of any investigating agencies of the Central Government or State Government and of  the 
services of  any other  persons or agencies. 
8.8.1    The Committee observed that th e staff of the Lokpal could be used for collection o f 
evidence and makin g inquiry.   The Committee was of  the view that it ma y not be proper for the
Lokpal to utilise the se rvices of persons or a gencies other than those of Central Government or
State Government, keepin g in view the fact that it would inquire into complaints a gainst top 
public functionaries i.e. the PM, Ministers and MPs.  Therefore,  the Committee recommended for
deletion of  sub-clause  (2) (ii)  so as to remove the provision   for securin g  the services, of an y
other person or a gency, b y the Lokpal.  The Committee also  recommended that  consequential
amendments in sub clauses (3) and (4) may be carried out. 
8.8.2        The Committee adopted the  clause as amended. 
Clause 10 
8.9.0    The clause  deals with the jurisdiction of th e Lokpal. Sub-Clause (1) s eeks to provide that the 
Lokpal may inquire into any matter involved in, or arising from or connected with any allegation made
in a complaint.  Sub-Clause (2) seeks to provide th at the Lokpal may inquire in to any act or conduct o f 
any person other than a public functi onary  if it considers necessary  to do so for the purposes of its
iniquiry into any allegation.  Sub- clause (3) seeks to provide that no matter in respect of which a
complaint may be made under th e proposed enactment shall be referred for inquiry under the
Commissions of  Inquiry Act,  1952.  
8.9.1        The Committee adopted  the clause  without any change. 
Clause 11
8.10.0  The clause  seeks to provide  that the Lokpal shall not inquire  into any matter concerning any
person if the Chairperson or any other Member has any bias in respect of such matter or person.  The
clause also seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall not inquire into any complaint made after the expiry of
a period of ten years from the date   on which the offence mentioned in  such a complaint is alleged to
have been committed. 
8.10.1    The Committee adopted  the clause  without any change. 
Clause 12
8.11.0  The clause seeks to provide that any person other than a pubic servant as defined therein may file
a complaint which shall be in the prescribed form a nd shall be accompanied by an affidavit. This clause
also seeks to provide that the complainant shall deposit such sum of money in such manner and with
such authority or agency as may be prescribed and the certificate for such deposit shall be furnished in
the prescribed form. 
Page 13 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

8.11.1  The Explanation below sub-clause  (1) defines “public servants” for the purposes of that sub-
clause,  who can make a complaint to the Lokpal.  Ac cording to the definition, “public servant” includes 
inter alia any person in the service of any other institut ion, concern or undertaking which is established 
by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act or which is controlled, or financed wholly or substantially
by funds provided, directly or indirectly, by the Central Government or a State Government. 
8.11.2  The Committee was of the view that persons only in the service of an  institution, concern, o r
undertaking which was funded directly by the Cent ral Government or a State Government should be
treated as “public servant” for the purposes of sub-clause (1). 
8.11.3  Accordingly, the Committee recommended that the words “or indirectly” appearin g in 
sub-section (c) of the Explanation below sub-clause (1) may be deleted. 
8.11.4  Sub-clause (4) provides that a letter written to the Lokpal, or as the case may be, to the 
appropriate authority, as defined in the Explanation below sub-clause (5), by a person in any jail or other 
place of custody or in any asylum or other place for insane persons may, if the Lokpal or the appropriate
authority is satisfied that it is n ecessary so to do, treat the letter as  a complaint made in accordance with
the provisions of clause 12. 
8.11.5  The Committee was of the view that onl y the Lokpal and no other authorit y should be 
entitled to receive  letters from persons in jail, custody, asylum, etc. 
8.11.6  Accordingly, the Committee recommended th at the words “or,  as the case ma y be, to the 
appropriate authority”, wherever these  occur  in  sub-clause (4) ma y be deleted.  The Committee 
further recommended that consequent ial amendments may be carried out in sub-clause (5).  The 
Committee also recommended deletion of Explanation below sub-clause (5) as it would become 
redundant in the light of amendments suggested in sub-clauses (4) and (5).  
8.11.7  The Committee adopted the clause as amended. 
Clause 13 
8.12.0    The clause deals with the preliminary scrutiny of complaints by the Lokpal.  
8.12.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 14 
8.13.0  The clause seeks to provide for the procedur e for making inquiries into the complaints by the
Lokpal.  This clause also seeks to provide that th e Lokpal shall complete th e inquiry within six months
from the date of the receipt of the complaint, whic h could be extended for a further period of six months
by the Lokpal for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
8.13.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 15 
8.14.0  The clause seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall have all the powers of a civil court in respect of
summoning and enforcing the attendance, receiv ing evidence and issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses or documen ts, etc.  This Clause also seek s to provide that the proceedings
before the Lokpal shall be de emed to be judicial proceedings with in the meaning of section 193 of the
Indian Penal code. 
8.14.1  The Committee recommended deletion of  sub-section (b)(v) of sub -clause (1) re garding 
issuing of commission for the examinat ion of witnesses or documents  as  the Committee felt  that 
the demeanor of the witness could be better  observed by the Lokpal  itself. 
8.14.2  The Committee adopted the clause as amended. 
Clause 16 
8.15.0  The clause seeks to confer powers of search and seizure on the Lokpal. 
Page 14 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

8.15.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 17 
8.16.0  The  clause relates to reports of the Lokpal and action taken thereon.  Sub-clause (1) seeks to 
provide that after inquiry the L okpal shall communicates its findings to the complainant,  the public
functionary and the competent authority.  This clause  also seeks to provide th at the annual consolidated
report shall be presented by the Lokpal to the President on the administration of the proposed enactment.
8.16.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
Clause 18 
8.17.0  The clause seeks to provide that the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Chairperson
and Members of the Lokpal shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
8.17.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 19 
8.18.0  The clause seeks to provide for punishment for intentional insult or interruption to the Lokpal. 
8.18.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 20 
8.19.0  The clause seeks to confer powers on the Lokpal to try summarily and punish those persons who 
intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption, to the Lokpal. 
8.19.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 21 
8.20.0  The clause seeks to provide for the disposal of deposits made by the complainants under clause
12.  This clause also seeks to provide for act ion to be taken by the Lokpal in the case of mala fide
complaints. 
8.20.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 22 
8.21.0  The clause provides for applic ation of certain provi sions of the Code of  Criminal Procedure,
1973 to the proceedings before the Lokpal. 
8.21.1  The Committee took exception to the provision fo r transferring cases fr om Lokpal to Court o f 
Sessions in accordance with section 406 of Cr. PC.   
8.21.2  Accordingly, the Committee recommended deletion of the entire clause. 
Clause 23 
8.22.0  The clause seeks to provide for the conferme nt of additional functions by the President on the
Lokpal. 
8.22.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 24 
8.23.0  The clause  provides that if at any stage of inquiry, any person is likely to be prejudicially
affected shall be afforded an opportunity of being heard. 
8.23.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 25 
8.24.0  The clause  provides for protection from le gal proceedings, etc., fo r the action taken in good
faith. 
8.24.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Page 15 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

Clause 26 
8.25.0    The clause deals with the delegation of certain powers by the Lokpal. 
8.25.1  The Committee recommended deletion of  the words “and  agencies” occurring in the clause as a 
consequence of the amendment suggested by it in clause 9 (2). 
8.25.2  The Committee adopted the clause as amended. 
Clause 27 
8.26.0  The clause seeks to confer power on the President to make rules. 
8.26.1  The Committee adopted the clause  without any change. 
Clause 28 
8.27.0  The clause makes it clear that the Lokpal sh all not have any jurisdic tion to conduct any inquiry
into any allegation against or any act or conduct of the Pr esident, the Vice-President or the Speaker o f 
the House of the People, the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme Court, the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India, the Ch ief Election Commissione r or other Election Commissioners or the
Chairman or any other Member of the Union Public Servic e Commission.  It also  provides that the
Lokpal shall not make any inquiry upon its own knowledge or information. 
8.27.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 29 
8.28.0  The clause  provides that the provisions of  the proposed enactment shall not affect the
constitution of, or the continuance of functioning or exercise of powers by, any Commission of Inquiry
appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 before the coming into force of the provisions of
the proposed enactment. 
8.28.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 30 
8.29.0  The clause seeks to make a consequential amendment in the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 
8.29.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Schedule 
  
8.30.0  The Schedule appended to the Bi ll contains the oath to be taken by Chairperson or Members o f
Lokpal. 
8.30.1  The Schedule to the Bill was adopted without any change. 
Clause I, the Enacting Formula and the Title
8.31     Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change. 
9.         The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed as reported by it. 
 
Page 16 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
•        The Committee was, however, of the unanimous vi ew that a separate legislation may be brought
forward to set up appropriate institutional mechanism to ensure accountability of Judges. 
(Para 6.5.3)
•        Be that as it may, the Committee regards the Bill as an half -baked measure and which contains 
the following serious anomalies and inconsiste ncies which needed to be addressed before
enacting the law on Lokpal:- 
  
(i)         Connotations of the two terms i.e.  ‘Public functionary’ and ‘complaint’ detailed   
in clause 2 of the Bi ll are incoherent with the sche me of Bill to the extent that
complaint against the offences under the PC Act, 1988 have to be investigated not
inquired.  Further inquisitioning of th e said offences committed by public
functionaries  (who have been declared  as public  servant by the Supreme Court)
by the Lokpal put the public functionaries in  double jeopardy vis-a-vis public 
servant  (bureaucrats ), and is therefore, against the   principle of equality before
the law. 
(ii)        The term “public functionary” in  the Bill included those who have been declared 
as ‘public servant’ by the Supreme Court and has not been explained, rationale o f
using the term ‘public functionary’ in the place of ‘public servant’. 
(iii)       The term ‘inquiry’ had not been  defined in the Bill whereas the inquiry as 
defined by Cr.P.C. meant inquiry by a Magistrate. 
(iv)       Inquiry into the complaint under the PC Act, 1988 by Lokpal as envisaged unde r
clause 10 of the Bill may cr eate a situation where two parallel authorities would
be inquiring and investigating into the same  offence as the Ma gistrate and Police
were not duty bound to keep the complain t pending till the ma tter was finalised
by the Lokpal and the provisions of Chapters XII and XV of the Cr. P.C. could
not be kept in abeyance during that period. 
(v)        Provisions in the Bill particul arly in Clauses 10 to 17 were a queer mixture o f
provisions of Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 and C ode of Civil Procedure,
1908.  It amounted to civil trial of corr uption cases by an inquiry officer which
ought to have been done by an investigating officer. 
(vi)       Taking evidence on oath at inquiry stage by the Lokpal  (which is usually done at
the time of trial) amounts to putting the cart before the horse. 
(vii)      Further the Lokpal cannot compel  a person who is not wi lling to appear before
him but is willing to give evidence before the Court of Law. 
(viii)      The Legislation has danger ous portend by clubbing pr ovisions of Commissions
of Inquiry Act with the provision of Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(ix)       The Lokpal has no nexus with Parliament as has been the Swedish Ombudsman
and Parliamentary Commissioner in U.K. 
(x)                The Legislation does not   address public grievances; rather focusses its attention
on bribery and corruption at high places, 
(xi)              Ranks of Officers to assist  Lokpal in conducting inquiry are not specified in the 
Bill.  
(Para 7.0)
Page 17 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

 
Clause 2 
•        The Committee, however, adopted the clause without any change. 
(Para 8.1.2)
Clause 3
z The Committee, however, adopted  the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.2.2)
Clause 4
•        The Committee, however, adopted the clause without any change. 
(Para 8.3.4)
Clause 5
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.4.2)
Clause 6 
•        The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
(Para 8.5.2)
Clause 7
•        The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
(Para 8.6.1)
Clause 8
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.7.2)
Clause 9
z The Committee observed that the staff of the Lokpal could be used for collection of evidence 
and makin g inquir y.   The Committee was of  the view that it ma y not be proper for the 
Lokpal to utilise the services of persons or agencies other than those of Central Government 
or State Government, keepin g in view the fact that it wo uld inquire into complaints a gainst 
top  public functionaries i.e. the PM, Minist ers and MPs.  Therefore,  the Committee 
recommended for deletion of  sub-clause  (2) (ii)  so as to remove the provision   for securing  
the services, of an y other person or a gency, b y the Lokpal.  The Committee also 
recommended that consequential amendments in sub clauses (3) and (4) may be carried out. 
(Para 8.8.1)
z The Committee adopted the clause as amended.  
(Para 8.8.3)
Clause 10 
•        The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
(Para 8.9.2)
Clause 11
•        The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Page 18 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

(Para 8.10.2)
Clause 12
z Accordingly, the Committee recommended that the words “or i ndirectly” appearing in sub-
section (c) of the Explanation below sub-clause (1) may be deleted.  
(Para 8.11.3)
z The Committee was of the view that onl y the Lokpal and no other authorit y should be 
entitled to receive letters from persons in jail, custody, asylum, etc.  
(Para 8.11.5)
z Accordingly, the Committe e recommended that the words “or, as the case ma y be, to the 
appropriate authority”, wherever th ese occur in sub-clause (4) ma y be deleted.  The 
Committee further recommended that cons equential amendments mi ght be carried out in 
sub-clause (5).  The Committee also recommended deletion of Explanation below sub-clause 
(5) as it would become redundan t in the light of am endments suggested in sub-clauses (4) 
and (5).  
(Para 8.11.6)
z The Committee adopted the clause as amended.  
(Para 8.11.7)
Clause 13 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.12.1)
Clause 14 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.13.2)
Clause 15 
z The Committee adopted the clause as amended.  
(Para 8.14.2)
Clause 16 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.15.1)
Clause 17 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.16.2)
Clause 18 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.17.1)
Clause 19 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.18.2)
Clause 20 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Page 19 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

(Para 8.19.2)
Clause 21 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.20.2)
Clause 22 
•        The Committee took exception to the provision fo r transferring cases fr om Lokpal to Court o f
Sessions in accordance with section 406 of Cr. PC.   
•        Accordingly, the Committee recommended deletion of the entire clause. 
(Paras 8.21.1 & 8.21.2)
Clause 23 
  
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.22.2)
Clause 24 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.23.2)
Clause 25 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.24.2)
Clause 26 
•        The Committee recommended deletion of  the words “and  agencies” occurring in the clause as a 
consequence of the amendment suggested by it in clause 9 (2). 
•        The Committee adopted the clause as amended. 
(Paras 8.25.1 & 8.25.2)
Clause 27 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.26.1)
Clause 28 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.27.1)
Clause 29 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.28.2)
Clause 30 
z The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
(Para 8.29.2)
Schedule 
•        The Schedule to the Bill was adopted without any change.
Page 20 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

(Para 8.30.1)
Clause I, the Enacting Formula and the Title
•        Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change. 
•        The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed as reported by it. 
(Paras 8.31 & 9.0)
MINUTES 
  
XXXVI 
THIRTY-SIXTH   MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M.  on Monday, 15 October, 2001 in  Committee Room  ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee―Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3.         Shri Hiphei 
4.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh 
5.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
6.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
7.         Shri K.M. Saifullah 
8.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
9.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10.       Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee       
11.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra  
12.       Shri Subodh Ray 
13.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
14.       Shri Anadi Sahu 
15.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma 
16.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
  
SECRETARIAT 
             
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES  
Representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
Shri A.K. Agarwal, Secretary 
Shrimati Chitra Chopra, Establishment Officer 
Shri K.V. Ea
pen, Director 
Page 21 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

Shri Bhaskar Khulbe, Director 
2.0       The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee along with Secret ary  (Personnel) and his
colleagues to the meeting of the Committee. 
2.1       Thereafter, he touched upon, in brief, diff erent phases of attempts at legislation on Lokpal which
spanned over more than four decades.  He apprised the Committee that the proposal on Lokpal had been
referred twice earlier to this Committee.  The pr edecessor Committee   had also articulated its view
thereon and subsequently had presented its Reports (Fortieth) and (Fiftieth) to Parliament. 
2.2       Thereafter, he requested the Secretary (Personnel) to make a brie f presentation on the proposed
legislation and requested Members to seek clarific ation from the Secretary after his presentation was
over.  He also indicated that the Committee would have another round of internal discussion   on the Bill
on 19 October 2001. 
3.0       The Secretary, before delineating the salient features of the Bill, apprised the Committee that the
proposed legislation had incorporat ed all the amendments suggested by this Comm ittee contained in its
Fiftieth Report which was presented to Parliament on 25 February 1999. 
3.1.0    Thereafter, he touched upon, in brief, the b ackground leading to setting up of the institution o f
Lokpal which were as follows: 
            The Administrative Reforms Commission had recommended setting   up of an institution
of Lokpal for Central Government and Lokayukta   for the State Government way back in
1966.  As a follow up action, the Central Government introduced legislation in the years -
1968, 1971, 1977, 1985,1989,  1996 and 1998.  Except  the 1985 Bill which was
withdrawn upon its introduction, all other Bills  lapsed on the dissolution  of concerned
Lok Sabhas. 
3.1.1    The Secretary then stated that the Lokpal  Bill, 1996 was referred  to the Standing Committee  on
Home Affairs chaired by Shri Sompal   which in turn   presented it s Report  to Parliament on  9 May 
1997.  The Lokpal Bill,  1998 was base d on Lokpal  Bill, 1996 and   was al so  referred to this Standing
Committee under the chairmanship  of present Chairman. 
3.1.2    Referring to Lokpal Bill , 1998 the Secretary mentioned that 23 clauses out of  32 clauses 
contained  in the Bill  were  adopted by this Committee without any change.  Recommendations in 
respect other eight clauses excluding clause 1 were duly considered by the Government.  The basic 
issues raised in the Fiftieth Report of the Committee on the Bill were as follows: 
(a)                Rationality of bringing Members of Parliame nt within the purview of the Lokpal, in
view of the Supreme Co urt judgement in the case  of Sh ri P.V. Narsimha Rao Vs. State,
wherein the court has held MPs and MLAs as  public servants who could be prosecuted
under the Prevention of Corruption (PC) Act, 1988; 
(b)               Views and recommendations  of the Committe e of Privileges of Lok Sabha regarding 
procedure to be followed by Lokpal in investigating cases of corruption against Members
of Parliament under the PC Act; and 
(c)                Views of Ethics Committee of the Rajya Sa bha wherein it had not favoured the idea o f 
subjecting the Members to the disciplinary authority of an agency outside the jurisdiction
of the House. 
3.1.3    He shared information regarding status of Report of the Committee of  Privileges (Eleventh Lo k
Sabha) ( under the Chairm anship of Dr. Mallikarjun) on “Ethics, St andards in Public Life,  Privileges,  
Facilities to Members and Other Re lated Matters” (1997) and First Re port of Ethics Committee   o f 
Rajya Sabha.  The Committee of Privileges was of the opinion that Lokpal ma y be empowered to deal
with only those complaints falling under the provisi ons of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.  Afte r
investigation on those com plaints, Lokpal may forward its Re port to the S peaker, Lok Sabha, who ma y
Page 22 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

refer the same to the Committees on Ethics and Privileges for suggesting action.  The Committee in turn 
may report back to the Speaker  with its suggestion and actions in such matters.   The said report had not
yet been adopted by the Lok Sabha.   
3.1.4    In relation to First Report of Ethics Committee of Rajya Sabha, the Secretary had stated that the 
same  was presented to Rajya Sabha on 8 December 1988 and  had also been adopted by that House on 
15 December 1999.  The Committee did not favour the idea of subjecting the Members to any 
disciplinary authority of an agency outside the jurisdiction of the House.  Moreover, the Committee was 
in favour of  making the Ethics Committee  a permanent institution of the Rajya Sabha . 
3.1.5    In regard to the issue of  the rationality of bri nging MPs within the purview of Lokpal, the
Secretary informed the Committee th at the matter was de liberated upon by a Group of Ministers, which
recommended exclusion of the MPs  from the purview  of Lokpal  to the Government.  But the Cabinet
decided to retain the MPs alongwit h the Prime Minister wi thin the ambit of Lokpal.  However, the
Cabinet in conformity with the recommendation of Group of Ministers had agreed to delete clause 18 of
Lokpal Bill, 1998 which spoke about the declaration of assets by the Members of Parliament.              
3.2       The Secretary (Personnel) highlighted sa lient features of the Lokp al Bill, 2001 which were as
follows: 
(i)                  The composition of Lokpal would be three-one Chairperson and two Members, for a fix 
term of three years.  While the Chairpers on could be appointed from amongst serving o r
retired Chief Justice of India or a Judge  of Supreme Court, the Members could be
appointed from among the reti red or  serving judges of the Supreme Court  or Chie f
Justices of High  Courts; 
(ii)                The Chairperson  and other members shal l be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the Committee consisting of the Vice
President  of India as Chairman, Prime Minist er, Speaker of the House of the People, the
Minister in charge of the Mi nistry of Home Affairs in th e Government of  India, the
Leader of the House  other than the House in which the Prime Minister is a member, the
Leader of the Opposition in the House  of the People and  the Leader of the Opposition in
the Council of States as members.   
(iii)               The Chairperson and Members of Lokpal woul d not be removed from their  office 
except by  an order made by the Presiden t on the ground of proved misbehaviour o r
incapacity, after an inquiry ma de by a Committee consisting of  the Chief Justice of India
and two other Judges of the Supreme Court next  to the Chief Justice in seniority.  The
Chairman or Member, as the case may be, woul d be  informed of the charges against him
and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
(iv)              The Lokpal would be  given the power of civil court in resp ect of summoning and 
enforcing the attendance of any person an d examining him on oa th, requiring the
discovery and production of any document and receiving  evidence etc. 
(v)                The Lokpal would enquire into complaints  against   public functionaries under the
Prevention of    Corruption  Act 1988 and the expression “public functionaries”  covers 
the  Prime Minister, the Ministers  a nd the Members of the Parliament.  The
constitutional functionaries  such as Judges of Supreme Court, the Election
Commissioner, etc.  have been kept out of ambit of Lokpal.      
4.0       Members raised a number of queries/issues  on the various provisions of the legislation while
expressing their respective viewpo ints on the Bill. Observations of the Members and their queries
centered around  the following points: 
(i)         The le gislation put more em phasis on corru ption b y public functionaries and
Page 23 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

understressed  the issue of redressal     of public grievances, which was the rationale for the
Lokpal and Lokayukta institutions  when debate thereon was  initiated in    the country; 
(ii)                There was unanimous view on th e issue of not bringing the Prime Minister within the 
ambit of Lokpal but on the issue of keeping M.P.s within the purview of Lokpal differing
views emerged.  One strand of  opinion was that the MPs s hould  not be brought within
the ambit of Lokpal as  
(a)  it would subject them to  the authority of an agency, other than the  House, which
enjoyed broad autonomy under the scheme  of Constitution and may amount to
encroachment  upon the authority and autonomy of Parliament; 
(b)   it would lead to subjecting MPs to one more inquiring agency  in addition  to 
Ethics/Privileges Committees of the respective House and the Central Bureau o f
Investigation/Police,  while public serv ants committing offences  under PC Act, 
1988 were subjected to only one investigating authority i.e. CBI/Police; 
(c)    Lokayukta of States  have no jurisdic tion over MLAs.  Why MPs  should be 
brought within the purview of Lokpal? 
(iv)       The Bill provides for inquiry into  allegations of complain t under  PC Act, 1988.  The
view of the Committee was th at bribery and corruption cases  were cognisable offences 
and had to be investigated unde r the relevant provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure. 
It was pointed out that a pol ice investigation would be done  for a public servant charged
with a ‘corruption offence’ whereas in the case of Member s, it would only be inquired
into.  Further the Bill did not  provide  definition  of the inquiry. What would happen in a
situation when an individual goes to the Police instead of Lokpal against an allegation  of
corruption by a Member of Parliament under Sections, 154 and 200 of Cr. PC? 
(v)        While the inquiry is in progress with Lokpal, is not it possible for the MPs to file case o f
defamation under Sections 182 or 193 or 500 of the Indian Penal Code as many people
can fabricate evidence? Again,  when the matt er is pending with L okpal, a Minister can
ask the Attorney-General/Advocate-General/ Public Prosecutor to file a complaint o f
defamation  under Section 199 of Cr.PC. 
(vi)              Inquiry by Lokpal would be a public inquiry if otherwis e not required to be done in
camera.  How far is it practicable for Ministers/MPs to function fearlessly? 
(vii)             The Supreme Court can transfer  cases against the Ministers or MPs  to any other Court 
of Sessions under section 406 of  the CrPC as indicated in clause 22 of the Bill, which
will be embarrassing for them   
(viii)           The Supreme Court judgment in   JMM Bribery case which declares  MPs to be  public
servant is a divided  judgment (three-two),  which could be modified  by the Supreme 
Court  itself.  A point was raised that MPs were not whole time public servants.  They are
public servants only   to the extent of  putting questions, speaking in the House. 
Subjecting them  to Lokpal for the act done as part of his profession was not appropriate. 
Further,  the MPs are immunized for their act ivities  in Parliament under Art 105 (2) o f
Constitution which had also been upheld by the Supreme Court. 
4.1       A Member who had circulated a note on Lokpal Bill wherein he had touched upon  some of the 
above points including‘cash for question’ issue in England and Nolan Committee and Salmon 
Committee Reports thereon wanted to hand over a copy of the said note to the representatives of the 
Ministry for their perusal  and comments.  The Chairman directed the Secretariat to hand over a copy of 
the same to the Secretary (Personnel). 
  
Page 24 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

5.0       The Chairman in his concluding observati on had endorsed the view of  the other members that 
the present  legislation did not   talk of public grievances and c oncentrated its focus on  corruption
amongst  public functionaries.  He em phasised that  the MPs should be tr eated at par with others so fa r
as corruption cases were concerned so that equality before law was established. 
5.1       He also pointed out that though the Prime Minister is ‘first among e qual; and the qualification 
for him and the Ministers were the same, yet he enjoys highest authority in the Indian democratic system
as long as he enjoys the confidence of the House of the People.  He adduced a situation when the inquiry
to the complaint against the Prime Minister by the Lokpal was  on, oppositi on  parties could demand
latter’s stepping down, pending the enquiry.  That situati on would lead to institu tional instability in the 
political system. 
5.2       He opined that the proposed legislati on was based on the judgement  of the Supreme Court in
JMM bribery case and there was no guarantee that the Supreme Court would not change its own view as
had been seen  from Golak Nath’s case to Keshavan anda Bharati’s case.  Furt her, enactment of this 
legislation might weaken the organs of the Government i.e. Legislative & Executive, thereby the balance
struck between the three organs – Legislature, Executive and Judici ary would be disturbed leading to
serious implications on the polity.  In that context, he raised apprehension about the future of an
institution like Lokpal. 
6.         The Secretary  stated that some of th e issues raised by the Committ ee had legal implications and
the Law Ministry had to be consulted for that purpose  and sought some time to furnish comments of the
Ministry. 
7.         The Chairman directed the Secretary (Personnel) to send the replies  of the Ministry as 
early  as possible. 
(The witness then withdraw.) 
8.         A verbatim record of proceedings  was kept.             
9.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 16 October 2001. 
 
XL 
  
FORTIETH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on  Friday,  19 October 2001 in Committee Room  ‘C’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee––Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.         Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
5.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
6.         Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
Page 25 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

7.         Shri P.H. Pandian 
8.         Shri Subodh Ray 
9.         Shri Anadi Sahu 
10.       Shri  Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
11.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
12.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
13.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma 
14.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy  
  
SECRETARIAT 
             
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer 
  
WITNESSES 
  
Representatives of Ministry of  Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
  
Shri A.K. Agarwal, Secretary 
Shri K.V. Eapen, Director 
Shri Bhaskar Khulbe, Director 
  
Representatives of Le gislative Department a nd Department of  Le gal Affairs (Ministr y of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs) 
  
Dr. Subhash  C. Jain, Secretary (Legislative Department) 
Shri N.L. Meena, JS & LC (Legislative Department) 
Shri R.L. Koli, JS & LA (Department of Legal Affairs) 
2.0       *                                              *                                              * 
2.1       *                                              *                                              * 
3.0       *                                              *                                              * 
3.1       *                                              *                                              * 
4.         *                                              *                                              * 
5.0
              Thereafter, the Committee took up the Lokpal Bill, 2001 for further consideration. 
6.0       The Chairman briefly outlined the histor y and evolution of the Par liamentary system in the
country and possible implications of the proposed legislation on the futu re of the system in the country. 
He made a passing reference to th e earlier Committees which had ex amined the said legislation in
depth.  He felt that the issue of  bringing the PM and the MPs within the ambit of Lokpal needed careful
and conscious consideration. 
6.1       He requested the Members, who were not present in the last meeting on Lokpal, to make thei r
observations on the Bill first.  Thereafter, othe r members might supplemen t their points expressed
earlier.   He advised the officers of the Ministries to take down poi nts and send their comments to the
Secretariat as early as possible.   
7.0       Members expressed their view- points/observations  on the  Bill  which inter alia  veered around 
the issue  (i) whether the Prime Minister should be  within the ambit of Lokpal ( ii) whether the
Members  of  Parliament should be subjected to multiplicity of authorities leading to double jeopardy as
Page 26 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

envisaged by the scheme of the Bill , and (iii) why not the members of judiciary could be considered to
be brought within the scope of Lokpal? 
7.1       Members were of the unanimous  view th at the Prime Minister shoul d not be brought within the
ambit of Lokpal as its  implications would shake   the foundation of Parliame ntary system built in the
last  fifty-two years.  They obser ved that how  the PM  who enjoyed the confidence of the House of the 
People could function  when allegati ons were brought to the notice of  Lokpal  and that body initiates
inquiry.  A Member opined that even if the PM wa s to be brought  within the scope of Lokpal, some
checks and balances should be provided in the Bill itself particularly in clause 23.  He suggested that the
Lokpal after making preliminary scrutiny  of the complaint against the PM should send it to the
President of India, who may sanction a full inquiry if deemed fit. 
7.2.0    As regards bringing MPs within the ambit of Lokpal, ce rtain Members felt that some
institution/body  to look  into the conduct of Member s of Parliament had beco me necessary as public
perception of the elected   representatives was an unhappy one.  But handing  over the matter to the
retired judges would mean that the constitutional framework was not working properly.  It was stated
that the MPs had been declared  as ‘public    servant’ by the Supreme Court a nd they were to be 
prosecuted  under the PC Act, 1988,  and thus the in clusion of the MPs in th e definition of ‘public 
functionary’  may  amount to double jeopardy and mul tiplicity of proceedings.        The propose d
legislation did not provide  safeguards nor did any sa feguard exist to protect the Members of Parliament
from double jeopardy. 
___________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matters. 
7.2.1    In that context, a member  mentioned that judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court  had
created safeguards for themselves with  the pronoun cement of judgement in th e K.Veeraswamy case, in
terms of which no FIR could be registered against a Judge of High Court, Chief Justice of High Court or
Judge of the Supreme  Court with out the clearance of the Chief Ju stice of India  and sanctions fo r
launching  prosecution against them  could not be  granted by the Presiden t of India without the
concurrence of the Chief Justice of India. 
7.2.2    That member further menti oned that there should be a law wh ich would entail the prosecuting
agency to take the concurrence of the Pr esiding Officer i.e. Hon’ble Speaker/Hon’ ble Chairman before 
proceeding further and the invest igation should be done by the officer not below the rank o f
Superintendent of Police.  Another member suggested  that the competent author ity in the case of the
MPs should be their re spective Houses which should send the comp laint against them either to a Joint
Parliamentary Committee or Priv ileges Committee or Ethics Com mittee which would decide about
action to be taken i.e. suspension, removal or criminal investigation by the investigating agency within a
particular time frame or the House could even also reprimand the MP at the Bar of the House.  He,
therefore, felt that the proposed legislation contained anomalies and if any law were to be made it should
be self contained and should be made  in consonance with the present sc heme of Law.  In the absence o f
proper law, the matter may be left to the House to ha ve its own mechanism to tackle cases of corruption
by the Members of Parliament. 
7.3       Some members desired that Judges and Chief Justices of the High Courts, Judges of the Supreme
Court and Chief Justice of India should also be brought under the cate gory of ‘Public functionaries’ as 
defined in sub-clause (g) of clause 2 of the Bill.  It was suggested that the President of India could be the 
sanctioning authority for inquiry in to conduct of judges of the High  Courts & the Supreme Court by
Lokpal, for which relevant provisions may be added in clause 23 of the Bill. 
8.0       Views were expressed that  the proposed legislation was an half- baked measure and contained 
serious anomalies.  Anomalies pointed out by the Members were as follows:- 
(i)         Connotations of two terms i.e. ‘Public  functionary’ and ‘complaint’ detailed   in clause 2 
of the Bill are incoherent with the sc heme of Law to the extent that complaint against the
Page 27 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

offence under the PC Act, 1988 has to  be investigated not inquired.  Further inquisitioning of the
said offences committed by publ ic functionaries  (who have  been declared as public
servant by the Supreme Cour t) by the Lokpal put  the public functi onaries in double
jeopardy vis-a-vis public servan t  (bureaucrats), is there by against the   principle o f 
equality before the law. 
(ii)                Taking evidence on oath at inquiry stage by the Lokpal  (which is usually done at the 
time of trial) amounts to putting the cart before the horse. 
(iii)               Further the Lokpal cannot compel  a person who is not willi ng to appear before him but
is willing to give evidence before the Court of Law. 
(iv)       The Legislation has dangerous tr end by clubbing provisions of  Commissions of Inquiry
Act with the provision of Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(v)                The Lokpal has no nexus with Parliament as has been the Sw edish Ombudsman and 
Parliamentary Commissioner in U.K. 
(vi)              The Legislation does not   a ddress public grievances; rath er focusses its attention on 
bribery and corruption at high places, 
Thus,  it was suggested  that effi cacious law  should be brought to tack le  corruption at high  places as
the Lokpal legislation  appeared to be insufficient. 
8.1       A Member solicited a comprehensive bac kground note in tablular fo rm detailing provisions o f
different Lokpal legislation, problems encountered by it and perspective of different legislation on
Lokayuktas and another note on how misconduct of the Members of Parliament were dealt with in USA,
European and Commonwealth countries.  He desired that  the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill 
may be deferred till that time. 
8.2       Another Member   suggested that promin ent jurist having experience of social service may be
inducted to Lokpal, who could also be Chairman of the institution of Lokpal. 
8.3       Certain members favoured the passage of  the Bill in the presen t form and suggested that
members of Judiciary shoul d be brought within Lokpa l.  A Member desired amendment of Section 197
of Cr.P.C in the light of rule 2 of the IPC.   Another member  suggested the change of  title of the Bill. 
9.         The Chairman informed the Committee th at clause – by-clause cons ideration of the Bill woul d 
be taken on 1 November, 2001 as more than fifteen members had alrea dy made their observations.  He
requested the Secretary (Personnel) to send their submission on the queries by 30 October 2001. 
10.       A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
11.       The meeting was them adjourned at 1.20 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 30 October 2001. 
XLIII 
  
FORTY-THIRD MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M.  on Thursday, 1 November 2001 in Committee Room  ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee––Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.         Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj 
Page 28 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

3.         Shri Hiphei 
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
5.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
6.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
7.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
8.         Shri Pritish Nandy 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
9.         Shri M.O.H. Farook 
10.       Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav 
11.       Shri Vinay Katiyar 
12.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
13.       Shri P.H. Pandian 
14.       Shri Subodh Ray 
15.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
16.       Shri Anadi Sahu 
17.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
18.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
19.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
  
SECRETARIAT 
             
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
             
            WITNESSES 
Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
1.
                  Shri A.K. Agarwal, Secretary 
2.                  Shri Bhaskar Khulbe, Director 
  
Representatives of Le gislative Department a nd Department of  Le gal Affairs (Ministr y of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs) 
  
1.         Shri N.L. Meena,  Joint  Secretary and Legislative Counsel (Legislative Department) 
2.         Shri R.L. Koli, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor (Department of Legal Affairs) 
2.0       The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and made reference to the history of 
the legislation on Lokpal and Lokayuktas as also to the originater of the idea behind the legislation, who 
happened to be a member of the Committee. 
2.1       Thereafter, he touched upon, in brief, following three major areas emerging out of the 
discussions held on the Bill in the meetings of the Committee so far:- 
(i)                  Whether Lokpal’s jurisdiction should be extended to cover the judiciary? 
(ii)                Whether the institution of Pr ime Minister being privy to so many secret and sensitive 
issues of national interest be brought within the purview of Lokpal? and  
(iii)               Whether MPs should be subjected to the juri sdiction of Lokpal in  view of Supreme
Court judgement declaring  them as public servant and its legal consequences?. 
He felt that those points should be considered b y the Committee at len gth.  He then re quested the
Page 29 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

Members to make their respective submissions on the issues along with any other new points. 
3.0       On the issue of extension of ambit of Lokpal to the Judiciary, some  members expressed  the
opinion that the Lokp al should be broad- based enough to cover judges including Chief Justice of India
as the judiciary was not as clean and as respectable as it used  to be in the past.   Another member while
invoking the concept of “quis custodiet ipsos custodes ?”  (who will guard the gua rdians?), referred to 
one of the observations of the Ad ministrative Reforms Commision that in the discretionary field, 
matters involving acts of justice or  injustice, corruption or favourtism were to be inquired into by the
Lokpal and suggested that since the judiciary had been at times passing orders in a discretionary manner,
it should be  brought  under the Lokpal.  In that c ontext, he informed the Committee that an amendment
to that effect had been submitted by him.  He furt her suggested that the Chie f Justice of India should be
brought within the ambit of Lokpal with some checks and balances i.e. by keeping the President of India
as sanctioning authority for granting permission for initiation of inquiry by Lokpal. 
3.1       Another member was of the view that sinc e the scope of scheme of the present Bill was only in
regard to public functionaries, there was a need to have in place a separate mechanism for the judiciary.  
3.2       A majority of the members were of the opinion that the Prime Minist er being privy to vital
information should not be brought unde r the jurisdiction of Lokpal, as a constitutional process i.e. no
confidence motion was available in the Lok Sabha fo r removing him.  A group of members  opined that
the PM was not above the law of the land and shoul d be brought within th e ambit of Lokpal,  as
envisaged  by the Bill. Another memb er suggested that the  issue  s hould be referred to the larger body
i.e. Parliament, for taking a view thereon.  He opined that in case, the Prime Minister  were to be
brought within the ambit of Lokpal, there should be some sort  of cheeks and balances – providing 
concurrence of the President of India for initiating inquiry against him by the Lokpal. 
3.3.0    As to the issue of keeping of the Members of Parl iament within the ambit of Lokpal, an opinion
was expressed that Members of Pa rliament were public servants sui generis  in accordance with the 
judgement of the Supreme Court.  A nother member expressed  reservations on  the judgement declaring
MPs as public servant as they di d not exercise any executive power  and desired that the Government
might be requested to instruct Attorney General for appealing the Supreme Court to review its decision. 
Another  member opined that  Members of Parliament were under th e discipline  of each  House and its
Privileges/Ethics Committee.  Putting the MPs under the Lokpal would make them subject to the
multiplicity of authoritie s and thus led to encroachment upon the priviledges, authority and  dignity o f
Parliament.  The MPs may be made to appear before Second Class Magistrate as the Supreme Court had
power to transfer cases from the  Lokpal to the Court of Sessions as per clause 22 of the Bill which may
hamper the dignity and privileges of  Members and thereby of the Ho use and suggested deletion of that
clause from the Bill.  Some ot her Members wondered how could the Lokpal have jurisdiction over the
MPs without amending Article 105 of the Constitution. and in th at context, wanted to know the position
of the Government with regard JMM case, wherei n five Supreme Court J udges unanimously had held
the  view  that Section 19 of PC  Act, 1988 be amended to give sa nctioning authority in relation to
prosecution of the MPs.  Anothe r strand of opinion expressed by Members was that Members o f
Parliament should not be subjected to multiplicity of authorities; rather  they should for under the
Privileges /Ethics Committees of th eir respective Houses as precedents  galore where  the functioning o f
those Committees were better than any Commissions of  Inquiry. 
3.3.1    Some members expressed the opinion that MPs should be under the Lokpal as inherent 
safeguards in the form of sanction by competent authority did exist in the Bill. 
3.4       A majority of the me mbers dubbed the   Bill as half – baked legislation, a whole heap o f 
anomalies and pointed out that the following inconsistencies needed to be addressed: 
(i)                  The term “public functionary”  in the Bill included thos e who had been declared as
‘public servant’ by the Supreme Court a nd rationale of usin g the term ‘public 
functionary’ in the place of ‘public servant’.
Page 30 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

(ii)                The term ‘inquiry’ had not been defined in the Bill whereas the inquiry as defined by
Cr.P.C. meant inquiry by a Magistrate. 
(iii)               The definition of the term ‘complaint’ as given in the Bill en tailed only inquiry into the 
offence under the PC Act, 1988 which ought to be investigated. 
(iv)              Provisions in the Bill particularly in Clauses 10 to 17 were a queer mixture of provisions 
of Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 and Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  It amounted to
civil trial of corruption cases  by an inquiry officer which ought to have been done by an
investigating officer. 
(v)                Inquiry into the complaint under the PC Ac t, 1988 by Lokpal as envisaged under clause 
10 of the Bill may creat a situ ation where two parallel authorities would be inquiring and
investigating into the same offence as the Magistrate and Police were not duty- bound to 
keep the complaint pending till the matter was finalised by the Lokpal and the provisions
of Chapters XII and XV of the Cr. P.C. could not be kept in abeyance during that period. 
(vi)              The Bill was silent as to what was to be done after th e charges were proved by the 
Lokpal. 
(vii)             Ranks of Officers to assist Lokpal in conducting inquiry were not specified in the Bill.  
4.0       Certain members suggested deletion of clau se 22 of the Bill. They we re in favour of only in-
camera trial of the public functionaries by the Lokpal.  They felt that the Bill  required further study and
consultation with eminent jurists.  According to th em, the Bill may be sent back to the Ministry o f
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for re-drafting. 
4.1       A few members desired that the Bill may be  passed in toto as four decades had been wasted to
enact the legislation.  Anot her member, in that context, opined that the Lokpal would be the creation o f
Parliament and the final authority in relation to the public functionaries w ould be their competent
authority which was prescribed in  the Bill and  therefore  Parliament woul d have control over them. 
That Member, further, opined that the Lokpal woul d be an expert body, whose inputs would be utilised
by Parliament in the conduct of inquiry against the Members.  Thus, the Bill  may be passed in the
present form. 
5.         The Chairman, in conclusion, clarified th at the intention of holding detailed discussion was to 
improve the Bill from every possibl e angle and not to stall the Bill.   Thereafter, he requested the
Secretary (Personnel) to send detail ed responses to the observations of Members, including legal points
raised, at the earliest, so as to enable the Commit tee to take up considerati on of the Bill clause-by-
clause.  He also requested the Memb ers to send their amendments, if they have any, to the Secretariat
meanwhile. 
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.         The Committee then ad journed at 1.10 P.M. to meet a gain at 11.00 A.M. on Frida y, 2
November 2001. 
  
XLVIII 
  
FORTY-EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, 4 December 2001 in Co mmittee Room No.63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee––Chairman 
  
Page 31 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

RAJYA SABHA 
             
2.                  Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
3.                  Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
4.                  Shri Drupad Borgohain 
5.                  Shri Kuldip Nayyar 
  
            LOK SABHA 
          
6.                  Shri M.O.H. Farook 
7.                  Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8.                  Shri Shriniwas Patil 
9.                  Shri Subodh Ray 
10.              Shri Anadi Sahu 
11.              Shri Manabendra Shah 
12.              Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
13.              Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha 
14.              Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
15.              Shri Jaisingrao  Gaikwad Patil 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
            Shri A. K. Sahoo, Committee Officer 
 
            WITNESSES 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
  
1.                  Shri A.K. Agarwal, Secretary 
2.                  Shri D.C. Gupta, Special Secretary 
3.                  Shri K.V. Eapen, Director 
4.                  Shri Bhaskar  Khulbe, Director 
5.                  Shri Jugal Kishore, Under Secretary 
  
            Representatives of  Legislative Department  (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs) 
  
1.
                  Shri N.L. Meena,  Joint  Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
2.                  Dr. S.D. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
  
            Representative of Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs) 
  
                        Shri R.L. Koli, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser 
2.                     *                                                          *                                                          *
Page 32 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

3.0       *                                                          *                                                          * 
3.1       *                                                          *                                                          * 
3.2       *                                                          *                                                          * 
4.0       The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministries and informed the Committee that 
thirty-six Members of the Committee had  so far spoken  on the various provisions of the Lokpal  Bill, 
200,  in     three sittings  spanning six hours and forty minutes. 
4.1       He then posed three vital issues connected with  the Bill-whether PM, MPs and Judges should be 
brought within the purview of the Lokpal and requested Members to express their views  on these 
issues. 
5.0       All members present expressed their views.  With regard to Members of Parliament, one strand 
of opinion was that instead of keeping them within the ambit of Lokpal, they should be under the 
jurisdiction of Privileges/Ethics Committees of their respective Houses.  The other strand of opinion was 
that the Members of Parliament were accountable to the public and should be brought within the ambit 
of the Lokpal. 
5.1       Pertaining to Prime Minister, one group  of opinion was that the Prime Minister being privy to 
vital information should not be brought under the jurisdiction of Lokpal.  The other strand of opinion 
was that no one was above the law of the land and the Prime Minister, thus, should be brought within 
the purview of Lokpal.   
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matters. 
  
5.2       The Committee also deliberated on the issue of extending the jurisdiction of Lokpal to the
judiciary.  Some Members of the Committee were of the view that the judici ary should  be brought
within the ambit of Lokpal.  The other section of opi nion desired that since in the scheme of the present
Bill, Judges would not fit in, a nother piece of legislation may be brought to make the Judges
accountable. 
 6.        The Chairman, then, announced that clause -by-clause consideration of the Bill may be taken up 
in the next meeting to be held on 11December  2001 and re-scheduled  the timing  to  3.00 P.M  instea d 
of  3.30 P.M as fixed earlier. 
(The witnesses then  withdrew) 
7.         The Committee adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 11December 2001. 
XLIX 
  
FORTY-NINTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 11 December 2001 in Committee Room No.63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee             ––        Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh 
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam 
4.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
  
            LOK SABHA 
  
5.         Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
Page 33 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

6.         Shri M.O.H.  Farook 
7.         Shri P.H. Pandian 
8.         Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
9.         Shri Subodh Ray 
10.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy 
11.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
12.       Shri Anadi Sahu 
13.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
14.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
15.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
  
SECRETARIAT 
             
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
            Shri A. K. Sahoo, Committee Officer 
  
WITNESSES 
  
Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
1.         Shri A.K. Agarwal, Secretary 
2.         Shri D.C. Gupta, Special Secretary 
3.         Shri Bhaskar  Khulbe, Director 
  
Representative of  Legislative Department  (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs) 
  
            N.L. Shri Meena,  Joint  Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
  
Representative  of  Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs) 
  
                        Shri R.L. Koli, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser 
2.0       *                                                          *                                                          * 
2.1       *                                                          *                                                          * 
3.         *                                                          *                                                          * 
3.1       *                                                          *                                                          * 
3.2       *                                                          *                                                          * 
4.         *                                                          *                                                          * 
4.1       *                                                          *                                                          * 
5.0       *                                                          *                                                          *           
5.1       *                                                          *                                                          * 
5.2       Then the Committee took up clause-by-clause  communication  of  Lokpal Bill, 2001. 
Clause 2 
6.0       The clause seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill.
Page 34 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

6.1       The Committee  adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 3 
6.2.0    The clause seeks to provide for the establishment of the institution of Lokpal and its composition
and qualifications for the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal. 
6.2.1    The Committee adopted  the clause without any change. 
Clause 4 
6.3.0    The clause seeks to provide  for  the appointment of Chairper son and Members of Lokpal,   on
the basis of recommendations of a high profile screening  Committee consisting of the Vice-President of 
India, the Prime Minister, the Speake r of the House of the People, the Minister in-charge of Ministry o f 
Home Affairs in the Government of  India, the Leader of the House other than the House in which the
Prime Minister is a member of Parliament, the Lead er of the Opposition in th e House of the People and
the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States. 
6.3.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 5 
6.4.0    The clause seeks to provid e that the Chairperson and the Memb ers shall be ineligible to hold
other offices. 
6.4.1    The Committee  adopted  the clause without any change. 
___________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matters. 
Clause 6 
6.5.0    The clause deals with the te rm of office and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and
Members of the Lokpal.  The conditions of service, salary, allowances and pension of the Chairperson
shall be the same as those of the Chief Justice of India an d of other Members as t hose of a Judge of the
Supreme Court. 
  
6.5.1    The Committee  adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 7 
6.6.0    The clause  deals with the removal of Chairperson and Members. 
6.6.1     The Committee  adopted  the clause without any change. 
Clause 8 
6.7.0    The clause seeks to provi de that the senior-most Member shall act as the Chairperson o r 
discharge his functions in certain circumstances. 
6.7.1        The Committee  adopted  the clause  without  any change. 
Clause 9 
6.8.0    The clause deals with the staff of the Lokpal and the powers of the Lokpal to utilize the services,
inter alia,  of any investigating agencies of the Central Government or State Government and of  the 
services of  any other  persons or agencies. 
6.8.1    The Committee observed that the staff of the Lokpal could be used for collection of evidence and
making inquiry.   The Committee was of the view that it may not be proper for the Lokpal to utilise the
services of persons or agencies other than those of Central Government or State Government, keeping in
view the fact that it would inqui re into complaints against top  public functionaries i.e. the PM,
Ministers and MPs.  Therefore,  th e Committee recommended for deletion of  sub-clause  (2) (ii)  so as 
to remove the provision   for securing  the services , of any other person or ag ency, by the Lokpal.  The
Committee also recommended that conse quential amendments in sub clauses (3) and (4) may be carried
Page 35 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

out. 
6.8.2        The Committee adopted the  clause as amended. 
Clause 10 
6.9.0    The clause  deals with the jurisdiction of th e Lokpal. Sub-Clause (1) s eeks to provide that the 
Lokpal may inquire into any matter involved in, or arising from or connected with any allegation made
in a complaint.  Sub-Clause (2) seeks to provide th at the Lokpal may inquire in to any act or conduct o f 
any person other than a public functi onary  if it considers necessary  to do so for the purposes of its
iniquiry into any allegation.  Sub- clause (3) seeks to provide that no matter in respect of which a
complaint may be made under th e proposed enactment shall be referred for inquiry under the
Commissions of  Inquiry Act,  1952.  
6.9.1        The Committee adopted  the clause  without any change. 
Clause 11 
6.10.0  The clause  seeks to provide  that the Lokpal shall not inquire  into any matter concerning any
person if the Chairperson or any other Member has any bias in respect of such matter or person.  The
clause also seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall not inquire into any complaint made after the expiry of
a period of ten years from the date   on which the offence mentioned in  such a complaint is alleged to
have been committed. 
6.10.1    The Committee adopted  the clause  without any change. 
Clause 12 
6.11.0  The clause seeks to provide that any person other than a pubic servant as defined therein may file
a complaint which shall be in the prescribed form a nd shall be accompanied by an affidavit. This clause
also seeks to provide that the complainant shall deposit such sum of money in such manner and with
such authority or agency as may be prescribed and the certificate for such deposit shall be furnished in
the prescribed form. 
6.11.1  The Explanation below sub-clause  (1) defines “public servants” for the purposes of that sub-
clause,  who can make a complaint to the Lokpal.  Ac cording to the definition, “public servant” includes 
inter alia any person in the service of any other institut ion, concern or undertaking which is established 
by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act or which is controlled, or financed wholly or substantially
by funds provided, directly or indirectly, by the Central Government or a State Government. 
6.11.2  The Committee was of the view that persons only in the service of an  institution, concern, o r
undertaking which was funded directly by the Cent ral Government or a State Government should be
treated as “public servant” for the purposes of sub-clause (1). 
6.11.3  Accordingly, the Committee r ecommended that the words “or indirectly” appearing in sub-
section (c) of the Explanation below sub-clause (1) may be deleted. 
6.11.4  Sub-clause (4) provides that a letter written to the Lokpal, or as the case may be, to the 
appropriate authority, as defined in the Explanation below sub-clause (5), by a person in any jail or other 
place of custody or in any asylum or other place for insane persons may, if the Lokpal or the appropriate
authority is satisfied that it is n ecessary so to do, treat the letter as  a complaint made in accordance with
the provisions of clause 12. 
6.11.5  The Committee was of the view that only the Lokpal and no other authority should be entitled to
receive  letters from persons in jail, custody, asylum, etc. 
6.11.6  Accordingly, the Committee recommended that the words “or,   as the case may be, to the 
appropriate authority”, wherever these  occur  in  sub-clause (4) may be deleted.  The Committee further 
recommended that consequential amendments may be carried out in sub-clause (5).  The Committee also 
recommended deletion of Explanation below sub-clause (5) as it would become redundant in the light of
Page 36 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

amendments suggested in sub-clauses (4) and (5).  
6.11.7  The Committee adopted the clause as amended. 
Clause 13 
6.12.0    The clause deals with the preliminary scrutiny of complaints by the Lokpal.  
6.12.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 14 
6.13.0  The clause seeks to provide for the procedur e for making inquiries into the complaints by the
Lokpal.  This clause also seeks to provide that th e Lokpal shall complete th e inquiry within six months
from the date of the receipt of the complaint, whic h could be extended for a further period of six months
by the Lokpal for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
6.13.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 15 
6.14.0  The clause seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall have all the powers of a civil court in respect of
summoning and enforcing the attendance, receiv ing evidence and issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses or documen ts, etc.  This Clause also seek s to provide that the proceedings
before the Lokpal shall be de emed to be judicial proceedings with in the meaning of section 193 of the
Indian Penal code. 
6.14.1  The Committee recomm ended deletion of sub -section (b)(v) of sub -clause (1) regarding issuing 
of commission for the examination of witnesses or documents  as  the Committee felt  that  the
demeanor of the witness could be better  observed by the Lokpal  itself. 
6.14.2  The Committee adopted the clause as amended. 
Clause 16 
6.15.0  The clause seeks to confer powers of search and seizure on the Lokpal. 
6.15.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 17 
6.16.0  The  clause relates to reports of the Lokpal and action taken thereon.  Sub-clause (1) seeks to 
provide that after inquiry the Lokpal shall communicates its findings to the complainant,  the public 
functionary and the competent authority.  This clause also seeks to provide that the annual consolidated 
report shall be presented by the Lokpal to the President on the administration of the proposed enactment.
6.16.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change.  
Clause 18 
6.17.0  The clause seeks to provide that the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Chairperson
and Members of the Lokpal shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
6.17.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 19 
6.18.0  The clause seeks to provide for punishment for intentional insult or interruption to the Lokpal. 
6.18.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 20 
6.19.0  The clause seeks to confer powers on the Lokpal to try summarily and punish those persons who 
intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption, to the Lokpal. 
6.19.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 21 
6.20.0  The clause seeks to provide for the dis posal of deposits made by the complainants under clause
Page 37 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

12.  This clause also seeks to provide for act ion to be taken by the Lokpal in the case of mala fide
complaints. 
6.20.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 22 
6.21.0  The clause provides for application of certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 to the proceedings before the Lokpal. 
6.21.1  The Committee took exception to  the provision for transferring cases from Lokpal to Court o f
Sessions in accordance with section 406 of Cr. PC.   
6.21.2  Accordingly, the Committee recommended deletion of the entire clause. 
Clause 23 
6.22.0  The clause seeks to provide for the conferme nt of additional functions by the President on the
Lokpal. 
6.22.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 24 
6.23.0  The clause  provides that if at any stage of inquiry, any person is likely to be prejudicially
affected shall be afforded an opportunity of being heard. 
6.23.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 25 
6.24.0  The clause  provides for protection from le gal proceedings, etc., fo r the action taken in good
faith. 
6.24.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 26 
6.25.0    The clause deals with the delegation of certain powers by the Lokpal. 
6.25.1  The Committee recommended deletion of  the words “and  agencies ” occurring in the 
clause as a consequence of the amendment suggested by it in clause 9 (2). 
6.25.2  The Committee adopted the clause as amended. 
Clause 27 
6.26.0  The clause seeks to confer power on the President to make rules. 
6.26.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 28 
6.27.0  The clause makes it clear that the Lokpal sh all not have any jurisdic tion to conduct any inquiry
into any allegation against or any act or conduct of the Pr esident, the Vice-President or the Speaker o f 
the House of the People, the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme Court, the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India, the Ch ief Election Commissione r or other Election Commissioners or the
Chairman or any other Member of the Union Public Servic e Commission.  It also  provides that the
Lokpal shall not make any inquiry upon its own knowledge or information. 
6.27.1  The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 29 
6.28.0  The clause provides that th e provisions of the proposed en actment shall not affect the
constitution of, or the continuance of functioning or exercise of powers by, any Commission of Inquiry
appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 before the coming into force of the provisions of
Page 38 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

the proposed enactment. 
6.28.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Clause 30 
6.29.0  the clause seeks to make a consequential amendment in the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 
6.29.1    The Committee adopted the clause without any change. 
Schedule 
  
6.30.0  The Schedule appended to the Bi ll contains the oath to be taken by Chairperson or Members o f
Lokpal. 
6.30.1  The Schedule to the Bill was adopted without any change. 
Clause I, the Enacting Formula and the  Title
6.31     Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change. 
  
7.         The Committee adjourned at 5.05 P.M. to meet again on 19 December 2001. 
  
L 
  
FIFTIETH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 19 December 2001 in Room No.63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee––Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh 
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi 
5.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu 
  
            LOK SABHA 
  
6.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
7.         Shri M.O.H.  Farook 
8.         Shri Vinay Katiyar 
9.         Shri Subodh Ray 
10.       Shri Anadi Sahu 
11.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
12.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
13.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
14.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
             
SECRETARIAT 
  
Page 39 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer 
            Shri A. K. Sahoo, Committee Officer 
  
2.0       The Committee considered the draft  Report on Lokpal Bill, 2001 and adopted the same. 
2.1       *                                              *                                              * 
_______________________ 
***Relates to other matters. 
  
2.2       The Committee decided to present/lay the Report on the Lokpal Bill , 2001, as its Eighty-third 
Report, along with Evidence tendered on the Bill, to both  Houses on Friday 21 December 2001.  The
Committee also decided to present/ lay the Report on “Law’s  Delays: Arrears in Courts” as its Eighty-
fourth Report, to both Houses on 21 December 2001. 
  
3.0       The Committee authorised its Chairman a nd in his absence Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj, and Shri
Anadi Sahu and in his absence Shri   P.H. Pandian, to respectively present/lay the Reports/Evidence to
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha. 
  
3.1       The Committee also decided that in view of  the indications of the likely adjournment of both the
Houses sine die before the scheduled date i. e. 21 December 2001, and also in view of the fact that the 
term of the current Committee would expire on 31 December 2001, the Reports and the Evidence may
be presented to Hon’ ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha by the Chairm an of the Committee, should the Houses
adjourn sine die prematurely. 
  
3.2       The Committee, accordingly, authorised its Chairman to present th e Reports and Evidence to
Hon’ble Chairman, if required. 
  
4.         The Chairman, on behalf of the entire Committee,  placed on record  his sincere appreciation  for
the good work done by the Secretariat in servici ng the Committee.  Several members associated
themselves with  the observations of the Chairman.  
  
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 P.M. to reassemble tent atively on 14 and 15 January
2002, after its reconstitution.  
ANNEXURE 
ANNEXURE I
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                            14 August 2001 
(See page 1, para 1 of the Report) 
THE LOKPAL BILL, 2001 
________ 
  
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
________ 
  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
  
CLAUSES 
Page 40 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
1.         Short title and commencement. 
2.         Definitions. 
  
CHAPTER II 
MACHINERY FOR INQUIRIES  
  
3.         Establishment of Lokpal. 
4.         Appointment of Chairperson and Members. 
5.         Chairperson and Members to be ineligible to hold  other offices. 
6.                  Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members. 
7.                  Removal of Chairperson or  Members. 
8.                  Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances. 
9.                  Staff of Lokpal. 
  
CHAPTER  III 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE IN RESPECT OF INQUIRIES 
  
10.       Jurisdiction of Lokpal. 
11.       Matters not subject to jurisdiction of Lokpal. 
12.       Complaints. 
13.       Preliminary scrutiny of complaints by Lokpal. 
14.       Procedure in respect of inquiries. 
15.       Evidence. 
16.       Search and seizure. 
17.       Reports. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
  
18.       Expenditure on Chairperson  and Me mbers to be charged on the Consolidated Fund o f
India. 
19.       Intentional  insult or interruption to Lokpal. 
20.       Power of Lokpal to try certain offences. 
21.       Disposal  of deposit under section 12, etc., and penalty for mala fide complaint. 
22.       Application of Act 2 of 1974. 
23.       Conferment of additional functions on Lokpal. 
24.       Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard. 
25.       Protection of action taken in good faith. 
26.       Power to delegate. 
27.       Power to make rules. 
28.       Removal of doubts. 
29.       Saving. 
30.       Consequential amendments of Act 60 of 1952. 
  
THE SCHEDULE 
 
Page 41 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
 
                     14 August 2001
 
 
Bill No. 73 of 2001
  
THE LOKPAL BILL, 2001 
  
A 
  
BILL 
  
to  provide  for  the  establishment  of  the  institution  of  Lokpal  to  inquire  into  allegations  of  
corruption  against public functionaries and for matters connected therewith. 
  
            BE  it  enacted  by Parliament  in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows: 
  
  
CHAPTER 1 
  
PRELIMINARY  
  
  
  
  1.(1) This Act may be called the Lokpal Act, 2001. Short title and 
commencement. 
  (2) It shall come into force on such date  as the  Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
  
  
  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
  
Definitions.
  
  
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Lokpal;
 (b) “competent authority”, in relation to 
(i)  the Prime Minister, means the House of the People; 
(ii) a member of the Council of Ministers, other than the Prime 
Minister, means the Prime Minister; and 
(iii) a member of Parlia ment, other than a Minister means the 
Council of States in the case of  a member of that Council and 
House of the People in the case of a member of that House; 
  
     (c )  “complaint” means a comp laint alleging that a public 
functionary has committed a ny offence punishable under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; 
49 of 
1988 
     (d)  “Lokpal” means the institution established under section 3;   
     (e)  “Member” means a Member of the Lokpal;   
     (f)  “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act;   
     (g)  “Public functionary” means a person who   
  (i) Holds or has held the office of the Prime Minister, Minister, 
Minister of State or Deputy Minister of the Union; or  
  
            (ii)  is or has been a member of either House of Parliament.   
Page 42 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

                                                                           CHAPTER II
  
MACHINERY FOR INQUIRIES 
  
Establishment 
of Lokpal. 
3.(1) As from the commencement of this Act, there shall be 
established, for the purpose of making inquiries in respect of 
complaints under this Act, an institution to be called the 
“Lokpal”.   
  
  
     (2)  The Lokpal shall consist of   
           (a) a Chairperson who is or has be en a Chief Justice or a Judge 
of the Supreme Court; and 
    
           (b)  two Members who are or have   been the Judges of the 
Supreme Court or the Chief Justices  of the High Courts. 
    
     (3)  The Chairperson and every other  Member shall, before 
entering upon his office,  make and subscribe  before  the President, 
or a person appointed in that behalf  by the President, an oath or a 
affirmation  in the form set  out in the Schedule. 
  
  
  
Appointment 
of 
Chairperson  
and Members. 
4. The Chairperson and Members shall be appointed by the President 
by  warrant under his hand and seal: 
  
  
  Provided that every appointment under this sub-section shall be 
made after obtaining the reco mmendations of a Committee 
consistin
g of 
  
  
       (a)  the Vice-President of India                                                        
Chairman; 
    
       (b)  the Prime Minister 
                                                                      Member; 
    
       (c)  the Speaker of the House of the People                                      
Member; 
    
  (d) the Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
           in the Government of India                                                         
Member;             
  
  
  (e) the Leader of the House other than the House in which the 
Prime  
      Minister is a Member  of Parliament                                           
Member;   
  
  
  (f)  the Leader of the opposition in the House of the people            
Member;                                                                                           
    
       (g) the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States              
  Member; 
    
  Provided  further that in case, th ere is no Leader of Opposition in 
the House of the  People or the Counc il of States, the leader of the 
single  largest group or party in opposition to the Government, as the 
case may be, in such House or C ouncil shall be deemed to be a 
member of the Committee specified in clause (f)  or clause (g), as the 
case may be. 
  
  
  Provided also that no sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or sitting 
Chief Justice of a Hi gh Court shall be appointed except after 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India. 
  
  
Page 43 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  (2) No appointment of a Chairperson  or a Me mber shall be invalid 
merely by reason of any vacancy in the Committee. 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
5.  The Chairperson or a Member shall not be a member  of Parliament or 
a member of the Legislature of any St ate or Union territory and shall not 
hold any office of trust or profit (oth er than his office as the Chairperson 
or a Member) or be connected with any political part y or carry on any 
business or practise any  profession  and accordingly, before he enters 
upon  his office, a person appointed as  the Chairperson or a Member ,as 
the case may be, shall, if 
Chairperson  
and 
Members  to 
be ineligible 
to hold other 
office. 
    (a)  he is a member of Parliament or  of the Legislatur e of any State or 
Union  territory, resign such membership; or 
  
    (b)  he holds any office or trust or profit, resign  from such office; or   
    (c)  he is connected with any political  party, sever his connection with it; 
or 
  
  
  (d) he  is carrying on any business, sever his connection (short of divesting 
himself of ownership) with the conduct  and management of such 
business; or  
  
    (e)  he is practising  any profession, cease to practise such  profession.   
  
  6. (1) The Chairperson and ev ery other Member shall hold office as such 
for a term of three  years from the date on which he en ters upon his office 
or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier: 
  
Provided that he may 
Term  of 
office and 
other 
conditions of 
service of 
Chairperson 
and 
Members. 
          (a)  by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his 
office; o
r 
  
          (b) be removed from his office in the manner provided in section 7.   
    On ceasing to hold Office, the Chairp erson and every other Member shall 
be ineligible for 
  
         (i)     reappointment in the Lokpal;   
  
      (ii )  any diplomatic assignment, a ppointment as administrator of a 
Union territory and such other a ssignment or appointment which is 
required  by law to be made by the President by warrant under his hand 
and seal; and 
  
        (iii ) further employment to any othe r office of profit under the 
Government of India or the Government of a State. 
  
    (3) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of   
          (i) the Chairperson shall be the same  as those of the Chief Justice 
of         India; 
  
    (ii) other Members shall be the sa me as those of a Judge of 
Supreme Court; 
  
  
  Provided that if the Chairperson  or  a Member is, at the time of his 
appointment, in receipt of  a pension (other than a disability or wound 
pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government of India 
or under the Government of a State, his salary in respect of service as the 
Chairperson or, as the case may be, as a Member, be reduced 
  
    (a)  by the amount of that pension; and   
    (b) if he has, before such appointment, received, in lieu of a portion of 
the pension due to him in respect of such previous  service, the commuted 
  
Page 44 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
  
CHAPTER III 
value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension:
  
  Provided further that the salary, a llowances and pension payable to, 
and other conditions of service of, th e Chairperson or a Member shall not 
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
  
  
  7. The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed fr om his  office 
except by an order made by the President on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or  incapacity afte r an inquiry made by a Committee 
consisting of the Chief Justice of India and two other Judges of the 
Supreme Court next to the Chief Ju stice in seniority, in which the 
Chairperson or the Member had been informed of the charges against him 
and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those 
charges. 
Removal of 
Chairperson 
or Members. 
Member to act 
as Chairperson 
or to discharge 
his functions in 
certain 
circumstances. 
8. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of 
the Chairperson by reason of his de ath, resignation or otherwise the 
President may, by notification, author ise the senior-most Member to 
act as the Chairperson until the a ppointment of a new Chairperson to 
fill such vacancy. 
  
  (2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing 
to absence on leave or otherwise th e senior-most Member available, 
as the President may, by notification, authorise in this  behalf, shall 
discharge the functions of the Chai rperson until the date on which the 
Chair
person resumes his duties. 
  
Staff of Lokpal.  9. (1) The Lokpal shall, for the pur pose of assisting it in the 
discharge of its functions (includi ng verification and inquiries in 
respect of complaints) under this Act, appoint a Secretary and 
such other officers and empl oyees as the president may 
determine, from time to time, in consultation with the Lok
pal. 
  
  (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
Lokpal may, for the purpose of dealing with any complaint or any 
classes of complaints, secure 
  
       (i) the services of any officer or employee or investigating 
agency of the Central Government  or a State Government with 
the concurrence of that Government  with the concurrence of that 
Government, or 
  
      (ii) the services of any other person or agency.   
       (3) The terms and conditions of service of the officers and 
employees referred to in sub-s ection (1) and of the officers, 
employees, agencies and persons referred to in sub-section (2) 
(including such special conditions as may be considered necessary for 
enabling them to act without fear or  favour in the di scharge of their 
functions) shall be such as the Pres ident may determine, from time to 
time, in consultation with the Lokpal.  
  
       (4) In the discharge of their functi ons under this Act, the officers 
and employees referred to in sub-section (1) and the officers, 
employees, agencies and persons referred to in sub-section (2) shall be 
subject to the exclusive administra tive control and direction of the 
Lokpal. 
 
  
  
Page 45 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE IN RESPECT OF INQUIRIES 
  
  
Jurisdiction 
of Lokpal. 
10. (1) Subject to the other pr ovisions of this Act, the Lokpal shall inquire 
into any matter involved in, or arising from, or connected with, any 
allegation made in a complaint: 
  
  Provided that the Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter involve in, or 
arising from, or connected with, a ny such allegation against the Prime 
Minister in so far as it relates to national security and maintenance of public 
order. 
  
        (2) The Lokpal may inquire into any act or conduct of any person other 
than a public functionary, in so far as it  considers it necessa ry so to do for 
the purpose of its inquiry into any such allegation: 
  
   Provided that the Lokpal shall give such person a reasonable 
opportunity of being here and to produce evidence in his defence. 
  
          (3) No matter in respect of which a complaint may be made under this 
Act shall be referred for inquiry unde r the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 
1952. 
60 of 
1952. 
Matters not 
subject to 
jurisdiction 
of Lokpal. 
11. (1) The Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter concerning any person 
if the Chairperson or any Member has any bias in re spect of such matter or 
person and if any dispute arises in th is behalf, the President shall, on an 
application made by the pa rty aggrieved, obtain, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, the opinion of the Chief Justice of Indi a and decide the dispute 
in conformit
y with such opinion. 
 
  
  
        (2) The Lokpal shall not inquire into any complaint if the complaint is 
made after the expiry of  ten years from the date on which the offence 
mentioned in such complaint is alleged to have been committed. 
  
  12. (1) Any person other than a public se rvant may make a complaint under 
this Act to the Lokpal. 
         Explanation . For the purposes of this su b-section, “public servant” 
means 
Complaints.
  
  
(a) any person who is a member of a de fence service or of a civil service 
of the Union or a State or of an all-India service or holds any post connected 
with defence or any civil post under the Union or a State; 
  
1 of 
1956. 
(b) any person in the service or pay of a local authority, a corporation 
established by or under a Central, Provi ncial or State Act or a Government 
company, as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; 
  
  (c) any person in the service of a ny other institution, concern or 
undertaking which is established by  or  under a Central, Provincial or State 
Act or which is controlled, or financ ed wholly or substantially by funds 
provided, directly or indirectly, by the Central Government or a State 
Government. 
  
  (2) The complaint shall be in the pr escribed form and shall set forth 
particulars of the offence alleged and shall be accompanied by fees 
prescribed, if any, an affidavit in suppor t of such particulars and a certificate 
of deposit furnished under sub-section (3) or, if the complain is unable to 
make the deposit, an application for exemption from the requirement as to 
such deposit. 
  
  (3) The complainant shall deposit such sum of money in such manner and 
with such authority or agency as may be prescribed and the certificate for 
such deposit shall be furnished in the prescribed form. 
  
Page 46 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
  (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the fo regoing sub-section, any 
letter written to the Lokpal or, as the case may be, to the appropriate 
authority, by a person in an y jail or other place of custody or in any asylum 
or other place for insane persons may, if the L okpal or, as the case may be, 
the appropriate authority is satisfied that  it is necessary so to do, be treated 
as a complaint made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
  
  (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other enactment, it shall be 
the duty of a police officer or other pe rson in-charge of a ny jail or other 
place of custody or of a ny asylum or other place for insane persons to 
forward, without opening, any letter addressed to the Lokpal or to the 
appropriate authority by a person imprisone d or detained in such jail, place 
of custody, asylum or other place, to the Lokpal or the appropriate authority, 
as the case may be, without delay. 
  
  Explanation.  For the purposes of this section, “appropriate authority” means 
any of the authorities, which the Lokpa l may, by general or special order, in 
writing, determine to be the appropriate authority. 
  
  13 (1) If the Lokpal is satisfied, after considering a complaint and after 
making such verification as it deems appropriate that 
Preliminary 
scrutiny of 
complaints 
by Lokpal. 
  (a) the complaint is not made within a period of ten years as specified in 
sub-section (2) of section 11; or 
  
  (b) the complaint is manifestly false and vexatious,
the Lokpal shall dismiss the complaint after recording its reasons therefore 
and communicate the same to the co mplainant and to the competent 
authority. 
  
  (2) the procedure for verification in  respect of a co mplaint under sub-
section (1) shall be such as the Lokpa l deems appropriate in the 
circumstances of the case an d in particular, the Lokpa l  may, if it deems fit 
in necessary so to do, call for the comments of the public functionary 
concerned. 
  
Procedure 
in respect 
of inquiries. 
14. (1) If, after the consideration and verification under section 13 in respect 
of a complaint, the Lokpal proposes to conduct any inquiry, it 
  
  (a) shall forthwith forward a copy of the complaint to the competent 
authority; 
  
  (b) may make such orders as to the safe custody of documents relevant to 
the inquiry as it deems fit; and 
  
  (c) shall, at such time as it considers appropriate, forward a copy of the 
complaint to the public functionary concerned and afford him an 
opportunity to represent his case. 
  
  (2) Every inquiry shall be conducted by the Chairperson and the Members 
sitting jointly and the place in which such inquiry is conducted shall be 
deemed to be an open court to which the public generally may have access 
so far as the same can conveniently contain them: 
  
  Provided that in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, such inquiry may be conducted in camera. 
  
  (3) The Lokpal shall hold every such inquiry as expeditiously as possible 
and in any case complete the inquiry within a period of six months from the 
date of receipt of the complaint: 
  
Page 47 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
  
  Provided that the Lokpal may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
complete the inquiry within a further period of six months. 
  
  (4) Save as aforesaid, the procedure for conducting any such inquiry shall be 
such as the Lokpal considers appropriate in the circumstances of the case. 
  
Evidence. 15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, for the purpose of any 
inquiry (including the verification under section 13), the Lokpal 
  
  (a) may require any public servant or any other person who, in its opinion, 
is able to furnish information or produce documents relevant to such 
inquiry, to furnish any such information or produce any such document; and 
  
  (b) shall have all the powers of a civil court, under the code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, 
namely- 
5 of 
1908. 
  (i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
 
  
  (ii) requiring the discovery and production of any document;   
  (iii) receiving evidence on affidavits;   
  (iv) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or 
office; 
  
  (v) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and   
  (vi) such other matters as may be prescribed.   
  (2) Any proceeding before the Lokpal shall be deemed to be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of section 193 of the Indian Penal Code. 
45 of 
1860. 
  (3) No obligation to maintain secrecy  or other restriction upon the 
disclosure of information obtained by or furnished to Government or any 
public servant, whether imposed by any enactment or by any provision of 
law whatever shall apply to the disclosure of information for the purposes of 
any inquiry (including the verification under section 13) under this Act. 
 
  
  (4) The Government or any public servant shall not be entitled, in relation to 
any such inquiry or verification under section 13 to any such privilege in 
respect of the production of documents or the giving of evidence as is 
allowed by any enactment or by any provision of law whatever in legal 
proceedings. 
  
 45 of 
1860 
Explanation.  For the purposes of this se ction, “public servant” shall 
have the same meaning as is in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
  
  16. (1) If the Lokpal has reason to belie ve that any document which, in 
its opinion, shall be useful for, or relevant to, any inquiry under this Act, 
are secreted in any place, it may aut horise any officer s ubordinate to it, 
or any officer of an investigating agency referred to in sub-section (2) of 
section 9, to search  for and to seize such documents. 
  
Search and 
seizure. 
     (2) If the Lokpal is satisfied that  any document seized under sub-
section (1) would be evidence for th e purpose of any inquiry under this 
Act and that it would be necessary to retain the document in its custody, 
it may so retain the said document till the completion of such inquiry: 
  
       Provided that where any document is required to be returned, the 
Lokpal shall return the same after retaining copies of such document 
duly authenticated thereof. 
  
2 of 1974 
  
  
    (3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating 
to searches shall, so far as may be , apply to searches under this section 
subject to the modification that sub-section (5) of section 165 of the said 
  
Page 48 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

    
CHAPTER IV 
  
MISCELLANEOUS 
  
  
  
  
Code shall have effect as if for the word “Magistrate”, wherever it 
occurs therein, the words “Lokpal or any officer authorized by it” were 
substituted. 
  17. (1) After the conclusion of inquiry, the Lokpal shall determine 
whether all or any of th e offences alleged in th e complaint have or has 
been proved to its satisfacti on and by report in  writing shall 
communicate its findings to the comp lainant, the public functionary and 
the competent authority. 
  
  
Reports. 
  
  
  
     (2) The Speaker, in the case of the Prime Minister or a member of the 
House of the People, and the Chairman  of the Council of States, in the 
case of a member of that Council shall, as soon as may be after the 
receipt of report under sub- section (1), cause the sa me to be laid before 
the House of the People or the Council  of States, as the case may be 
while it is in session, and if the H ouse of the people or the Council of 
States, as the case may be is not in  session, within a period of one week 
from the reassembly of the said hous e or the Council, as the case may 
be. 
  
       (3) The competent authority shall ex amine the report forwarded to it 
under sub-section (1) and communicate to the Lokpal, within a period of 
ninety days from the date of receip t of the report, the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the basis of the report. 
  
       (4) The Lokpal shall present annually to the President a consolidated 
report on the administration of this Ac t and the President shall, as soon 
as may be after and in any case not later than ninety days from the 
receipt of such report, cause the sa me, together with an explanatory 
memorandum, to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
  
  Explanation – In computing the period of ninety days referred to in this 
sub-section, and period dur ing which Parliament or , as the case may be, 
either House of Parliament, is not in session, shall be excluded. 
  
  18. The salaries, allowances and pensi ons payable to, or  in respect of, 
the Chairperson and me mbers of the Lokpal, shall be expenditure 
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
Expenditure 
on 
Chairperson 
and members 
to be charged 
on the 
Consolidated 
fund of India. 
International 
insult or 
interruption 
to Lokpal. 
19. (1) Whoever intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption, 
to the Lokpal while the Lokpal or any of its Members is making any 
verification or conductin g any inquiry under this Act, shall be punished 
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine, or with both. 
  
       (2) The provisions of sub-section (2 ) of section 199 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply in relation to an offence referred to in 
sub-section (1) as they apply in relati on to an offence referred to in sub-
 
  
2 of 
Page 49 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

section (2) of the said section, subjec t to the modification that no complaint 
in respect of such offence shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except 
with the previous sanction of the Lokpal. 
1974.
Power of 
Lokpal to 
try certain 
offences. 
20. (1) When any such offence as is desc ribed in sub-section (1) of section 
19 is committed in the vi ew or presence of th e Lokpal, the Lokpal may 
cause the offender to be detained in custody and may, at any time on the 
same day, take cognizance of the of fence and, after giving the offender a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cau se why he should not be punished 
under this section, try such offender summarily, so far as may be in 
accordance with the procedure specifie d for summary trails under the code 
of Criminal procedure, 1973, and sent ence him to simple imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to  one month, or with fine  which may extend to 
five hundred rupees, or with both. 
 
2 of 
1974 
  (2) In every case tried under this sect ion, the Lokpal shall record the facts 
constituting the offence w ith the statement, if a ny, made by the offender as 
well as the finding and the sentence. 
 
  
  
  (3) any person convicted on a trial held under this section may appeal to the 
Supreme Court. 
  
  (4) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
2 of 
1974. 
Disposal of 
deposit 
under 
section 12, 
etc., and 
penalty for 
malafide 
complaint. 
21. (1) The sum deposited by a complainant in pursuance of the provisions 
of section 12 shall,  
8.30     in a case where the complaint is dismissed under sub-section (1) of 
section 13, stand forfeited to the Central Government; 
(b) if the Lokpal, for reasons to be record ed in writing so directs, be utilised 
for compensating the public functionary complained against; and 
(c)  in any other case, be refunded to the complainant. 
  
  (2) If the Lokpal is satisfied that   
  (a) all or any of the allegations made  in a complaint have or has been 
substantiated either wholly or partly; and 
  
  (b) having regard to the expenses incurred by the  complainant in relation to 
the proceedings in respect of such  complaint and all other relevant 
circumstances of the case the complainant deserves to be compensated or 
rewarded, 
  
  The Lokpal shall determine the amount  which shall be paid to the 
complainant by way of such compensa tion or reward and the Lokpal shall 
determine the person by whom the said  compensation or reward shall be 
paid after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
  
  (3) Every person who makes any compla int which is held by the Lokpal to 
be false and filed with malafide intention to harass the public functionary 
against whom such complaint is filed shall be punishable as provided in 
sub-section (4). 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(4) When any offence under sub-secti on (3) is committed, the Lokpal may 
take cognizance of the offence and af ter giving the offender a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished for such 
offence, try such offender summarily, so  far as may be, in accordance with 
the procedure specified from summary trials under the Code of Criminal 
procedure, 1973 and if such offende r is found guilty of committing the 
offence, sentence him to imprisonment for a term which shall not be less  
than one year but which 
  
Page 50 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
2 of 1974 
  
  
may extend to three years and also to fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees and may also award where fine is imposed, out of the 
amount of the fine, to the public f unctionary against whom such false 
complaint has been made, such amount of compensation as the Lokpal 
thinks fit.  
  
  22. Notwithstanding anything contai ned in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 and subject to the othe r provisions of this Act, any case 
pending before the Lokpal under sub-sect ion (4) of secti on 21 shall only 
be transferred to another criminal c ourt in accordance with the procedure 
contained in section 406 of that code and for the purposes of that section 
the Lokpal shall be deemed to be a Court of Session. 
Applications 
of Act 2 of 
1974. 
  23. (1)  The President may, by order in writing and subject to such 
conditions or limitations as may be specified in the order, require the 
Lokpal to inquire into any allegations  (being an allegati on in respect of 
which a complaint may be made) specified in the order in respect of a 
public functionary and subject to th e provisions of s ection 13, the Lokpal 
shall comply with such order. 
conferment 
of additional 
functions on 
Lokpal. 
  (2) When the Lokpal is to make any inquiry under sub-section (1), the 
Lokpal shall exercise the same power s and discharge the same functions 
as it would in the case of any inqui ry made on a complaint under this act 
and the provisions of this Act (except section 21) shall apply accordingly. 
  
  24. If at any stage of the inquiry, the Lokpal-
8.31     considers it necessary to inquire into the conduct of any person; or 
(b) is of opinion that the reputati on of any person is likely to be 
prejudicially affected by the inquiry, 
Persons 
likely to be 
prejudicially 
affected to 
be heard. 
  the Lokpal shall give to that pers on a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in the inquiry and to produce evidence in his defence: 
  
  Provided that nothing in this secti on shall apply where the credit of a 
witness is being impeached. 
  
  25. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Lokpal or against any offi cer, employees, agency or person referred to in 
section 9, in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act. 
Protection of 
action taken 
in good 
faith. 
  (2) Save as otherwise provided in this  Act, no proceedings  or decision of 
the Lokpal shall be called in question in any Court. 
  
  26. The Lokpal may, by general or special  order in writing, and subject to 
such conditions and limitations as may be specified therein, direct that any 
power conferred or duties imposed on it by or under this Act [except the 
powers under sub-section (1) of section 12, the power to dismiss a 
complaint under sub-section (1) of section 13, an d the powers under 
section 21] may also be exercised or discharged by the officers, employees 
and agencies referred to in section 9, as may be specified in the order. 
Power to 
delegate. 
  27. (1) The president may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
Power to 
make rules. 
  (2) In particular, and wit hout prejudice to the gene rality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for 
  
  (a) the manner in which the President shall obtain the opinion of the Chief 
Justice of India under sub-section (1) of section 11; 
  
  (b) the form of compla ints under sub-section (2) of section 12 and the   
Page 51 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
  
  
THE SCHEDULE 
  
[See section 3(3)] 
  
            I, A.B. ……………………………… having been appointed Chairperson (or a Member) of the  
  
Lokpal, do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India 
                          Solemnly affirm   
as by law established, that  I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and
fees, if any, to be accompanied therewith;
  (c) the manner in which and the authorities or agencies with whom deposit 
shall be made under sub-section (3) of section 12 and the form in which 
certificate shall be furnished in respect of such deposits; 
  
  (d) the matters referred to in sub-clause (vi) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 15; and  
  
  (e) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.   
  (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days wh ich may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modificati on in the rule, or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case  may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
  
Removal of 
doubts. 
28. For the removal of doubts, it is here by declared that nothing in this Act 
shall operate to confer or enable th e conferring of any jurisdiction on the 
Lokpal to make any inquiry 
  
  (a) into any allegation against or any act or conduct of   
  (i) the President, the vice-President or  the Speaker of the House of the 
People; 
  
  (ii) the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme Court; and    
  (iii) the Comptroller and Auditor-Gener al of India, the Chief Election 
Commissioners or other Election Com missioner or the Chairman or any 
other member of the Union Public Service Commission; or 
  
  (b) upon its own knowledge or information.   
Saving. 29. Nothing contained in this Act shall be cons trued as affecting the 
constitution of, or the c ontinuance or, functioning or exercise of powers by 
any Commission of Inquiry appointed  under the Commissions of Inquiry 
Act, 1952 before the commencement of this Act and no complaint shall be 
made under this Act in respect of any matter referred for inquiry to such 
commission before such commencement. 
60 of 
1952 
  
  
  
Consequential 
amendments 
of Act 60 of 
1952. 
30. In section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, in sub-section (1), 
for the words “The appropriate Govern ment may”, the words, brackets and 
figures “Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 10 of the 
Lokpal Act, 2001, the appropriate Government may” shall be substituted. 
  
Page 52 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

judgment perform the duties of my office w ithout fear or favour , affection or ill-
will.                                         
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
  
            In its interim report on the “Probl em of Redress of Citizens ’ Grievances” submitted in 
1966, the administrative Refo rms Commission recommended, inter alia , the setting up of an 
institution of Lokpal. 
             
2. To give effect to this recommendation of the Administrative Reforms Commission, a Bill, namely, the
“Lokpal and the Lokayuktas Bill, 1968” was introduced in the Fourth Lok Sabha in 1968.  The Bill was
considered by a Joint Committee of Parliament a nd the Bill, as reported by the Joint Committee, was
passed by the Lok Sabha in 1969.  While this Bill was pending in Rajya Sabha, the Fourth Lok Sabha
was dissolved and consequently, th e Bill lapsed.  In 1971, the Bill passed by th e previous Lok Sabha
was re-introduced in the Fifth L ok Sabha, namely, the “Lokpal and L okayuktas Bill, 1971”.  This Bill 
also lapsed on the dissolution  of the Fifth Lok Sabha. 
  
3. A fresh Bill calle d the “Lokpal Bill, 1977 ” was introduced in the Sixth Lok Sabha in 1977.  This Bill 
was referred to a Joint Committe e of Parliament which submitted its report in July, 1978.  When the
Bill, as reported by the Joint Comm ittee, was under consideration in the Lok Sabha, the Lok Sabha was
prorogued and was subsequently dissolved and consequently that Bill also lapsed. 
  
4. The Lokpal Bill, 1985 was introduced in the Eighth Lok Sabha and subsequently withdrawn.  The
Lokpal Bill, 1989 which sought to include the office of Prime Minister also within the jurisdiction of the
Lokpal which was to be a three Me mber body was introduced in the Lok Sabha and lapsed with the
dissolution of the Ninth Lok Sabha. 
  
5. The Lokpal Bill, 1996 was introduced in the El eventh Lok Sabha on 13- 9-1996. Thereafter, it was 
referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs for examination
and report.  The Standing Committ ee presented its report to the Pa rliament on 9-5-1997.   Before the 
Government could finalise its st and on the various recommendations of the Committee, the Eleventh
Lok Sabha was dissolved and the Bill also lapsed. 
  
6. The Lokpal Bill, 1998 was introduced  in the Lok Sabha on 3-8-1998.  Th ereafter, it was referred to 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs for examination and 
report.  The Standing Committee pr esented its Report to the Parlia ment on this Bill on 25-2-1999.  
However, before the Government could take a view on the various recommendations made by the
Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Twelfth Lok Sabha was dissolved and consequently the Bill also
lapsed. 
  
7. The salient features of the proposed Bill are as follows:-   
  
(i) Setting up the office of Lokpal with a Chairperson and two Members for fixed tenure; 
  
(ii) With a view to en suring that the Lokpal is able to  act independently and discharge its
functions without fear or fav our, the Bill provides that the Chairperson or a Member o f
Lokpal shall not be removed from his office, except by an order made by the President on
the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapac ity after an inquiry made by a Committee
consisting of the Chief Justice of India a nd two other Judges of the Supreme Court next
to the Chief Justice in seniority in which th e Chairperson or Member, as the case may be,
had been informed of the char ges a gainst him and given a reasonable o pportunity o f
Page 53 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

being heard in respect of those charges;
  
(iii) To enable the Lokpal to function effe ctively and in a quasi- judicial manner, the 
powers of the civil court in respect of summoning and enfo rcing the attendance of any
person and examining him on oath, requiring the discove ry and production of any
document and receiving evidence, etc., have been conferred on the Lokpal; 
  
(iv) The Chairperson and other Members shal l be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on th e recommendations of a Comm ittee consisting of the Vice-
President of India, as Chairman, Prime Minist er, Speaker of the House of the People, the
Minister in charge of the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India, Leader of
the House other than the House in which the Prime Minister is a member of Parliament,
the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People and Leader of Opposition in Council
of States as members. 
  
(v) The public functionaries directly or indirectly elected by and responsible to the public,
such as, Members of Parliame nt, Prime Minister and Ministers have been brought within
the purview of the Bill but other constituti onal functionaries such as Judges of the
Supreme Court, the Election Co mmissioners, etc., have been kept out of the purview o f
the Bill. 
  
  
(vi) The Lokpal will inquire into complaints alleging that a public f unctionary as defined
in the Bill had committed an  offence punishable under the prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 and the expression “public functionary” covers the Prime Minister, the Minister, the 
Ministers of State, the Deput y Ministers and the Members of  Parliament.  It seeks to
carry out in this respect the recommenda tions of the Admini strative Reforms
Commission for enabling the citizens to have  recourse to a conve nient and effective
forum for determination of complaints a nd thereby save them from pursuing thei r
remedies through the process of courts. 
  
  
(vii) The Bill also seeks to make special provisions for discouraging frivolous, vexatious 
and false complaints. 
  
8.32     The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
---------------- 
  
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF 
INDIA 
  
  
            [Copy of letter No. 407/2/2001-AVD. IV, dated the 29 th June, 2001 from Shrimati Vasundhara 
Raje, Minister of State for Personnel and Pensions to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha] 
  
            The President, having been informed  of the subject matter of the Lokpal Bill, 2001 recommends
the introduction and consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha under article 117(1) and (3) of the
Constitution. 
New Delhi; 
The 9th July, 2001. 
  
VASUNDHARA RAJE.
Page 54 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
Notes on clauses 
  
            Clause 1 deals with the short title and commencement of the proposed legislation which provides
that it shall come into force on su ch date as the Central Government  may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint. 
  
            Clause 2 seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill. 
  
            Clause 3 seeks to provide for the es tablishment of Lokpal consisti ng of a Chairperson and two 
Members.  The Chairperson shall be  a person who is or has been the Chief Justice or a Judge of the
Supreme Court.  The Members shall be the persons who are, or have been, the Judges of the Supreme
Court or the Chief Justices of the High Courts. 
  
            Clause 4  seeks to provide the appointment of Ch airperson and Members of Lokpal.  The
Chairperson and Members shall be  appointed after obtaining the r ecommendations of a Committee
consisting of the Vice-President of India, the Prime Minist er, the Speaker of the House of the People, 
the Minister in-charge of Home Affairs in the Government of Indi a, the Leader of the House other than
the House in which the Prime Minist er is a member of Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition in the
House of the People and the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States. 
  
            Clause 5 seeks to provide that the Ch airperson and the Members shall be ineligible to hold othe r
offices. 
  
            Clause 6 deals with the term of office and other conditions of  service of the Chairperson and
Member of the Lokpal.  The conditi ons of service, salary, allowances  and pension of the Chairperson
shall be the same as those of the Chief Justice of India.  The salary of other Member shall be the same as
those of a Judge of the Supreme Court.  After a pers on is appointed as the Chairperson or a Member, his
conditions of service, allowances and pension payable to him shall not be varied to his disadvantages. 
  
            Clause 7 deals with the removal of Chairperson and Members. 
  
            Clause 8 seeks to provide that the senior-most Member  shall act as the Chairperson or discharge 
his functions in certain circumstances. 
  
            Clause 9 deals with the staff of the Lokpal and the powers of the Lokpal to utilize the services,
inter alia, of any investigating agencies of the Government and of any other agencies. 
  
            Clause 10  deals with the jurisdiction  of the Lokpal Sub-clause (1 ) seeks to provide that the 
Lokpal may inquire into any matter involved in, or arising from or connected with any allegation made
in a complaint, Sub-clause (2) se eks to provide that the Lokpal may conduct an inquiry  into any act o r 
conduct of any person other than a publ ic functionary concerned  if it  considers necessary to do so fo r
the purposes of his inquiry into any allegation.  Sub-cl ause (3) seeks to provide that no matter in respect 
of which a complaint may be made  under the proposed enactment shall be referred for inquiry under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 
  
            Clause 11  seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall not  inquire into any matter concerning any
person if the Chairperson or any ot her Member has any bias in respec t of such matter or person.  This
clause also seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall not inquire into any complaint made after the expiry of
a period of ten years from the date of the commission of the offence mentioned in the complaint. 
  
Page 55 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

            Clause 12 seeks to provide that any person other than a public servant as defined therein may file 
a complaint which shall be in the prescribed form a nd shall be accompanied by an affidavit.  This clause
also seeks to provide that the complainant shall deposit such sum of money in such manner and with
such authority or agency as may be prescribed and the certificate for such deposit shall be furnished in
the prescribed form.  
  
            Clause 13 deals with the preliminary scrutiny of complaints by the Lokpal. 
  
            Clause 14  seeks to provide for the pr ocedure for making inquiries into the complaints by the
Lokpal.  This clause also seeks to provide that th e Lokpal shall complete th e inquiry within six months
from the date of the receipt of the complaint, whic h could be extended for a further period of six months
by the Lokpal for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
  
            Clause 15 seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall have  all the powers of civi l court in respect o f
summoning and enforcing the attendance, receiv ing evidence and issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses or documents, etc.  This clause also seeks to pr ovide that the proceedings
before the Lokpal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meani ng of section 193 of the
Indian Penal Code. 
  
            Clause 16 seeks to confer powers of search and seizure on the Lokpal. 
  
            Clause 17  relates to reports of the Lokpal and action taken thereon.  Sub-clause (1) seeks to 
provide that after inquir y the Lokpal shall communicate its findi ngs to the complainant, the public
functionary and the competent authority.  This clause  also seeks to provide th at the annual consolidated
report shall be presented by the Lokpal to the President on the administration of the proposed enactment.
  
            Clause 18 seeks to provide that the sa laries, allowances and pensions payable to the Chairperson
and Members of the Lokpal shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
  
            Clause 19 seeks to provide for punishment for intentional insult or interruption to the Lokpal. 
  
            Clause 20 seeks to confer powers on the Lokpal to try summarily and punish those persons who 
intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption, to the Lokpal. 
  
            Clause 21 seeks to provide for the disposal of de posits made by the complainants under clause
12.  This clause also seeks to provide for act ion to be taken by the Lokpal in the case of mala fide
complaints. 
  
            Clause 22  seeks to provide for application of cert ain provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 to the proceedings before the Lokpal. 
  
            Clause 23 seeks to provide fo r the conferment of additional functions by the President on the 
Lokpal. 
  
            Clause 24 seeks to provide that if at any stage of i nquiry, any person is likely to be prejudicially 
affected shall be afforded an opportunity of being heard. 
  
            Clause 25 seeks to provide for protection from lega l proceedings, etc., for the action taken in 
good faith. 
  
            Clause 26 deals with the delegation of certain powers by the Lokpal. 
Page 56 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
            Clause 27 seeks to confer power on the President to make rules. 
  
            Clause 28 seeks to make it clear that the Lokpal sh all not have any jurisdiction to conduct any 
inquiry into any allegation  against or any act or c onduct of the President, the Vice-president or the 
Speaker of the House of the People, the Chief Just ice or any other Judge of  the Supreme Court, the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, th e Chief Election Commissi oner or other Election 
Commissioners or the Chairman or any other Member of the Union Pu blic Service Commission.  It also
provides that the Lokpal shall not make any inquiry upon its own knowledge or information. 
  
            Clause 29  seeks to provide that the provisions of the proposed enactment shall not affect the 
constitution of, or the c ontinuance of functioning or exercise of powers by any Co mmission of Inquiry
appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 before the coming into force of the provisions of
the proposed enactment. 
  
            Clause 30 seeks to make a consequential amendment in the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952. 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
  
            Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Lokpal consisting of a 
Chairperson and two other Members.  Sub-clause  (3) of clause 6 of th e Bill envisages that the salary, 
allowances and all other conditions of service of, the Chairperson shall be the same as those of the Chief
Justice of India and the Members as those of the Judges of the Supreme Court.  This sub-clause  also 
provides  that the salary payable to the Chairperson and other Members shall be reduced by any pension
and pension equivalent to other pensionary benefits to which th e Chairperson or a Member may be
entitled to in respect of any previous service under  the Government of India or under the Government of
a State. 
  
8.33     Sub-clause (1) of clause 9 provides that th e Lokpal shall, for the purpos e of assisting it in the
discharge of its functions under the Bill, appoint a Secretary and such  other officers and employees as
the President may determine, from time to time, in consultation with L okpal.  Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 
empowers the Lokpal to secure for the purpose  of  dealing with any comp laint or any classes o f
complaints, the services  of any of ficer or employee or investigating agency of the Central Government
or a State Government with the c oncurrence of that  Government or the servi ces of any other person o r
agency.  The terms and conditions of such officers, employees, agencies  and persons shall be such as
the President may determine, from time to time, in consultation with the Lokpal. 
  
8.34     Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the salari es, allowances and pensions payable to, or in respect
of, the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal, shal l be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund
of India. 
  
8.35     At this stage, it is not possible to give precise details of the expenditure to be incurred on the
Lokpal.  It is, however, expected that the Bill, wh en enacted, will involve  a non-recurring expenditure 
of rupees seventy-five lakhs and a recurring expenditure of rupees one crore and fifty lakhs in a year. In 
case it becomes necessary to cons truct a building to house the establ ishment of the Lokpal, additional
expenditure of a non-recurring nature of the orde r of rupees one crore a nd fifty lakhs may also be
involved. 
  
8.36     The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure. 
 
Page 57 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
  
            Clause 27 of the Bill empowers th e President to make rules for the purpose of carrying into
effect the provisions of proposed enactment.  The various matters in relation to which such rules may be
made have been enumerated in deta il under various items of sub-clause (2) of that clause  and relate to 
the manner in which the President shall obtain the opi nion of the Chief Justice of India under sub-clause 
(1) of clause11, the form of compla int under sub-clause (2) of clause 12 and the fees, if any, to be 
accompained therewith; the manner in which  and the authorities or agencies with w hom deposits shall
be made under sub-clause (3) of clause 12 and the form in which certificate shall be furnished in respect 
of such deposits, the matters refe rred to in clause 15(1)(b)(vi) and any other matter which may be
prescribed.  These are matters of de tail necessary for effective adminis tration of the provisions of the
Bill and it is difficult to provide for all the situations in  the Bill itself.  The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
Page 58 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

ANNEXURE
  
EXTRACT FROM THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952 
  
(60 OF 1952 ) 
  
                        *                                              *                                              * 
  
                        *                                              *                                              *           
 
Appointment 
of 
Commission 
3. (1)    The appropriate Government ma y, if it is of opinion that it is 
necessary             so  to do, and sh all, if a resolution in this behalf is passed 
by each House of Parliament or, as th e case may be, the Legislative of the 
State, by notification in the offici al Gazette, appoint a Commission of 
Inquiry for the purpose of  making an inquiry into any definite matter of 
public importance and performing such f unctions and within such time as 
may be specified in the notification, and the Commission so appointed shall 
make the inquiry and perform the functions accordingly: 
  
     Provided that where any such Comm ission has been appointed to inquire 
into any  matter 
(a) by the Central Government , no State Government sh all, except with the 
approval of the Centra l Government, appoint another Commission to 
inquire into the same matter for so  long as the Commission appointed  by 
the Central Government is functioning; 
 (b) by a State Government, the Centra l Government shall not appoint 
another Commission to inquire into th e same matter for so long as the 
Commission appointed by the State Gove rnment is functi oning, unless the 
Central Government is of opinion that  the scope of the inquiry should be 
extended to two or more States. 
Page 59 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

LOK SABHA
_______ 
  
A 
  
BILL 
  
To provide for the establishment of the institution of Lokpal to inquire into allegations of corruption 
against public functionaries and for matters  
Connected therewith. 
_______ 
  
(Smt. Vasundhara Raje, Minister of State for Personnel and Pensions) 
ANNEXURE – II
(See page 2, para 3.4.0 of the Report) 
THE CHRONOLOGICAL EVENTS INDICATING THE VARIOUS LOKPAL BILLS 
INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Title of the 
Bill 
Date of 
introduction 
Whether 
referred to any 
Committee
Whether 
passed or not 
Remarks 
1. The Lokpal 
and 
Lokayuktas 
Bill, 1968. 
09.05.1968 Yes. It was 
referred to the 
Select 
Committee of 
Parliament 
It was passed 
in the Lok 
Sabha as “The 
Lokpal and 
Lokayukta 
Bill, 1969” on 
20th August, 
1969.
Before this Bill could be 
passed by the Rajya Sabha, 
the Fourth Lok Sabha was 
dissolved and consequently 
this Bill lapsed. 
2. The Lokpal 
and 
Lokayuktas 
Bill, 1971. 
11.08.1971 No No This Bill lapsed consequent 
upon the dissolution of the 
Fifth Lok Sabha. 
3. The Lokpal 
Bill, 1977. 
28.07.1977 Yes.  It was 
referred to a 
Joint Select 
Committee of 
both the Houses 
of Parliament 
No Before the 
recommendations of the 
Joint Select Committee 
could be considered, the 
Sixth Lok Sabha was 
dissolved and consequently 
this Bill also la
psed.
4. The Lokpal 
Bill, 1985. 
26.08.1985 Yes. This Bill 
was referred to a 
Joint Select 
Committee of 
the Parliament 
No This Bill was, however, 
withdrawn by the then 
Government because of its 
inadequacy to cover 
another type of situation 
and would later come 
forward with a 
comprehensive legislation 
to deal with redress of 
public grievances. 
Page 60 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
  
  
 
5. The Lokpal 
Bill, 1989 
29.12.1989.   No No This Bill  lapsed consequent 
upon the dissolution of the 
Ninth Lok Sabha on 
13.3.1991. 
Sl. 
No. 
Title of the 
Bill 
Date of 
introduction 
Whether 
referred to any 
Committee
Whether 
passed or not 
Remarks 
6. The Lokpal 
Bill, 1996. 
13.09.1996 Yes. It was 
referred to the 
Department 
related 
Parliamentary 
Standing 
Committee on 
Home Affairs  
for examination 
and report. 
No The Standing Committee 
presented its Report to the 
Parliament on 9.5.1997 
making wide ranging 
amendments to the various 
provisions of this Bill.  
Before the Government 
could finalise its stand on 
the various 
recommendations of the 
Standing  Committee, the 
Eleventh Lok Sabha was 
dissolved and consequently 
the Bill also  la
psed.
7. The Lokpal 
Bill, 1998. 
03.08.1998 Yes.  It was 
referred to the 
Department 
related 
Parliamentary 
Standing 
Committee on 
Home Affairs 
for examination 
and report. 
No The Standing Committee 
presented its report to the 
Parliament on 25.02.1999.  
However, before the 
Government could take a 
view on the various 
recommendations made by 
the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, the Twelth Lok 
Sabha was dissolved on 
26.4.1999 and 
consequently the Bill also 
la
psed. 
8. The Lokpal 
Bill, 2001. 
14.08.2001 Yes.  It has been 
referred to the 
Department 
related 
Parliamentary 
Standing 
Committee on 
Home Affairs 
for examination 
and re
port.
— The Standing Committee is 
yet to consider the various 
provisions of this Bill and 
make its recommendations 
thereon. 
Page 61 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

ANNEXURE – III
(See page 9, para 8.0 of the Report) 
ANADI SAHU 
Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) 
Member : 
•              Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
•              Standing Committee on Subordinate Legislation  
•              Joint Committee on the Central Vigilance  
             Commission Bill, 1999 
•              Consultative Committee on Fertilisers and Chemicals                          Date : 30-10-2001 
  
To 
The Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
  
Sub :    Amendments to the Lok Pal Bill. 
Sir, 
  
            I am to propose the following amendments in the Lok Pal Bill, 2001. 
  
1.         In Clause 2-Definitions the following may be added: 
(a) below (b) (iii) 
  
(iv)       In relation to CJI and Judges of the Supreme Court the President of India. 
  
(b) after (g) (ii) 
  
      (iii)C.J.I. and Judges of the Supreme Court. 
  
2.         Clause 4(i)– 
            The second proviso from lines 44 to 45 be deleted. 
  
3.         Clause-7- the entire clause be redrafted as follows :– 
  
            The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by 
the President of India on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry by a Joint 
Parliamentary Committee.  The J.P.C. shall formulate its opinion after giving a reasonable opportunity 
to the Chairperson or Member charged of being heard in respect of these charges and after consultation 
with the Attorney-General of India. 
4.         Clause-9 
            (2)(ii) at line-16 be deleted. 
  
5.         Clause-12 
(a)
    Sub (i)(c) the word ‘indirectly’ in  line 12 be deleted. 
  
(b) sub-clause (4) line 25 
“or, as the case may be, the appropriate authority” be deleted. 
  
(c) sub-clause (5)-line-31 
  
“or the appropriate authority, as the case may be” be deleted.
Page 62 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
(d) explanation at lines 33 to 35 be deleted.  
  
6.         Clause 13 
            After sub-clause (2) 
  
            Sub-clause 3.  No preliminary scrutiny against the Prime Minister or Chief Justice of India shall 
be taken up by the Lok Pal without prior approval of the President. 
  
7.         Clause - 15 
  
            Sub-clause (i) (v) be deleted. 
  
8.         Clause 22 be deleted. 
  
9.         Clause 23 – The bracketted  sentence at line 14 may read as follows :– 
  
[being an allegation in respect of which a complaint may be made or a reference has been made by the 
Lok Pal under Section 13 (3)], 
  
10.       Clause 26 
  
            “and the agencies” at lines 38-39 be deleted. 
  
  
Yours faithfully,
 
Sd/-
(ANADI SAHU) 
  
  
 
1 The oldest institution devised for the purpose was by King Charles XII of Sweden through his Order of Chancery  in 1713 and was known as the 
“Chancellor of Justice” to act as invigilator to look into the functioning of the War Time Government 
  
2
 Finland in 1919, Denmark in 1953, Norway in 1962, Britain in 1967, Israel, Zambia, Portugal, Spain, South Africa in 1970s, Ice land, Ireland,  Netherlands
and Poland in 1980s, Slovenia in 1993, Burkino Faso in 1994  and Belgium  in 1995. 
  
3 Great Britain, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, New Zealand, Norway, Slovenia, South Africa and Zambia. 
  
4 “I should like to  mention another matter  which is of very great importance to our country in particular.  It is the matter of  having a sort of a Parliamentary
Commission on the pattern of Ombudsman  in Scandinavian  countries.  This is an institution wh ich may be the real  solution for  the various  problems
which arise in respect of the inju stice  being  done in particular cases.  This institution would be  secu ring to the  common c itizen  a forum wherein his
grievances can be effectively ven tilated.  This would be securing for  the Parlia ment  an institution  through which it can eff ectively function in individual
cases.” 
  
5 “As in the case of the administrative  law,  so in the case of public administration in  general, the confidence of the public is the main asset and it may well  
be that if an Ombudsman  or an authority corresponding to him is appointed in this country, citizens would feel that their grievances  against corrupt officials 
can be speedily ventilated before such an authority.  As the experience of th e Scandinavian countr ies shows, once the Ombudsman  begins to function, his 
existence turn out to be more a source of strength to the public servants than a source of weakness.” 
  
  
  
Page 63 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm

  
  
6
 Government of India Notification No.40/3/65-AR (P), 5 January, 1966.
 
  
7
 Final report thereon was not presented as Shri Morarji Desai, resigned from Chairmanship of the Commission on joining the Union   
 
  Cabinet as Deputy Prime Minister on 13 March, 1967. 
  
8Interim Report of ARC on Problems of Redress of Citizen’s Grievances (1999) p.18, (para 28). 
             
9 (a) Chaired by  Shri M.B. Rana, MP (LS) on the Lokpal  and  Lokayuktas Bill, 1968, presented its Report on 26 March, 1969. 
  (b) Chaired by  Shri Shyamnadan Mishra, MP (LS) on the Lokpal Bill, 1997, presented its Report on 20 July, 1978. 
  (c) Chaired by Shri Somnath Rath MP (LS) on the Lokpal Bill, 1985, presented  its Report on 6 December, 1988. 
  
10 (a)Chaired by Shri Sompal MP (RS)  presented its Fortieth Report in the Lokpal Bill, 1996 on 9 May, 1997.   
   (b) Chaired by Shri Pranab Mukherjee, MP (RS) presented its Fiftieth report on Lokpal Bill, 1998 on 25 February, 1999. 
  
11 Orissa became the first State to enact the Lokayukta Act i.e. Lokpal and Lokayukta Act, 1971, which came into force in October , 1983 and abolished in 
August, 1992.  Maharashtra was  the first State to appoint a Lokayukta by enact ing the Maharashtra Lokayukta and Upa-Lokayukta Act, 1971 in September, 
1971.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
12 Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Ka rnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punj ab (with 
nomenclature as Lokpal) Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, National Capital Territory of Delhi. 
  
  
13 Six times Private Member Bills  were also introduced in Lok Sabha in 1967, 1977,1982, 1983, 1984 and 1998,  first  attempt being by Shri Pratap 
Keshari  Deo followed by Shri Ram Jethmalani. 
Page 64 of 6484th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/home_aff/84threport.htm