Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
     FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
 
             ON
 
       EXPLOSIVE SUBSTANCES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
 
  (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 15TH  MARCH,  2000)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 15TH  MARCH, 2000)
 
    RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
                     NEW DELHI
 
 MARCH, 2000/PHALGUNA, 1921 (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
1          COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                  
 
2.         REPORT                                                                                                                      
 
3.         O
BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS                            
AT A GLANCE                
 
  4.       R
ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE            
 
   5.      ANNEXURES
 
(I)                 Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999                            
(II)              Interim reply dated 29th February, 2000 of                             
             Ministry  of   Home Affairs on points raised in the
             meeting of  the committee held on  8th  February,  2000                                
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1999-2000)
                    Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
 
       RAJYA  SABHA 
 
1.      Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj      
2.   Shri Hiphei                       
3.   Shri Akhilesh Das             
4.   Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5.   Dr. L. M. Singhvi              
6.   Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai                       
7.   Shri K. M. Saifullah
8.   Shri C. M. Ibrahim
9.   Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
10.
  Shri C. P. Thirunavukkarasu                      
11.  Shri Drupad Borgohain     
12.  Shri Kuldip Nayyar           
13.  Dr. Jagannath Mishra
*15. Dr. (Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta      
 

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
             LOK SABHA
 
      16.  Shri Manabendra Shah     
      17.  Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari      
      18.  Shri Vinay Katiyar           
      19.  Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi                        
      20.  Shri Anadi Sahu               
      21.  Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri               
      22.  Shri Ram Nagina Mishra  
      23.  Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt  
      24.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee                      
      25.  Shri Rajen Gohain           
      26.  Shri N. Janardhana Reddy                         
      
27.  Shri Rajkumar Wangcha  
      28.  Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi
      29.  Shrimati Nisha Chaudhary                        
      30.  Shri Jitendra Prasad         
      31.  Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel   
      32.  Shri M. O. H. Farook       
      33.  Shri Samar Choudhury    
      34.  Shri Subodh Roy             
      35.  Dr. S. Venugopalachari
      36.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma   
      37.  Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
      38.  Shri Arun Kumar
      39.  Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
      40.  Shri P. H. Pandian            
     ______________________________________________________________
*
Nominated w.e.f. 28th  February,  2000.
 
       41. Shri Shriniwas Patil          
       42. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh                   
       43. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
       44. Shri S. K. Bwiswmuthiary
            SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
             Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
             Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
   Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
REPORT
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs having been authorized by the
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present    this Fifty-eighth Report on the Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999.
2.         In pursuance of the rule relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in
consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred * the Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999 (Annexure-I), as introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on 23 December 1999, and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and report.
3.         The Bill seeks to amend the relevant provisions of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 by putting more lethal explosives, namely,
RDX, PETN, HMX and other similar explosives or a combination thereof and remote control devices for causing explosion, under ‘Special
Category Explosive Substances’ and to provide for enhancement in maximum punishment for offences committed with such explosive
substances.
4.         The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill explains that in the recent past there have been incidents of bomb blasts on a very
large scale in some parts of the country particularly in Jammu and Kashmir, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, West Bengal and the
North-East causing huge loss to life and property. It further explains that terrorists and anti-national elements have, through clandestine means,
acquired research  development explosive (RDX), pentra erythritol tetra nitrate (PETN), high melting explosive (HMX) and other similar types
of explosive substances. These explosives, having high plasticity and low evaporation, are difficult to detect in the normal course. At the same
time, they are far more lethal in their potential for damage than the conventional explosives. Use of such explosives by terrorists and anti-
national elements has not only endangered human life but has also caused a great threat to the security environment of the  country.
4.1       The Statement also explains   that in the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 which provides for the punishment to any person who causes
an explosion likely to endanger life or property, or who attempts to cause such an explosion or makes or has in his possession explosive
substance with intent to endanger life or property, there is no distinction between offences involving use of conventional explosives as
compared with offences committed with more lethal explosives e.g., RDX, PETN, HMX, LTPE and other similar explosives. There is also a
need that explosions caused by use of Remote Control Devices should attract more severe punishment.
5.         The Ministry of Home Affairs  in its Background Note on the  Bill has stated that the Explosive Substances Act, 1908, in its present 
form does not discriminate  between the conventional  type of explosives   and the more  sophisticated type of explosives as are being  used by
the terrorists/militants in carrying out their operations at present.  It has further been stated that it is with a view to checking the rising trend of
violence and terrorism   by extremists and anti-national   elements in various parts of the country by using sophisticated explosives like

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
RDX,HMX,PETN, etc.  that it is considered necessary  to provide for enhanced   punishment in respect of  offences being committed with the
use of such explosives.
5.1       It has also been stated in the Background Note that the  Explosive Substances Act, 1908 is an old  enactment and contains provisions
for unishment to  any person who causes an explosion likely to endanger  life  or  property  or  who attempts to cause such an explosion.
_______________________________________________________________
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part No.37731 dated 14th January,  2000
 
or makes or has in his possession any explosive substance with intent to endanger life or property.  The maximum punishment provided  in the
existing Act is –
(a)        transportation for life for unlawfully and maliciously causing explosion to
endanger life or property (Section 3 of the Act);
(b)        transportation for    20 years with fine   for  unlawfully   and  maliciously attempting     or conspiring  to cause explosion or for
making or keeping an explosive substance  with intent to endanger life or property (Section 4 of the Act); and
(c)        transportation for 14 years with  fine for making or possessing explosive substance under suspicious circumstances (Section 5
of the Act).
5.2       In the backdrop of the situation as explained above, it is proposed to amend the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 by providing for the
sophisticated type of explosives under the definition of  ‘Special Category   Explosive Substances’   and to provide for enhanced punishment
for offences committed with such explosives.
5.3       The salient features of the new legislation as enumerated  in the Background Note  are as follows:-
(i)         A new section (Section 2 (b) ) after the existing Section 2,  provides for classification   of  ‘Special Category Explosive Substances’. 
The proposed amendment is as under:-
 
the expression “special category explosive substance” shall be deemed to include research  development explosive (RDX), penta  
erythritol    tetra nitrate (PETN), high melting explosive  (HMX), tri nitro toluene (TNT), low temperature plastic explosive
(LTPE), composition exploding (CE)(2,4,6 phenyl methyl nit amine or tartly), OCTOL (mixture of high melting explosive and tri
nitro toluene), plastic explosive kirkee-1 (PEK-1) and RDX/TNT compounds and other similar type of explosives  and  a   
combination   thereof   and   remote  control  devices causing explosion.
(ii)        Sections 3,4 and 5 of the existing Act which provide for punishment for the offences committed  with conventional explosives, are also
proposed to be amended by providing for enhanced punishment for offences committed with special category explosives.  The
proposed amendments to these Sections are as under:-
Section 3
 
Existing Provisions:
 
Punishment for causing explosion likely to endanger life or property-
 
Any person who unlawfully and maliciously causes by any explosive substance an explosion of a  nature likely to endanger life or
to cause serious injury to property shall, whether any injury to person or property  has  been actually caused or not, be  punished
with transportation for life or any shorter term, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment  for a term which may extend to
ten years, to which fine may be added.
 
Proposed Provisions:
 
Punishment for causing explosion likely to endanger life  or property –
Any person who unlawfully and maliciously  causes by –
(a)    any explosive substance an explosion of a nature likely to endanger life  
or to cause serious injury to property shall, whether any injury to person     or  property has  been actually caused or not,
be punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of  either   description for  a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
      (b)  any special category explosive substance an explosion of a nature likely   to  endanger life or to cause serious injury to
property shall, whether any injury to person or property has been actually caused or not, be punished with death, or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
 
Section 4
Existing provisions:
Punishment for attempt   to cause explosion, or for making or keeping explosive with intent  to endanger life or property –
Any person who unlawfully and maliciously –
(a)         does any act with intent  to cause by an explosive substance, or conspires to cause by an explosive substance, an explosion 
in India of a nature likely to endanger life or to cause serious injury to property; or

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
(b)        makes  or has in his possession or under his control any explosive substance with intent   by means  thereof to endanger 
life, or cause serious injury to property in  India, or to enable any other  person by means thereof to endanger life or cause 
serious injury  to property in India.
Shall, whether any explosion does or does not take place and whether any injury to person or property  has been actually
caused or not, be punished with transportation for a term which may extend to twenty  years, to which fine may be added, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added.
Proposed Provisions:
Punishment for attempt to cause explosion, or for making or keeping explosive with intent to endanger life or property –
Any person who unlawfully and maliciously –
(a)
    does any act with intent to cause by an explosive substance or special category explosive   substance, or conspires  to  cause by
an explosive  substance or special   category explosive substance, an explosion in India of a nature likely to endanger life or to
cause serious injury to property; or
 
 
(b)         makes or has in his possession or under his control any explosive substance  or special category explosive substance  with
intent by means thereof to endanger  life, or cause serious injury  to property in India, or to enable any other person by
means  thereof  to endanger life or cause  serious injury  to property  in India.
 
Shall, whether any explosion does or does not take place and whether any injury to person or  property has been actually
caused  or not, be punished –
(i)         in the case of any explosive substance, with imprisonment for  life, or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which  may  extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(ii)        in the case of any special category explosive substance, with rigorous imprisonment   for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment  for a term which  may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Section 5
Existing provisions:
 
Punishment for making or possessing explosives under suspicious circumstances-
Any person who makes or knowingly has in his possession or under his control any explosive   substance, under such
circumstances as to give rise to a reasonable suspicion  that he is not making it or does not have it in his possession or  under his
control for a lawful  object, shall, unless he can show  that he made it or had it in his possession or under his  control   for a lawful
object, be  punishable with transportation for a term   which may extend to fourteen years, to which fine may be added,  or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend  to five years, to which fine may be added.
Proposed Provisions:
Punishment  for making or possessing explosives under suspicious circumstances–
Any person who makes or knowingly has in his  possession or under his control any explosive  substance or special category
explosive  substance, under such circumstances as to give  rise  to a reasonable suspicion that he is not making it or does not have it
in his possession or under his control for a lawful object, shall, unless he can show that he made it or had it in his possession or
under his control for a lawful object, be punished-
(a)        in the case of any explosive substance, with imprisonment for a term which may    extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine;
(b)        in the case of any special category explosive   substance,  rigorous  imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
6.         The Committee examined the Bill in its sitting held on  8 February 2000.  The concerned Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home
Affairs made a  presentation on the Bill.   The presentation  revolved round the circumstances as explained in the  preceding paragraphs, which
led the  Government  to come forward  with suitable amendments  to the provisions of the existing  Act. 
6.1       The Special Secretary explained   to the Committee that the production and use of explosive substances was regulated under two Acts,
namely, the Explosives  Act, 1884, and the Explosive   Substances  Act, 1908.  The Department of Industrial   Development   administered the
former, the main objective of which was to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale,  transport, import and export of various explosives  
in   the country.  The Ministry of Home Affairs administered   the latter  which    broadly dealt with the punishment to any person who caused
an explosion likely to endanger life    or property or attempted to cause such explosion or made or had in his  possession any explosive  
substance  with an intention   to endanger life or property.  He informed   the Committee   that from the time of militancy  in Punjab, internal
security had become much more complex as sophisticated   weapons, equipment   and explosives  were increasingly being used.  The use of
such weapons and explosives  had not remained confined to Punjab  and Jammu and Kashmir, but it had  also spread to the North-East and 
certain other parts of the country.  He  further stated that the  Pakistan’s  intelligence   agency  ISI was mainly   responsible for that.   Terrorists
trained ,  equipped and indoctrinated  by them had taken  a heavy toll of innocent  lives  in India. 
6.2       He informed the Committee that there had been more than  5,000 explosions  in the last ten to twelve years and the property  destroyed
as a result  of  them   was about Rs.2,000  crore.  The intensity as well as frequency of the explosions had increased manifold in the last four
years.  From 1996 to October 1999, there had been more than 2000 explosions in which 1200 persons lost their lives.  With the advancement in

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
technology, the explosions that were being caused   by the terrorists were becoming   increasingly   sophisticated, capable   of wreaking
devastation  of a much greater dimension than the conventional explosives.  The explosives being used had high plasticity, low evaporation and
were difficult  to detect.   They were   also easy to carry  and  were  far  more lethal   in nature.    It was, therefore, felt necessary that high-
technology  modern    explosives,   including explosives  which were remote-controlled,  electronically-operated, were put in a special category
for the purpose of punishment that was provided  in the Act.  However, there was need to make a distinction between the types of explosives as
it was not legally tenable   to provide for same kind   of punishment   for   different types of explosives.  He further explained that the Bill
sought  to enhance the punishment not only in the case of special category   explosives but in the case of ordinary explosives as well.  Apart
from this, the punishment had been authorized keeping in view the direction of the Supreme Court.
6.3.      The Special Secretary also informed that the Bill under the consideration of the Committee was the same, which had lapsed due to
dissolution  of Twelfth  Lok Sabha  though  it  was   passed by it on 17  December,1998.
7.         Members raised following points and sought clarifications thereon: 
(a)        While in Clauses 4 and 5, there was provision for ‘rigorous imprisonment’, it was only  ‘imprisonment’ in the case of Clause
3.  It would be proper to explicitly  mention the word ‘rigorous’ in Clause 3 as well.
(b)        The expression ‘explosive substance’ was not fully  descriptive.   If in future, a new type of explosive material was developed
which was outside the purview of the amended Act then what  would be the solution?  There was need to insert or add a clause
or a sentence in the Bill to take care of  the occurrence of such a phenomenon.
(c )       Section 6 of the Act says “Any person who by the supply of or solicitation for money, the providing of premises, the supply  of
materials,  or in any manner whatsoever, procures , counsels, aids, abets, or is accessory to, the commission of any offence
under this Act shall  be  punished with the punishment provided for the offence”.  As  per this clause, if anybody, in  any way,
was accessory to the commission of any offence, he could be punished with death penalty.   Did it mean that a person who did
not have a criminal intention could be punished to the extent of death penalty?
(d)        In Clauses 4 (a) and 4 (b), the words  “an explosion in India” and “injury to property in India” had been used, respectively.  
However, there was no mention of any of these expressions in Section 3.
(e)        If one referred  to Clause 4 (b) of the Bill, an inference may be  drawn  that if a  person  made or had in his possession or under
his control any explosive  substance  which led to an explosion,  he could be punished with rigorous  imprisonment for life or
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may  extend to only  ten years, whereas in Clause 3, there was a provision for
death penalty if an explosion took place.  Why there was a contradiction between Clauses 3 and 4? In both the cases, explosion
might cause loss to life or property, then why there should be difference in  punishment?
8.         The Special Secretary replied to some of the issues/queries.  The Chair also clarified the position in regard to some of the
issues/queries.       
9.         The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on 8 February 2000.
10.       The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its sitting held on 13 March 2000.
11.     The observations/views/suggestions of the Committee with regard to the principal changes proposed in the Bill are given below:
Clause 2
11.1     Clause 2 is the substitution of existing Section 2 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 and seeks to add the definition of ‘special
category explosive substances’.  The expression ‘special category explosive substances’ inter alia includes RDX, PETN, HMX, TNT, LTPE,
OCTOL etc. and a combination thereof and remote control devices causing explosion.
11.2     The Committee felt that the definition of the expression ‘special category explosive substances’ was not comprehensive keeping
in view the future technological   developments in this field and wanted to know that if in future some explosive of  a  different type
were to be developed and if the substance did   not  fit into the definition  given  in the  clause  of  the Bill,   the  purpose  of  the 
legislation would be defeated.   Hence, a provision may be added in the clause to include any type of explosive or in the alternative the
Committee suggested that Government may be empowered  to  issue  notification  from  time  to  time  thereby including   any new
type of explosive substance which might be developed in future so as to obviate the necessity  of going through the  legislative process
of frequently amending the law. 
11.3     Subject to this the clause was  adopted.
Clause 3
11.4     Clause 3 of the bill provides for enhanced punishment to any person who unlawfully and maliciously   causes an explosion likely to
endanger life or property.  According to this clause, if any damage to life or property is caused by the explosion of any explosive substance,
the punishment may be for life or with imprisonment of either description for a term  which  may  extend  to  ten  years and shall also be liable
to fine, while if any damage is caused due to explosion of any special category explosive substance, death penalty or imprisonment for life and
fine have been prescribed.
11.5     The Committee pointed out that the phrase ‘imprisonment for life’ in clause 3 had not been qualified by the term ‘rigorous’ as had been
done in clause 4(b)(ii) and clause 5(b) of the Bill .  Although life imprisonment included rigorous imprisonment,   the   Committee  
recommended   that   the term ‘rigorous’ may be added before the phrase ‘imprisonment for life’ wherever it occurred in the Bill for
the sake of uniformity and clarity.   Thereupon,  the    Ministry’s     representative      stated       that        it       would be better   to clarify the
position in the Act itself, even if there were other extant laws  like Section 53-A(4) of   IPC and Section 433-A of Cr.P.C. which clearly
clarified that life imprisonment meant rigorous imprisonment for not less than 14 years.
11.6     It was also pointed out that the proposed amendment did not provide for minimum punishment. The Committee felt that the
provision of minimum punishment might be provided in the clause.
11.7     It was further pointed out that the words ‘an explosion in India’ and ‘injury to property in India’ had been used in clauses 4(a) and 4(b)
respectively, but the reference to  ‘India’ had not been made in clause 3. The Committee recommended that the necessity  of making a

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
reference to ‘India’ in clause 3  may be examined.
11.8     Subject to this the clause was adopted.
Clause 4
11.9     Clause 4 provides for punishment for attempt to cause explosion or for making or keeping explosive substance with intent to  endanger 
life or  property.  In  the case of  possession of any explosive substance, provision has been made for life imprisonment or imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years and shall also include fine, while in the case of possession of any explosive substance of special category a
person may be   awarded   with   rigorous  imprisonment for life or with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to ten years and shall also be
liable to fine.
11.10   A point relating to the aspect of mens rea was raised during the discussion and the Committee wanted to know whether a person in the
absence of criminal intention could be punished to that extent as prescribed under Section 6 of Explosive Substances Act, 1908 read with
clause 3 of the Bill.
11.11   It was also pointed out that under clause 3 if any person was found guilty, he might be punished with imprisonment for life or death,
while in case of a person found guilty under clause 4, punishment was rigorous imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years.  In this context, a view was expressed as to how different punishment had been prescribed for the same
offence. 
11.12   The Committee directed the Ministry to examine the above points from  various angles including the legal angle.
11.13   Subject to this the clause was adopted.
Clause 5
11.14   Clause 5 provides for punishment for making or possessing explosives under suspicious circumstances.   If any person who makes  or 
knowingly has  in possession or under his control any explosive substance or special category explosive substance, under such circumstance
which may give rise to a reasonable suspicion that he is not making it or does not have it in his possession for a lawful object,  he is punishable
for a term which may extend  to ten  years  and  also  liable  to  be  fined  for possessing explosive substances, while rigorous imprisonment for
life or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may   extend   for ten years along with fine is prescribed for possessing special category
explosive substance.
11.15   An apprehension was expressed that the definition of “explosive substance” given under clause 2 had very wide connotations so that
any person suspected to be in possession of any explosive substance under clause 5 might be held guilty under clause 3 of the Bill.  Since
provision of the Bill confer strict liability, the onus would be on the accused and in the absence of adequate safeguards in clause 5, it was
likely to be misused and might cause undue harassment to innocent persons.  The Committee felt that the Government may examine the
feasibility of incorporating suitable safeguards in clause 5 against possible misuse of the power conferred on the executive authority.
11.16   The provisions under clause 5 are ambiguous as to who would exercise power thereunder.  The Committee recommended that
explicit provisions may be incorporated prescribing levels of authority for the exercise of power.
11.17   Subject to this the clause was adopted.  
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
12.       Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of consequential or drafting nature,
namely, “1999” and “Fiftieth” to be substituted by “2000” and “Fifty-first”, respectively.
General Observations
13.       Section 7 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 provides that no Court shall proceed with the trial of any person for an offence under 
this Act except with the consent of the Central Government.  In this context, the Committee traced the historical background of the enactment
of the law to the Bengal Partition of 1905 and its aftermath.   After some deliberations it was suggested that such kind of    restriction on
the trial of the offence under the Act needed to be reviewed in the contemporary situation. In this context, it was also suggested that
the Government may examine the feasibility of amending Section 7 in such a way so that no Court shall take cognisance of any offence
against the Act except with the consent of the District Magistrate.
13.1     The Committee expressed its serious concern over the undue delay in filing charge-sheet against the person involved in
terrorist/subversive activities and recommended expeditious trial within a given time frame.
13.2     The Committee was of the view that the Government may bring in a comprehensive piece of legislation to deal with all kinds of
terrorist/subversive activities to suit the existing situation.
14.       A communication of interim nature dated 29 February 2000 (Annexure-II) has been received from the Ministry of Home Affairs inter
alia stating   that   it    would  be necessary to consult the Ministries of Law and Defence in respect of the suggestions/observations made in the
Committee on the Bill. It has also been stated that it would be necessary to make a reference to the State Governments for collection of certain
data sought by Members during the discussion on the Bill. As the process of consultation with the Ministries and collection of information
from the State Governments will take quite some time, the Ministry has requested for grant of time (say about two months or so) so that a final
view can be formulated and a complete reply furnished to the Committee.
5.         The Committee directs the Government to examine the specific views/suggestions expressed/made by it during the course of
clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill, before piloting the same in Parliament. The Committee desires that its general observations
on the proposed legislation may also be examined by the Government.  
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                PRANAB MUKHERJEE
March 13, 2000                                                                                                   Chairman
   Department-related Parliamentary  
                         Standing Committee on Home Affairs

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
Clause 2
¨         The Committee felt that the definition of the expression ‘special category explosive substances’ was not comprehensive keeping
in view the future technological developments in this field and wanted to know that if in future some explosive of  a  different
type were to be developed and if the substance did not fit into the definition  given  in the  clause  of  the Bill,   the  purpose  of 
the  legislation would be defeated.   Hence, a provision may be added in the clause to include any type of explosive or in the
alternative the Committee suggested that Government may be empowered to issue notification  from  time  to  time  thereby
including   any new type of explosive substance which might be developed in future so as to obviate the necessity  of going
through the  legislative process of frequently amending the law. 
 
(Para 11.2)
Clause 3
 
¨         The Committee pointed out that the phrase ‘imprisonment for life’ in clause 3 had not been qualified by the term ‘rigorous’ as
had been done in clause 4(b)(ii) and clause 5(b) of the Bill.  Although life imprisonment included rigorous imprisonment, the
Committee recommended that the term ‘rigorous’ may be added before the phrase ‘imprisonment for life’ wherever it
occurred in the Bill for the sake of uniformity and clarity.
(Para 11.5)
¨         It was also pointed out that the proposed amendment did not provide for minimum punishment. The Committee felt that the
provision of minimum punishment might be provided in the clause.
(Para 11.6)
¨         It was further pointed out that the words ‘an explosion in India’ and ‘injury to property in India’ had been used in clauses 4(a)
and 4(b) respectively, but the reference to  ‘India’ had not been made in clause 3. The Committee recommended that the
necessity  of making a reference to ‘India’ in clause 3  may be examined.
(Para 11.7)
Clause 4
 
¨         The Committee directed the Ministry to examine the above points (as enumerated in Para Nos. 9.10 & 9.11) from various angles
including the legal angle.
(Para 11.12)
Clause 5
¨         The Committee felt that the Government may examine the feasibility of incorporating suitable safeguards in clause 5 against
possible misuse of the power conferred on  the executive authority.
(Para 11.15)
 
 
¨         The Committee recommended that explicit provisions may be incorporated prescribing levels of authority for the exercise of
power.
 
(Para 11.16)
 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
 
¨         Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of consequential or drafting nature,
namely, “1999” and “Fiftieth” to be substituted by “2000” and “Fifty-first”, respectively.
(Para 12)
 
General Observations
 
¨         After some deliberation it was suggested that such kind of restriction (requirement of consent of Central Government under Section
7 of the Explosive  Substances Act, 1908) on the trial of the offences  needed to be reviewed in the contemporary situation. In this
context, it was also suggested that the Government may examine the feasibility of amending Section 7 in such a way so that no
Court shall take cognisance of any offence against the Act except with the consent of the District Magistrate.
(Para 13)
¨         The Committee recommended expeditious trial (of cases relating to terrorist/subversive activities) within a given time frame.
(Para 13.1)
 
¨         The Committee was of the view that the Government may bring in a comprehensive piece of legislation to deal with all kinds of
terrorist/subversive activities to suit the existing situation.
(Para 13.2)
¨         The Committee directs the Government to examine the specific views/suggestions expressed/made by it during the course of
clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill, before piloting the same in Parliament. The Committee desires that its general
observations on the proposed legislation may also be examined by the Government.                                                              

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
(Para 15)
 
MINUTES
 
IV
FOURTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on  Tuesday,  8 February 2000  in Room No. 53, First  Floor, Parliament House , New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
             RAJYA SABHA
2.          Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                    
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4.          Dr. L. M. Singhvi             
5.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai                                                    
6.          Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
7.          Shri C. P. Thirunavukkarasu                     
8.         Shri Drupad Borgohain     
9.          Shri Kuldip Nayyar
 
              LOK SABHA
 
10.        Shri Manabendra Shah     
11.       Shri Anadi Sahu         
12.        Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri               
13.        Shri Ram Nagina Mishra  
14.        Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt  
15.        Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee                      
16.        Shri N. Janardhana Reddy                         
17.        Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi                        
18.        Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel   
19.        Shri M. O. H. Farook
20.        Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
21.        Shri Shriniwas Patil          
 
             SECRETARIAT
        
             Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
             Shri A. K. Singh, Under Secretary
              Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS
 
Dr. Raghbir Singh, Secretary, Legislative Department
Shrimati Sushma Jain, Joint Secretary, Legislative Department
Dr. P.K. Agarwal, Joint Secretary, Department of Justice
            Shri Anurag Bhalla, Under Secretary, Department of Justice
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
 
Shri M.B. Kaushal, Special Secretary
Shri Vinay  Kumar,  Joint Secretary
Shri S.K. Tuli, Deputy Secretary
 
2.                  *                                                        *                                    *
3.                         *                                                                            *                                                *
4.         The Chairman announced  that on account of  Basant Panchami  the meeting of the Committee scheduled for 10 February 2000 stood
cancelled.  Thereafter,   he  made introductory observations on the provisions of the Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999 and
welcomed the Special Secretary and other officers from the  Ministry of Home Affairs and requested   the Special Secretary to make a
presentation on the Bill.

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
 
5.        At the beginning of his presentation, the Special Secretary gave a brief outline of the background to the proposed amendment to the
Explosive Substances Act, 1908.  He stated that production and use of explosive substances was regulated   under two  Acts, namely,   the
Explosives  Act, 1884 and the  Explosive   Substances  Act, 1908, which were administered   by Ministries of Industry  and  Home Affairs, 
respectively. The prime objective of the  former Act was to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport, import and export  of
various  explosives  in the country.  The latter Act dealt with punishment to any person who caused an explosion or attempted to cause an
explosion or had in his possession any explosive substances with an intention to endanger life or property.
 
5.1       The Special Secretary told the Committee that the use of sophisticated   lethal explosives had become rampant by the
terrorists/militants causing great havoc  in the country during the last twelve to thirteen years,  the intensity of which had gone up
especially during the past three to four years.  He informed the Committee that the terrorist activities had caused more than 5000
explosions in the last ten to twelve   years  and the property destroyed because of those explosions was about Rs.2000 crores.  During
the  years 1996, 97, 98 and upto October, 1999  there  had  been  more than 2000 explosions  in which  1200  persons  had  been
killed.    He stated that these explosives had high plasticity, low evaporation  and were difficult to detect.   These were easy  to carry and far
more lethal in nature which necessitated stringent punishment for persons indulging   in  activities connected with such  explosives  by
differentiating  these explosives  from the conventional  ones.  Hence, high lethal  explosives  of later generation such as research development 
explosive (RDX), penta erythritol tetra nitrate (PETN), high melting explosive (HMX),  tri nitro toluene (TNT), low temperature plastic
explosive  (LTPE), composition exploding (CE)(2,4,6 phenyl methyl nitramine or tetryl), OCTOL (mixture of high melting explosive and tri
nitro toluene), plastic explosive kirkee-1 (PEK-1) and RDX/TNT compounds  including those remote controlled & electronically  operated
were put under ‘Special Category Explosive Substances’ and were  incorporated in clause 2(b) of the Bill.
 
5.2       He further stated that the amendments to clauses 3,4 & 5 of the Explosive   Substances Act, 1908 had been proposed in the Bill in order
to enhance punishment not only in regard to the special category   of explosives  but even in regard to ordinary  category of explosives.  He 
mentioned  that the phrases  like ‘imprisonment for life’  in  place   of  ‘transportation    for   life’, ‘liable   to  fine’    in    place    of   ‘fine may 
be  added’    had   been
*** Relates to other matters
 
included in the Bill to rationalise  punishment.  Further, higher punishment including death  sentence  had  also  been  proposed  in  regard 
to special category explosive substances.   He emphasised   that   the  punishment in the existing Act had been rationalised keeping in view
the direction of  the Supreme Court.
5.3       The Special Secretary also  informed  that the Bill under the consideration   of Committee was the same, which had lapsed due to
dissolution  of Twelfth  Lok Sabha  though  it  was   passed by it on 17  December 1998.
6.         Thereafter, the Chairman and members  raised certain queries  which were replied to by the Special Secretary.
7.         The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999.
Clause 2
7.1.0.   Clause 2  is the substitution of existing Section 2 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 and seeks to add the definition   of ‘special
category explosive substances’.  The expression ‘special category explosive  substances’ inter alia includes RDX, PETN, HMX, TNT,
LTPE, OCTOL etc. and a     combination thereof and remote control devices causing explosion.
 
7.1.1    The Committee felt that the definition of the expression ‘special category explosive substances’   was not comprehensive 
keeping  in view the future technological   developments in this field and wanted to know that if in future some explosive of  a 
different type were to be developed and if the substance did not fit into the definition  given  in the  clause  of  the Bill,   the 
purpose  of  the  legislation would be defeated.   Hence, a provision may be added in the clause to include any type of explosive or
in the alternative the Committee suggested that Government may be empowered  to  issue  notification  from  time  to  time 
thereby including   any new type of explosive substance which might be developed in future so as to obviate the necessity  of going
through the  legislative process of frequently amending the law. 
 
7.1.2    Subject to this the clause was  adopted.
Clause 3
7.2       Clause 3 of the Bill provides for enhanced punishment to any person who unlawfully and maliciously   cause an explosion likely to
endanger life or property.  According to this clause, if any damage to life or property is caused by the explosion of any explosive
substance, the punishment may be for life or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall
also be liable to fine, while if any damage is caused due to explosion of any special category explosive substance, death penalty or
imprisonment for life and fine have been prescribed.
 
7.2.1    The Committee pointed out that the phrase ‘imprisonment for life’ in clause 3 had not been qualified by the term ‘rigorous’ as had
been done in clause 4(b)(ii) and clause 5(b) of the Bill .   It  was   noted   that   although   life   imprisonment included rigorous
imprisonment, the Committee recommended that the term ‘rigorous’ may be added before the phrase ‘imprisonment for life’
wherever it occurred in the Bill for the sake of    uniformity   and   clarity .   Thereupon, the Ministry’s  representative stated that it
would      be    better     to
   clarify  the  position  in  the Act  itself, even if there were other extant laws  like Section    53-A(4) of   IPC and
Section 433-A of Cr.P.C. which clearly clarified that life imprisonment meant rigorous imprisonment for not less than 14 years.
 
7.2.2    It was also pointed out that the proposed amendment did not provide for minimum punishment. The Committee felt that
the provision of minimum punishment might be provided in the clause.
 

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
7.2.3    It was further pointed out that the  words ‘an explosion in India’ and ‘injury to property in India’ had been used in clauses 4(a) and
4(b) respectively, but the reference to  ‘India’ had not been made in clause 3. The Committee recommended that the necessity  of
making a reference to ‘India’ in clause 3  may be examined.
 
7.2.4    Subject to this the clause was adopted.
Clause 4
7.3.0    Clause 4 provides punishment for attempt to cause explosion or for making or keeping explosive substance with intent to endanger
life or property.  In the case of  possession of any explosive substance, provision  has  been  made for  life   imprisonment
or imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also  include fine, while in the case of possession of any explosive
substance of special category a person may be awarded with rigorous imprisonment for life or with rigorous imprisonment which may
extend to ten years. 
 
7.3.1    A point relating to aspect of mens rea was raised during the discussion and the Committee wanted to know whether a person in the
absence of criminal intention could be punished to that extent as prescribed under Section 6 of Explosive Substances Act, 1908 read with
clause 3 of the Bill.
 
7.3.2    It was also pointed out that under clause 3 if any person was found guilty, he might be punished with imprisonment for life or
death, while in case of a person found guilty under clause 4, punishment was rigorous imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years.  In this context, a view was expressed as to how different punishment had been prescribed for the
same offence. 
 
7.3.3    The Committee directed the Ministry to examine the above points from  various angles including the legal angle.
 
7.3.4    Subject to this the clause was adopted.
Clause 5
7.4.0    Clause 5 provides punishment for making or possessing explosives under suspicious circumstances.   If any person who makes  or 
knowingly has  in possession or under his control any explosive substance or special category explosive substance, under such
circumstance which may give rise to a reasonable suspicion that he is not making it or does not have it in his possession for a lawful
object.  In such a situation he is punishable for a term which may extend to ten years and also liable to be fined for possessing explosive
substances, while rigorous imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend for ten years along with fine is
prescribed for possessing special category explosive substance.
 
7.4.1    An apprehension was expressed that the definition of “explosive substance” given under clause 2 had very wide connotations so
that any person suspected to be in possession of any explosive substance under clause 5 might be held guilty under clause 3
of the Bill.  Since provision of  the Bill confer strict liability, the onus would be on the accused and in the absence of adequate safeguards
in clause 5, it was likely to be misused and might cause undue harassment to innocent persons.  The Committee felt that the Government
may examine the feasibility of incorporating suitable safeguards in clause 5 against possible misuse of the power conferred on  the
executive authority.
7.4.2    The provisions under clause 5 are ambiguous as to who would exercise power thereunder.   The Committee recommended that
explicit provisions may be incorporated prescribing levels of authority for the exercise of power.
7.4.3    Subject to this the clause was adopted.  
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
8.         Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of consequential or drafting
nature, namely, “1999” and “Fiftieth” to be substituted by “2000” and “Fifty-first”, respectively.
 
General observations
8.1       Section 7 of  the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 provides that  no Court shall proceed with the trial of any person for an offence
against this Act except with the consent of the Central Government.  In this context, the Committee traced the historical background of the
enactment of the law,  to the Bengal Partition of 1905 and its aftermath.  After some deliberations it was suggested that such kind of
restriction on the trial of the offence under the Act needed to be reviewed in the contemporary situation. 
 
9.1       The Committee expressed its serious concern over the undue delay in filing charge-sheet against the person involved in
terrorist/subversive activities and recommended expeditious trial within a given time frame.
 
9.2       The Committee was of the view that the Government may bring in a comprehensive piece of legislation to deal with all
kinds of terrorist/subversive activities to suit the existing situation.
 
10.       The Committee then directed the Government to examine the specific views /suggestions expressed/made by it during the
course of clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill, before piloting the same in Parliament. The Committee desired that its general
observations on the proposed legislation may also be examined by the Government
 
11.       *                                        *                                                      *

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
12.       *                                        *                                                      *
13.       The Committee adjourned at 4.00 P.M.  to meet at 11.00 A.M. on 9  February 2000.
***Relates to other matters
 
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on  Wednesday, the 13th March, 2000  in Room No. 63, First  Floor, Parliament House , New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee            ¾Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
2.          Shri Sangh Priya Gautam                                                                
3.          Shri Drupad Borgohain
4.         Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
        
            
LOK SABHA
 
5.         Shri Manabendra Shah      
6.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari                                 
7.         Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi                         
8.         Shri Anadi Sahu                
9.         Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri                
10.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra   
11.       Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt   
12.       Shri Samar Choudhury
13.        Shri Subodh Roy
14.        Shri Arun Kumar
15.        Shri P.H. Pandian
16.        Shri Shriniwas Patil
17.        Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
2.         *                                  *                                    *
 
3.         *                                  *                                     *
 
 
 
***
Relates to other matters
 
3.1       The Committee also adopted the Fifty Eighth Report with a minor  change.
3.2       *                                  *                                    *
 
4.         *                                  *                                    *                   
5.         *                                  *                                    *
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday 23 March 2000.
 
***Relates to other matters
 
ANNEXURE

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 
Bill No.LII of 1999
 
THE EXPLOSIVE SUBSTANCES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
A
BILL
                      further to amend the Explosive Substances Act,1908.
           BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
 
 
l. (1) This Act may be called the Explosive Substances (Amendment) Act, 1999.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
2. In the Explosive Substances Act, 1908, for sections 2 to 5 the tollowing sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
Substitution of
new sections for
sections 2 to 5 of
Act 6 of 1908.
‘2. In this Act,—-
         (a) the expression "explosive substance" shall be deemed to
include any materials for making any explosive substance; also any
apparatus, machine, implement or material used, or intended to be used,
or adapted for causing, or aiding in causing, any explosion in or with
any explosive substance; also any part of any such apparatus, machine
or implement-,
 
 
 
 
(b) the expression "special category explosive substance" shall be
deemed to include research
development explosive (RDX) penta erythritol tetra nitrate
Definitions.
(b)    the expression “special category explosive substance”
                  shall  be  deemed  to  include    research   development   explosive   (RDX),            
                  pentra   erythritoltetra  nitrate  (PETN),  high  melting   explosive   (HMX),
 
 
tri nitro toluene  (TNT), low temperature plastic explosive (LTPE),
composition exploding (CE) (2,4,6 phenyl methyl nitramine or tetryl),
OCTOL (mixture of high melting  explosive and tri nitro toluene),
plastic explosive kirkee-1 (PEK-1) and RDX/TNT compounds and
other similar type of explosives and a combination thereof and remote
control devices causing explosion.'.
Punishment for
causing
explosion likely
to endanger life
or property.
3. Any person who unlawfully and maliciously causes by—
     
 (a) any explosive substance an explosion of a nature likely to endanger
life or to cause serious injury to property shall, whether any injury to
person    or   property  has  been  actually    caused  or   not, be 
punished
 with imprisonment  for life, or with imprisonment of either   description
for a term which may  extend to ten years, and shall also  be liable to
fine;
 
 
 
       (b) any special category explosive substance an explosion of a     
nature likely to endanger life or to cause serious injury to property
shall, whether any injury to person or property has been actually
caused or not, be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and
shall also be
 be liable to fine.
Punishment for 4. Any person who unlawfully and maliciously—

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
attempt to cause
explosion, or for
making or
keeping
explosive with
intent to
endanger life or
property.
(a) does any act with intent to cause by an explosive substance or
special category explosive substance, or conspires to cause by an
explosive substance or special category explosive substance, an
explosion in India of a nature likely to endanger life or to cause serious
injury to property; or
         (b) makes or has in his possession or under his control any
explosive substance or special category explosive substance with intent
by means thereof to endanger life, or cause serious injury to property in
India, or to enable any other person by means thereof to endanger life
or cause serious injury to property in India,
 cause  serious to property in India.
 
 
shall, whether any explosion does or does not take place and whether any
injury to person or property has been actually caused or not, be punished,—
          (i) in the case of any explosive substance, with imprisonment for
life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(ii) in the case of any special category explosive substance, with
rigorous imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
 
 
 
 
Punishment for                        4.         Any  person who makes or knowingly  has in  his  possession or
making or                    under his control any explosive  substance or special  category explosive
possessing                    substance,  under such circumstances as to give  rise to  reasonable suspi-
explosives                    cion that he is not making it or does not have it in his possession or under
under suspicious          his control for a lawful object, shall unless he can show that he made it or
circumstances.             had  it  in  his   possession  or   under   his   control  for a lawful object be
                                    punished -
           
                                    ‘(a)       in  the case  of  any explosive substance, with imprisonment for a
                                    term  which  may   extend   to   ten  years, and shall also be liable to fine;
                                      (b)      in   the  case  of  any  special category   explosive substance, with
                                    rigorous  imprisonment  for  life,  or  with  rigorous  imprisonment  for a
                                    term  which  may  extend  to  ten  years,  and  shall also be liable to fine’.    
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 
In the recent past there have been incidents of bomb blasts on a very large scale in some parts of the country particularly in Jammu and
Kashmir, Tamil Nadu,Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, West Bengal and the North-East causing huge loss to life and property. Terrorists and
anti-national elements have, through clandestine means, acquired research development explosive (RDX), penta erythritol tetra nitrate (PETN),
high melting explosive (HMX) and other similar types of explosive substances. These explosives, håving high plasticity and low evaporation,
are difficult to detect in the normal course.At the same time, they are far more lethal in their potential for damage than the conventional
explosives. Use of such explosives by terrorists and anti-national elements has not only endangered human life but has also caused a great
threat to the security environment of the country.
 
2.         In the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 which provides for the punishment to any person who causes an explosion likely to endanger
life or property, or who attempts to cause such an explosion or måkes or has in his possession explosive substance with intent to endanger life
or property, there is no distinction between offences involving use of conventional explosives as compared with offences committed with more
lethal explosives, e.g., RDX, PETN, HMX, LTPE and other similar explosives. There is also a need that explosion caused by use of Remote
Control Devices should attract more severe punishment. To overcome these deficiencies, it is proposed to amend the Act by putting more lethal
explosives, viz., RDX, PETN, HMX and other similar explosives or a combination thereof and remote control devices for causing explosion
under 'Special Category Explosive Substances' and to provide for enhancement in maximum punishment for offences committed with such
explosive substances by amending the relevant provisions of the Act.
3.         The Bill seeks to give effect to the above proposed amendments in the Act.
N
EW DLHI;
The l6th December, 1999.                                                         L. K. ADVANI
 
 
 
 

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
    
                                                                   
              
ANNEXURE
    EXTRACTS  FROM THE
EXPLOSIVE  SUBSTANCES ACT,
1908
                                   
(6 OF 1908)
*                *                *                         
*                         *
Definition of "explosive substance".         2. In this Act the expression "explosive substance"
shall be deemed to include any materials for making any
explosive substance; also any apparatus, machine,
implement       or     material used, or intended to be used,
or adapted for causing, or aiding in causing, any explosion
in or with any explosive substance; also any part of any
such apparatus, machine or implement.
Punish-ment for causing explo-  sion
likely to endanger life or property.punish
-ment for attem- pt to cause explosion, or
formakingor keeping explosive with
intentto  endangerlife or property.
3.   Any    person    who unlawfully    and
maliciously causes by any explosive substance and
explosion of a nature likely to endanger life or to
cause serious injury to property shall, whether any
injury to person or property has been actually caused
or not, be punished with transportation for life or any
shorter term, to which fine may be added, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, to which fine may be added.
4. Any person who unlawfully and maliciously—
(a)
   does any act with intent to cause by an
explosive substance, or conspires to
cause by an explosive substance, an
explosion in India of a nature likely to
endanger life or to cause serious injury
to property; or
(b)
   makes  or  has  in   is  ossession or
under his control any explosive
 
 substance with intent by means  thereof  to  endanger 
life,  or  cause   serious  injury to property  in India, or to
enable any other  person by means thereof to endanger life
or cause serious injury to property in India.
 
 
shall, whether any explosion does or  does  not  take  place 
and  whether any injury to person or property has been
actually caused or not, be punished with transportat -    ion
for a term, which  may extend   to  twenty  years,   to   
which  fine  may  be added, or with imprisonment    for  a 
term  which  may  extend  to  seven  years,  to which fine
may be adadded.
 which  fine may be added.
Punishment for making or possessing
explosives under suspicious circums-
tances.
5. Any person who måkes or knowingly has in
his possession or   under his control any explosive
substance, under such circumstances as to give   rise 
to  a reasonable suspicion thai he is not making it or
does not have it in his possession or under his control
for a lawful object, shall, unless he can show that   he
made it or had it in his possession or under his control
for  a  lawful object, be  punishable with transportation
for a term which may extend to  fourteen   years, to
which fine may be added, or with imprisonment for a
term which may  extend   to  five years, to which fine
may be added.
*****
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
A
 
BILL
 
Further to amend the Explosive Substances Act, 1908
 
(Shri L.K. Advani, Minister of Home Affairs)

Are You suprised ?
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/58%20Report.htm[30-06-2016 17:34:29]
 
MOST IMMEDIATE
CONFIDENTIAL
 
No. V-15012/1/97-Arms
Government of India/Bharat Sarkar
Ministry of Home Affairs/Grih Mantralaya
****
 
New Delhi, the 22nd February, 2000
 
To
            Shri Tapan Chatterjee
            Deputy Secretary,
            Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
            Parliament House Annexe,
            New Delhi.
 
Subject:            Consideration of the Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999 by the
                        Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
 
Sir,      
            I am directed to refer to your letter No. RS6(1)/2000-CS (HA) dated 16
th February, 2000 on the above subject and to say that the matter
has been carefully considered.  It is noticed that during the deliberations, the Members have raised a number of important issues relating to
various aspects of the proposed Bill.  Some of the more important issues raised by the Members are as follows:-
           
(i)                 Replacement of the existing punishment ‘imprisonment for life’ provided vide Section 3 (b) of the proposed Bill by
‘rigorous imprisonment for life’.
(ii)               Delegation of powers for sanction of prosecution to the District Magistrate in the States in terms of Section 7 of the
existing Explosive Substances Act, 1908.
(iii)             Number of cases where punishment has been awarded so far by different States for offences relating to explosions.
(iv)             The expression ‘Special Category Explosive Substance’ in Section 2 (b) of the proposed Bill should be so defined as to
take care of any new type of ‘explosive’ which may be developed in future.
 
It will be noticed that it will be necessary to consult the Ministries of Law and Defence in respect of the above suggestions/observations made
by the Hon’ble Members during the discussions.  Similarly, it will be necessary to make a reference to the State Governments for collection of
information in respect of certain data sought by the Hon’ble Members during the discussions on the above Bill.   The process of consultation
with the Ministries and of collection of information from the State Governments will take quite some time before we are in a position to
respond to each and every point/suggestion made by the Hon’ble Members in the above meeting.
 
1.
      It is, therefore, requested that the Committee may kindly be suitably informed of the above position and requested to allow reasonable time
(say about month or so)   to   this Ministry for
collection of information from the State Governments and completing the process of consultations with the concerned Ministries so
that a final view can be formulated and a complete reply may be furnished.
2.            This issues with the approval of Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs.
 
 
Yours faithfully,
 
(S.K.Tuli )
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
Tel: 3015698
 
 