PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 152
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON REVAMPING AND REVITALISATION OF CIVIL
DEFENCE IN THE COUNTRY
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA, 1933 (SAKA)NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA, 1933 (SAKA)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23 , NOVEMBER, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 , NOVEMBER, 2011)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23 , NOVEMBER, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 , NOVEMBER, 2011)
RD
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)RD
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)
RD
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)RD
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
ON REV AMPING AND REVITALISATION OF CIVIL
DEFENCE IN THE COUNTRY
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(FORW ARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 3 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22 ND NOVEMBER, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA, 1933 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.) 295

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ..................................................................................... 2—7
CHAPTER II : Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does
not desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s
replies ...................................................................................................... 8—9
C
HAPTER III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ....... 10—16
CHAPTER IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government have not yet been received by the
Committee ............................................................................................... 17—18
4. O
BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE 19—20
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 21—24

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2010)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
*7. Shri Javed Akhtar
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Ramen Deka
15. Shri L. Rajagopal
16. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
17. Shri Naveen Jindal
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik (Sonepat)
19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
23. Adv. A. Sampath
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
27. Shri Ravneet Singh
28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
29. Shri Harsh Vardhan
30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
* Shri Javed Akhtar nominated w.e.f. 21 st September, 2010 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva, who has resigned from the Membership
of the DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.f.  the 13 th September, 2010.
(i)

Committee on Home Affairs
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Fifty Second Report on the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in its One Hundred and Thirty Sixth Report on Revamping
and Revitalisation of Civil Defence.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Parliament on 21 October, 2008.
3. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the Action Taken Note on the One Hundred and
Thirty Seventh Report of the Committee on 31
st July, 2009 and subsequently an updated note on
the implementation of recommendations as contained in the Report was sent. Again a questionnaire
on the updated action taken notes was sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs to furnish the replies
thereon. The response so received from the Government alongwith the updated action taken note
have been incorporated in the present action taken report.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
11 May 2011.
5. The recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
11 May, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.

1
1
REPORT
This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty Sixth Report of
the Committee on Revamping and Revitalisation of Civil Defence in the Country. The One Hundred
Thirty Sixth Report was presented to/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
21
st October, 2008.
2. Action Taken Notes/updated Action Taken Note/replies to the questionnaire received from
the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the recommendations contained in the 136 th Report have
been categorized as follows:
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government Paras: 14.1.2, 18.1, 19.1, 20.1, 23.1, 24.1.
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire
to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s replies Para: 17.2,
22.1.
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee or the Committee
is not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry Paras: 14.1.1, 15.1, 17.1,
21.1, 21.2.
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the
Government have not yet been received by the Committee Para: 16.1.
3. The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation or unsatisfactory
implementation of recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should
furnish logical explanation and convincing responses in respect of those recommendations. The
Committee also impress upon the Government to furnish final replies in respect of recommendation
contained in Chapter IV .
4. The details of the Action Taken Notes have been discussed in various Chapters in the
succeeding pages.

2
2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 ASSISTING THE DISTRICT DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (DDMA)
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee is of the strong view that Civil Defence set up can playa major role in
assisting the District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) with the help of its volunteers at
grass root level, in different phases of disaster, particularly in pre-disaster (public awareness,
community capacity building and community preparedness) and mid-disaster (response and relief)
phases. Training to the cadres of Civil Defence in this respect would make available to the states,
trained manpower in district and local administration in the event of a disaster, and would also
provide them additional resources to generate public awareness to sensitise and prepare the
community for disaster scenarios.
(Para 14.1.2 of 136
th Report )
Action Taken
1.1.2 The role of Civil Defence has been expanded through executive instructions issued by
Ministry of Home Affairs during 2003 advising the State Governments to utilize the services of Civil
Defence volunteers for mitigation, prevention and preparedness for disasters as well as for response
and relief, after a disaster has struck.
1.1.3 Recognizing the view that the Communities are often the first responders in any disaster
situation, the Government had constituted a High Powered Committee in February, 2006, to
suggest ways and means of integrating Civil Defence in disaster management. The report
submitted by the Committee has been accepted in the meeting of Home Minister’s Civil Defence
Advisory Committee held on April 2, 2008. Based on the recommendations contained in the
report, a Bill to amend Section (2) of Civil Defence Act, 1968 for assigning specific role to Civil
Defence volunteers in disaster management has been passed by the Parliament in the recently
concluded winter session.
1.1.4 Since, Civil Defence is proposed to be integrated in the overall Disaster Management
Framework, it has been decided to upgrade the existing Training Institutes in various States/UTs
in terms of infrastructure, transport and equipment. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme for
‘Revamping the Civil Defence set up in the Country’ will help in creating a voluntary force capable
of responding to emergency situation and assisting the District Disaster Managements Authorities
(DDMAs) in different phases of disaster management. Besides, National Civil Defence College,
Nagpur is also being upgraded to give specialized training to Civil Defence volunteers in various
aspects of disaster management.
1.1.5 To give impetus to the idea of utilization of Civil Defence volunteers during disasters and
to generated awareness in common public, various programmes like conduct of seminars, rallies,
mock drills, demonstrations and exercises are being carried out regularly by the States.

3
1.2 LINKING CIVIL DEFENCE WITH DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Civil Defence organisation should enhance its capacity to act as first responder to any
disaster situation with the help of its volunteers at different levels. This would make trained
manpower available to the State, district and local administration in the form of Civil Defence
staff and volunteers in the event of a disaster. The Committee recommends that training in Civil
Defence should be made part of Disaster Management. It is in this area that civil defence has
maximum potential.
(Para 18.1 of 136
th Report )
Action Taken
1.2.2 In line with recommendations of Shri K.M. Singh’s Committee, Disaster Management has
been identified as a critical role of Civil Defence organisation. Accordingly, a Bill to amend Section
(2) of Civil Defence Act, 1968 has been passed by both the House of the Parliament. This
amendment will provide statutory back up to Civil Defence Corps in disaster management.
1.2.3 The Scheme for Revamping Civil Defence setup, envisages upgrading training infrastructure
in the State level Institutions and Civil Defence volunteers will be trained in disaster response and
relief to act as first responders in any disaster, disaster like situation. In addition, pre-disaster
preparedness and prevention aspects would also be taken up for enhancing the capacity of Civil
Defence.
Further Observation
1.2.4 The Committee hopes that amendment to the Civil Defence Act, 1968 would give
fillip to the critical role of Civil Defence organization and train Civil Defence corps as first
responder to any disaster situation. The Committee appreciates that Government proposes
to take up pre-disaster preparedness and prevention aspects for enhancing the capacity of
Civil Defence. The Committee desires that early action may be taken in this regard.
1.3 PROVISION FOR ADEQUATE NUMBER OF TRAINING INSTITUTES
Recommendation
1.3.1 The success of the suggested new role of Civil Defence will largely depend on selection of
motivated cadre with aptitude for social service. The Committee is of the view that in order to
raise sufficient trained cadre, Civil Defence requires more training institutes. The Committee
strongly recommends revamping of Central Training Institutes in States and establishing more such
institutes for better supply of trained cadres in times of need.
(Para 19.1 of 136
th Report )
Action Taken
1.3.2 In order to provide better training and high level of professionalism to Civil Defence
volunteers, 17 existing State level Institutes are being upgraded in terms of physical infrastructure,
transport and equipment under the Scheme of Revamping of Civil Defence at an estimated cost of
Rs.100 crore. So far, proposals from 12 States have been received and funds have been allocated
to the States/UTs within the current Financial Year. In addition, 10 new State level training institutes
are proposed to be established as a part of the above Scheme. Strategic investments will also
proposed to be made under the above Scheme in 100 multi hazard prone districts by providing
transport and equipment support for training of Civil Defence Corps.

4
1.3.3 Apart from above, National Civil Defence College located at Nagpur is also being upgraded
in terms of infrastructure, transport and equipment to enhance the training capacity.
1.3.4 Further issues raised
• The status regarding upgradation of State level institutions for Civil Defence and
opening of ten new State level training institutes for the same.
• Whether upgradation of National Civil Defence College has been completed, and if
not, the reason thereof and the time schedule for completion of the target.
1.3.5 Response of the Government
(i) Upgradation of State level Civil Defence Training Institutes: - A total of 17 State level
Civil Defence Training Institutes are planned for upgradation under the Scheme. Out of a
total amount of Rs 1802 lakhs provisioned for this activity an amount of Rs 1001.40 lakhs
has been allocated to various States/UTs for this purpose during financial years 2009-10 and
2010-11. The process of upgradation has commenced in nine States i.e. Assam, Delhi,
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Maharashtra and
West Bengal. Balance of eight States/UTs are in the process of commencing the
up-gradation of their State level Civil Defence Training institute.
(ii) Creation of Ten New State Level Civil Defence Training Institutes: - The basic
requirement for creation of new State level Civil Defence Training Institute is provision of
land and staff by the State Governments. Till date only three States, i.e. Bihar, Chhattisgarh
and Kerala have allocated land for the Training Institutes. Out of a total amount of Rs 1920
lakhs provisioned for this activity in the scheme a total amount of Rs 252.5 lakhs has been
disbursed to these three States during financial years 2009-10 and 2010-2011 for creation
of State level Civil Defence Training Institute. State of Orissa and A&N Islands have
recently intimated that the Civil Defence Training Institute will be established along with
existing Fire and Police Training Institutes, hence funds for the same are planned for
allocation during Financial Year 2011-12. The remaining five States i.e Arunanchal Pradesh,
Chandigarh, Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand are yet to allocate land for this purpose
and are under the process of identifying land, as such no funds could be disbursed to these
States/UTs.
(iii) Upgradation of National Civil Defence College:-  The upgradation of NCDC has been
partially completed as under :-–
(a) The training programmes have been upgraded and revised as well as new programmes
introduced.
(b) The training methodologies have been upgraded and computer simulation/scenario
building/table top exercise are being adopted for imparting skills.
(c) Infrastructure building for NCDC has been completed except residential quarters
(Type-I & II) and water pool which are under construction and will be completed by
June, 2011.
(d) Purchase of equipment has been undertaken partially.
(e) The existing vacancies will be filled after the process for revision of existing
Recruitment Rules, which is under process.

5
(f) The upgradation of NCDC could not be completed in time due to non allocation of
adequate funds for building infrastructure and equipment purchase. Due to this,
extension of the scheme for up-gradation of NCDC, Nagpur, till March 2012, is under
consideration.
(g) The Scheme is likely to be completed within financial year 2011-12.
Further Observation
1.3.6 The Committee hopes that the scheme would be completed during the Financial Y ear
2011-12, as scheduled, without time and cost overruns. The Committee desires that the
upgradation of the State Institutes may be completed at the earliest. The States that have
not allotted land for the institutes may be persuaded for the purpose. Upgradation of the
NCDC may be extended upto March 2012 as sought by the Ministry and upgradation of the
college may be completed by then, without fail.
1.4 CIVIL DEFENCE AND PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS (PRIS)
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee endorses the recommendation of K.M Singh Committee that Civil Defence
activities should be undertaken in community capacity building and public awareness in tandem
with the PRIs and urban local bodies. Participation of the local bodies would ensure resilience and
sustainability of the disaster combating initiatives at the grassroots level. The Committee strongly
urges upon the Ministry to make efforts in that direction.
(Para 20.1 of 136th Report )
Action Taken
1.4.2 The recommendations of Shri K.M. Singh’s Committee on Civil Defence have been accepted
by Home Minister’s Civil Defence Advisory Committee in its meeting held during April, 2008. In
line with the above recommendations, a Scheme for Revamping of Civil Defence setup in the
country at an estimated cost of Rs.100 crore has been included in the Eleventh Plan Period. The
Scheme provides a crucial role to the Civil Defence Corps in community capacity building and
public awareness in close association with PRIs and Urban Local Bodies.
1.4.3 Further issues raised
• The concrete steps taken in the Eleventh Plan period to develop community based Civil
Defence activities.
• The success achieved in revamping of Civil Defence.
• Whether any impact assessment was undertaken in this regard, if so, the details thereof
including shortcomings noticed and remedial measures suggested?
1.4.4 Response of the Government
(i) Development of Community Based Civil Defence Activities: –  Under the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme for Revamping of Civil Defence Setup in the country, a Pilot Project has
been launched in 40 selected towns to involve Civil Defence V olunteers in Internal Security
duties. As against a target of Training 214 Master Trainers, all 214 have been trained and
against a target of training of 4280 Civil Defence V olunteers by these master trainers at state
level, 3267 volunteers have already been trained. These volunteers are now to be deployed
by the states for community policing and intelligence gathering.

6
(ii) In addition to the above, a Revamping Cell for Civil Defence has been created in the office
of the Director General Civil Defence to monitor the Revamping Scheme. Regular visits to
states are made by officers of the Revamping Cell to apprise the Civil Defence functionaries
at state level about the requirements and to monitor the progress. Interactive meetings have
been held by the DG , NDRF&CD with representative of 15 States. Three national level
meetings and one interactive workshop of representatives of States have been conducted at
New Delhi. In addition, publicity material i.e. video spot on promotion of Civil Defence has
been created and was aired on D.D Network and major private T.V Channels in December
2010 and a Documentary Film is under production for distribution to States/UTs
(iii) The revamping process under the Scheme is to be carried out with an outlay of Rs.100 crores
during the current five year plan. Till Date Rs.29 crores have been provisioned for the
scheme and out of this amount Rs.27 crores have been utilized for the scheme.
(iv) The mid term evaluation of the scheme was to be carried out during end of 2010. However,
the scheme has since been rescheduled to be carried out by December 2011 due to
cumbersome procedure in the states for transferring the fund to the user organization.
Further Observation
1.4.5 The Committee desires that the Government may complete mid-term evaluation of
the scheme by 2011 as scheduled.
1.5 Amendments to the Civil Defence Act, 1968
Recommendation
1.5.1  The Committee recommends that the amendments to the Civil Defence Act, 1968, as
recommended by the Home Minister’ s Defence Advisory Committee, may be carried out in a time
bound manner.
(Para 23.1 of 136
th Report )
Action Taken
1.5.2 Based on the recommendations contained in the report, a Bill to amend Section (2) of Civil
Defence Act, 1968 for assigning statutory back up to the Civil Defence volunteers in disaster
management has been passed by the Parliament in the recently concluded winter session.
1.6 GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS
Recommendation
1.6.1 It is incumbent on the Government to ensure that the project for ‘Revamping of Civil
Defence’ is implemented within Eleventh Plan period so that Civil Defence could play a vital role
in disaster management, as envisaged by K.M Singh Committee.
(Para 24.1 of 136
th Report )
Action Taken
1.6.2 Necessary steps are being taken to ensure that the Scheme for ‘Revamping of Civil Defence
setup in the Country’ at an estimated cost of the Rs.100 crore is implemented during Eleventh Five
Year Plan. The scheme is being implemented by Director General of National Disaster Response
Force and Civil Defence and for overseeing the implementation of the scheme a High Power
Committee is being setup under the chairmanship of Secretary (Border Management) in the Ministry.

7
1.6.3 Further issue raised
• The details of the projects undertaken under the scheme ‘Revamping of Civil Defence’,
which are yet to be completed along with the reasons for the same and targeted dates/
revised targeted dates thereof.
1.6.4 Response of the  Government
Due to late launch of the Scheme and commencement of funding from October 2009 and
delayed allocations to user Organizations by the State Governments, all components of the Scheme
are yet to be completed. However efforts are being made to complete all the following major
components of the projects by the end of March 2012 as envisaged in the sanction:
(i) Strengthening of Training Infrastructure.
(ii) Strategic Investments in 100 selected multi-hazard districts.
(iii) Pilot Project for involving Civil Defence in Disaster Management and Internal Security
matters.
(iv) Re-orientation of CD from Town Centric approach to District Centric.
Further Observation
1.6.5 The Committee recommends that the Government should make all out efforts to
complete the scheme by March, 2012. There should not be any delay in completing any of
the components.

8
8
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE THE
MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
2.1 NEED FOR BROAD BASING CIVIL DEFENCE
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee is also of the considered view that the objective of Civil Defence should
cover any prospect of loss of life and property irrespective of whether caused by man made or
natural factors. It should not limit itself to ‘hostile attacks’ whose definition itself warrants
amendment in order to be broadened and bring the consequences of explosion/triggering of Weapons
of Mass Destruction (WMDs) by forces inimical to India, even without declaring a formal war
against the country, within the ambit of its definition.
(Para 17.2 of 136
th Report )
Action Taken
2.1.2 The definition of “Hostile Attack” as given at para 2 (c) in Civil Defence Act, 1968 is as
under:–
“Hostile Attack”, means any attack by any person or body of persons, whether during any
war, external aggression, internal disturbances or otherwise which endangers the security of
any life, property, place or thing in India or any part of the territory thereof”.
2.1.3 It may be seen from above that the definition of “hostile attack” is wide enough to cover
extremist and disruptive activities, sabotage, arson, communal violence or any other form of
organized threat to the safety and security of persons or properties or place. In other words, it
may be presumed from the interpretation of the definition that extremist, terrorist and communal
violence endangering internal security are among the circumstances warranting Civil Defence
measures. Therefore, it is felt that there is no need for further amending the definition of “hostile
attack”.
2.2 BUDGETARY PROVISION FOR REVITALIZING CIVIL DEFENCE
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee noted with satisfaction that MHA has drawn up a project proposal for
‘Revamping of Civil Defence’ to be implemented during the Eleventh Plan period at a total
estimated cost of Rs.100 crore. The Project is likely to be implemented from the third quarter of
the current financial year. It is a good beginning for revamping and revitalizing the civil defence
apparatus. However, the Ministry of Home Affairs may make a re-assessment of the financial
requirement in the mid term appraisal. The Ministry may also kindly ensure that the project
positively takes off as indicated, as we are already in the second year of the Eleventh Plan.
(Para 22.1 of 136
th Report )

9
Action Taken
2.2.2 The process of revamping of Civil Defence has commenced and Rs.100 crore have been
sanctioned under the scheme for Revamping of Civil Defence set up in the country in the current
financial year vide MHA letter No. I-4501l/02/2008-Ad(CD) dated 20.04.2009. Rs.15.00 crore have
been allocated for the year 2009-2010, in the third quarter of current financial year under the
Scheme.
2.2.3 MHA will carry out mid-term appraisal to re-assess the financial requirement in middle of
financial year 2010-2011, and if required additional funds will be made available in the current
Eleventh Five Year Plan.
2.2.4 Further issues raised
• What has been the expenditure on Civil Defence out of the allocation made in the
Eleventh Plan till date?
• Was the allocation sufficient to meet the requirement?
• Whether any additional allocations have been made to meet additional requirement and
to cover inflation?
2.2.5 Response of the Government
During 2009-2010 an amount of Rs.15 crores was allocated for the scheme (in October
2009) and for 2010-11 Rs.14 crores were allocated for the scheme (2.5 crores in May 2010 and
balance in October 2010). Out of this total allocation of Rs.29 crores, Rs.26.95 crores have been
disbursed to States. The allocations made were not sufficient to meet the requirement and were
lower than the projections made for the Scheme. As the approved cost of the present scheme for
Revamping of Civil Defence set up in the country is Rs.100 crore, no additional allocations are
proposed to be made to meet new requirements or cover inflation.

10
10
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT
OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 ROLE OF CIVIL DEFENCE IN CHANGING SCENARIO
Recommendation
3.1.1 The role of Civil Defence should be seen in the light of the paradigm shift in the security
scenario of the country and that it should be in consonance with the changing times. Modern civil
defence cannot be effective unless it gears to the new challenges of proxy war, terrorism, communal
riots and other civic strife which cause loss of life and property. Since traditional warfare is no
longer a major component of threat, the new security climate requires prompt response to new threat
instruments like proxy war, terrorism, acts of sabotage and subversion.
(Para 14.1.1 of 136
th Report )
Action Taken
3.1.2 Civil Defence in India operates under the statutory authority of the Civil Defence Act, 1968
and is intended to be organized primarily on a voluntary basis as an integral part of the defence
of the country on a limited scale. Civil Defence being a community based organization presents a
unique opportunity for community policing and they have acquired certain skills in crisis prevention
and recovery.
3.1.3 A Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Revamping Civil Defence set up in the country at an
estimated cost of Rs.100 crore for implementation in the Eleventh Plan Period has been approved
and sanctioned by the Government of India. The Scheme inter alia, include upgradation of existing
State Training Institutes in terms of infrastructure, transport and equipment, construction of 10
new State Training Institutes, upgradation of facilities in 100 identified Civil Defence towns. The
Scheme envisages converting the Civil Defence from town-centric to district-centric. As a part of
this scheme, a pilot project at a cost of Rs.3.25 crore is being undertaken to involve Civil Defence
volunteers in assisting the Police in law and order and internal security situations. The overall
objective of the pilot project is to interpret the law more liberally to include internal security threats
like terrorist and extremist violence, communal violence among the reasons for involving Civil
Defence measures. This pilot project envisages 10 days’ intensive training for 214 hand-picked Civil
Defence Wardens/ V olunteers from 17 Major and 23 Minor towns from different States at National
Civil Defence College (NCDC), Nagpur in batches.
3.1.4 After the completion of training at NCDC, Nagpur, these Master Trainers, with the help of
guest faculties, will impart training to trainers in their respective State Training Institutes to 4280
volunteers/wardens (1000 from Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Bangalore and Hyderabad, 1440 from other
12 major towns and 1840 from 23 Minor Towns).
3.1.5 Trainers trained in the State Training Institutes will be involved in various types of
orientation programmes, drills, etc. to be organized in coordination with the police authorities and
will also assist them in orientation programmes which will include seminars, workshops, rallies,
demonstrations, and exercises. Through these programmes, all the Civil Defence volunteers residing

11
in the jurisdiction of local police stations will be given orientation by the trained Master Trainers
and trained Civil Defence volunteers in intelligence gathering, surveillance, maintenance of
communal harmony, national integration, precautions in case of bomb scare and protective
measures before the bomb is detected/defused, tenant verification, general vigilance with reference
to possible terrorist activities, various response activities including evacuation of casualties, first aid
and establishment of relief camps etc. All these activities will be conducted under the overall
supervision of Controller/Deputy Controller of Civil Defence in consultation with local police
authorities. Detailed guidelines as to how these activities have to be carried out, role of civil
authorities and the coordination mechanism with police authorities and Civil Defence volunteers/
wardens has been issued separately by Director General (NCRF & CD).
3.1.6 So far, 185 Master Trainers have already completed their training at NCDC, Nagpur, and
the training of trainers at State level has commenced in some of the States. The remaining 29
trainees will be trained in the course commencing on 08.02.2010. Thereafter the training of trainers
will commence in all the States, where pilot project has been launched. Their work will be
reviewed for gauging their operational and administrative efficiency by the end of calendar year
2010. Based on the impact assessment of the project, its replication in other districts/towns could
be considered. The project is being closely monitored by the Director General (NCRF & CD) as
well as MHA on regular basis.
3.1.7 Further issues raised
• The status of pilot projects of Civil Defence in 100 selected towns.
• Whether operational and administrative efficiency review proposed to be undertaken by
the end of 2010, has been undertaken; if so, the details thereof?
• Composition of professional services, which have been entrusted to manage working of
Civil Defence institutions.
3.1.8 Response of the Government
(i) Status of Pilot Project:-  Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Revamping of Civil
Defence Setup in the Country a Pilot Project has been launched in 40 Selected towns to
involve Civil Defence V olunteers in Internal Security duties. As against a target of Training
214 Masters Trainers all 214 have been trained and against a target of training of 4,280
Civil Defence V olunteers by these master trainers at State level 3,267 volunteers have
already been trained. These volunteers are now to be deployed by the States for Community
policing and intelligence gathering.
(ii) The scheme was sanctioned in 2009. Initially, the funds were allocated to States as grant-
in-aid for various activities of the scheme. The actual work on ground started in the
Financial Year 2010-11. Hence, a mid-term review of the scheme, “Revamping of Civil
Defence set up in the country” is now planned in 2011-12.
(iii) No professional services have been earmarked in the scheme to manage working of Civil
Defence institutions in the States as it is the responsibility of the State Governments to
provide manpower for the Civil Defence institutes. Large number of vacancies exists in the
permanent Civil Defence staff at CD headquarters’ and state level C.D training institutes
which need to be filled up by the State Governments.
Further Recommendation
3.1.9 The Committee is constrained to note that as against a target of training of 4,280

12
Civil Defence Volunteers by these master trainers at State level, only 3,267 volunteers have
been trained. Since the civil defence apparatus has mainly volunteers at the lower level, the
top implementing leadership should be professional so that it can guide volunteers well.
3.1.10 The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that there are a large number of
vacancies in the permanent Civil Defence staff at CD headquarters’ and state level CD
training institutes. In this scenario, the Civil Defence set up cannot function efficiently. The
Committee strongly recommends that early steps may be taken to fill up the vacancies.
3.2 ADEQUATE TRAINING AND PROFESSIONALISATION OF CIVIL DEFENCE
APPARATUS
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee is of the view that Civil Defence should be made more professional as the
challenges have grown extremely complex and require a more sophisticated response. This, in turn,
requires better training and higher professionalism. The Committee is also of the view that a sense
of professionalism is essential to be infused among the ranks of Civil Defence organization across
the country in order to augment its capability to deal with the potential challenges which are
growingly assuming complex characteristics warranting sophisticated response for safety of lives
and properties. The sophistication can be achieved by encouraging professionalism in the civil
defence organization and by imparting better training.
(Para 15.1 of 136
th Report )
Action Taken
3.2.2 A Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Revamping of Civil Defence has been approved for
implementation during the Eleventh Plan period at an estimated cost of Rs.100 crore. The Scheme
lays emphasis on enhancing the capabilities of the existing Civil Defence organization by
upgradation of existing 17 State Training Institutes (STIs), creation of 10 new STIs, grant of
equipments and transport required for training. Proposals have been received from 12 States for
strengthening of existing institutes. Out of the Rs.15 crore sanctioned for revamping of Civil
Defence during the current year, an amount of Rs.14.55 crore has been released to the concerned
State Government by the DG (NDRF&CD). DG, NDRF & CD has been regularly monitoring the
progress of the scheme.
3.2.3 National Civil Defence College at Nagpur is also being strengthened/upgraded in terms of
building, infrastructure, transport and equipment for capacity building of Civil Defence personnel
and volunteers.
3.2.4 To encourage professionalism among the volunteers, the existing register of Civil Defence
Corps is being revised on regular basis by Director General of Civil Defence to weed out incapable,
infirm and weak volunteers. So far 21,628 Civil Defence volunteers have been weeded out from
the register of the Civil Defence and 20,370 new volunteers have been enrolled.
3.2.5 Public awareness campaign will be undertaken as a part of the Scheme to motivate people
of good social standing to join Civil Defence. Efforts will be made to inculcate a sense of
professionalism among the wardens/volunteers.
3.2.6 Further issues raised
• 20,370 new volunteers have been enrolled against 21,628  weeded out. In this
background, how the shortfall is made up and at what intervals this exercise of
weeding out is done?

13
• Whether Government has any plan to rope in, subject to fitness, retired public servants
as civil defence volunteers?
3.2.7 Response of the Government
The weeding out exercise was carried out as a onetime measure where all enrolled Civil
Defence volunteers were screened for efficiency, age and physical fitness. A total of 62,904
volunteers were weeded out after Jan 2009 and 54,389 new volunteers were enrolled. Thereafter
the weeding out is to be carried out periodically and vacancies filled by new volunteers by the
States. There is no maximum age limit for joining Civil Defence organization and as such retired
public servants are eligible to join civil defence organization subject to their physical fitness and
mental fitness.
Further Recommendations
3.2.8 The Committee notes that a total of 62,904 volunteers were weeded out after
January 2009 and 54,389 new volunteers were enrolled, thus leaving a substantial shortfall
in the strength of total number of volunteers. The Committee is of the considered view
that concrete steps are required to be taken to fill the shortfall, if Civil Defence system
is to be strengthened and for its proper functioning. Public awareness campaigns are
needed to be undertaken on a regular intervals. A plan may be chalked out to infuse
professionalism.
3.3 NEED FOR BROAD BASING CIVIL DEFENCE
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee is of the view that the present classification of Civil Defence towns in
various categories is irrelevant in today’ s context as the modern missile technology has brought
virtually every inch of the country’s territory in its target. A more realistic classification according
to the present security and strategic environment should be drawn up with a view to ensure that
trained Civil Defence volunteer forces are raised in every possible nook and corners of the country
who can be called for duty to the society envisaged inter -alia under Article 51A (i) of the
Constitution of India.
(Para 17.1 of 136
th Report )
Action taken
3.3.2 The core recommendation of the Shri K.M. Singh’s Committee report is that the Civil
Defence set up presently limited to towns should be made district-centric and should cover all the
600+ districts. The Second Administrative Reforms Commission in its Third Report on Crisis
Management has recommended that efforts should be made to enroll 1% of the total population of
the country under Civil Defence. This can be achieved by spreading the Civil Defence to all
districts of the country in a phased manner.
3.3.3 Based on above recommendations, Rs.4.00 crore has been allocated to reorient the town-
specific Civil Defence set up into a district-wise entity in 100 identified multi-hazard prone
districts within in the Scheme of Revamping Civil Defence setup being implemented during the
current Plan Period. In 36 districts out of the 100 identified multi-hazard prone districts, Civil
Defence setup does not exist and will be raised under the present Scheme. Eventually, all the 600
districts of the country will be covered in phases so that Civil Defence organization spread
throughout the country.

14
3.3.4 Further issues raised
• Civil Defence setup does not exist in 36 districts out of the 100 districts identified for
multihazard prone districts. What steps have been taken to raise Civil Defence
infrastructure in these districts?
• Whether any blue print to cover all the 600 districts has been prepared; if so, the
details thereof; and if not, by when the same will be ready?
3.3.5 Response of the Government
A total of 100 districts have been identified as multi hazard Civil Defence (CD) districts,
out of which 36 districts not considered as CD districts earlier have now been notified as CD
districts and State Governments have been authorized to raise CD organization there. Based on the
feedback received from these 100 CD districts, a plan to cover all the 600 districts as CD districts
in phases is to be prepared for uniform spread of CD organization.
Further Recommendation
3.3.6 The Committee is dismayed to note that in the 36 districts, out of the 100 districts
identified for multi-hazard prone districts, Civil Defence setup does not exist. The
Committee strongly recommends that steps be taken to raise civil defence infrastructure in
these districts as soon as possible. The Committee hopes that after the successful
completion of the first phase, and based on the feedback received from the 100 CD districts,
the plan to cover all the 600 districts in the country as CD districts in phases may be
prepared and implemented soon.
3.4 INTEGRATING CIVIL DEFENCE ORGANIZATION WITH NCC/NSS AND NYKS
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee is of the view that a workable linkage between the various youth
organizations and Civil Defence for the purpose of strengthening the Disaster Management effort
can be developed by synergizing all efforts and resources of the various agencies involved and
capacity-building measures for developing trained human resource.
(Para 21.1 of 136
th Report )
3.4.2 Youth organizations such as National Cadet Corps (NCC), Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangthan
(NYKS), and National Service Scheme (NSS), which invariably comprise of volunteers belonging to
Schools, Colleges and Universities, although have the inherent advantage of reaching out to the
grass-roots level and their ready availability for immediate assistance in the event of any disaster
and have been rightly recommended by the High Power Committee for focusing emphasis on greater
coordination with these youth organization, the Committee find the shortcoming in the said
recommendation of the High Power Committee conspicuous in restricting the endeavour only within
the youth who have the privilege of receiving formal education in schools, colleges and universities
and, thus, leaving a vast pool of un-educated youth, whose number must be substantial in the
country where approximately 43  per cent people are illiterate, outside the Civil Defence endeavour
because they can neither be members of NCC nor NYKS nor NSS. The Committee, therefore, urges
upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to make sincere efforts in seeking the cooperation and
coordination of various youth organizations as well as to ensure involvement as Volunteers also of
non-student youths right from the village panchayat level upto the level of each Civil Defence
district.
(Para 21.2 of 136
th Report )

15
Action Taken
3.4.3 Ministries of Defence and Youth Affairs have been approached to seek cooperation for
motivating the members of various youth organization such as NCC, NYKS and NSS etc. to join
the Civil Defence Corps as volunteers. In order to achieve the objective of enhanced capacity
building, they have been requested to issue appropriate instructions to chief co-coordinators and
office bearers of these organizations at State/ district levels to co-operate and co-ordinate with
controllers of Civil Defence for active interaction and extending cooperation in organizing activities
to train and motivate youths of these organization to become Civil Defence volunteers. Director
General of Civil Defence has also requested Civil Defence authority in the State to seek their
cooperation and to achieve better coordination between the Civil Defence authorities and office
bearers of various Youth Organizations at State/ district level for enrolling the members of these
organizations as Civil Defence volunteers. As per report received from the States, Civil Defence
training is being imparted in schools and colleges. NCC Cadets of Schools and Colleges are also
motivated and imparted training and are potential Civil Defence V olunteers after they finish their
studies.
3.4.4 Once the existing approach of towns centric gets re-oriented to district centric, the youth
at village/block level will also be encouraged to join Civil Defence set up through motivation and
awareness generation programmes. The cadres of NSS & NYKS will also be roped in to take active
part in Civil Defence activities.
3.4.5 Further issues raised
• Steps taken to integrate youth outside the formal organization in Civil Defence so as
to tap the vast human resource of less educated youths;
• The legal institutional framework made so far and motivational schemes floated for
attracting the youth for the purpose.
• Whether any centralized data having profile of volunteers viz. age group, profession
and other necessary items, is being maintained; if so, details thereof and how many
enrolled volunteers are from NCC, NKYS and NSS.
3.4.6 Response of the Government
(i) In  order to attract the desirable quality of youth to join as Civil Defence volunteers an
amount of Rs.3 crores has been provisioned in the Scheme for carrying out publicity at
both Central and State level. In  addition Rs.5.5 crores has been provisioned to conduct
training camps/exercises and demonstrations for Civil Defence volunteers in States/UTs. In
order to attract the youth, no legal-institutional framework for tapping less educated youth
exists as of now since “the basic educational qualification to become a Civil Defence
volunteer is only primary standard and this also can be relaxed on the discretion of
controller civil defence in the district” as laid down in Civil Defence Regulations.
(ii) As the Civil Defence is a State subject, the CD setup in States is managed and maintained
entirely by the State Governments. The Central Government does not maintain any
centralized data of civil defence volunteers on regular basis as all volunteers are enrolled,
trained equipped and paid by the State Governments. Data on civil defence is obtained from
States on as required basis.

16
Further recommendations
3.4.7 The Committee is of the view that the vast population of less educated youth still
remains untapped. The services of such vast resource in far flung areas should not be
ignored. A proper institutional mechanism can efficiently tap this huge potential. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Government should not only make legal
framework and institutional arrangement for the purpose, but motivational schemes may
also prepared and implemented for attracting the educated as well as the less educated
youth.

17
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT YET BEEN RECEIVED BY THE COMMITTEE
4.1 PUBLIC-PRIV ATE PARTNERSHIP IN CIVIL DEFENCE
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee recommends that private sector having good track record should be
encouraged to participate in civil defence activities through tax exemptions on contributions made
in such activities. They can also be persuaded to sponsor seminars and other awareness programmes
as part of their social responsibility. The Committee recommends that private sector entities,
including enterprising individual citizens, should be encouraged to participate in building and
maintaining civil defence activities inter alia by way of granting exemption from Tax to financial
contributions made towards such activities, including sponsoring of seminars and other public
awareness programmes etc. as part of their social responsibility.
(Para 16.1 of 136
th Report )
Action taken
4.1.2 The recommendation of Shri K.M. Singh Committee for enhancing public-private-partnership
through voluntary contribution by private corporate sector to the Civil Defence setup was endorsed
by the Home Minister’s Civil Defence Advisory Committee during its meeting held in April, 2008
at New Delhi.
4.1.3 Proposal for considering tax exemption to the private sector for contribution/donation to
Civil Defence organization has been forwarded to Department of Revenue on 19.2.2009.
Department of Revenue is being pursued to take a decision.
4.1.4 Further issues raised
• What is the response of the Department of Revenue on the issue of providing tax
exemptions to the private sector for contribution/donation to Civil Defence
organization?
• What are the other proposals to attract the private sector to Civil Defence?
• Whether the matter of extending-tax exemption was again pursued with the Department
of Revenue before finalization of the Budget 2011-12; if so, the response thereof?
4.1.5 Response of the Government
A reference was made to Department of Revenue on 19.2.2009 for tax-exemption under
Income-Tax Act on donation/contributions given by the private/corporate sector to Civil Defence
activities. However neither response was received from Department of Revenue nor has any
notification regarding tax exemption been received. No reference has been made to the Department
of Revenue for tax exemption before finalization of the Budget 2011-12.
17

18
Further recommendation
4.1.6 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may follow up with
Department of Revenue for tax-exemption under Income-Tax Act on donation/contributions
given by the private/corporate sector to Civil Defence activities and the response of the
Department of Revenue may be informed to this Committee.

19
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSION/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
LINKING CIVIL DEFENCE WITH DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee hopes that amendment to the Civil Defence Act, 1968 would give
fillip to the critical role of Civil Defence organization and train Civil Defence corps as first
responder to any disaster situation. The Committee appreciates that Government proposes
to take up pre-disaster preparedness and prevention aspects for enhancing the capacity of
Civil Defence. The Committee desires that early action may be taken in this regard.
(Para 1.2.4)
PROVISION FOR ADEQUATE NUMBER OF TRAINING INSTITUTES
The Committee hopes that the scheme would be completed during the Financial Year
2011-12, as scheduled, without time and cost overruns. The Committee desires that the
upgradation of the State Institutes may be completed at the earliest. The States that have
not allotted land for the institutes may be persuaded for the purpose. Upgradation of the
NCDC may be extended upto March, 2012 as sought by the Ministry and upgradation of the
college may be completed by then, without fail. (Para 1.3.6)
CIVIL DEFENCE AND PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS (PRIs)
The Committee desires that the Government may complete mid-term evaluation of
the scheme by 2011 as scheduled. (Para 1.4.5)
PROJECT FOR REV AMPING OF CIVIL DEFENCE
The Committee recommends that the Government should make all out efforts to
complete the scheme by March, 2012. There should not be any delay in completing any of
the components. (Para 1.6.5)
ROLE OF CIVIL DEFENCE IN CHANGING SCENARIO
The Committee is constrained to note that as against a target of training of 4,280
Civil Defence volunteers by these master trainers at State level, only 3,267 volunteers have
been trained. Since the civil defence apparatus has mainly volunteers at the lower level, the
top implementing leadership should be professional so that it can guide volunteers well.
(Para 3.1.9)
The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that there are a large number of
vacancies in the permanent Civil Defence staff at CD headquarters and state level CD
training institutes. In this scenario, the Civil Defence set up cannot function efficiently. The
Committee strongly recommends that early steps may be taken to fill up the vacancies.
(Para 3.1.10)
19

20
ADEQUATE TRAINING AND PROFESSIONALISATION OF CIVIL DEFENCE APPARATUS
The Committee notes that a total of 62,904 volunteers were weeded out after
January 2009 and 54,389 new volunteers were enrolled, thus leaving a substantial shortfall
in the strength of total number of volunteers. The Committee is of the considered view that
concrete steps are required to be taken to fill the shortfall, if Civil Defence system is to
be strengthened and for its proper functioning. Public awareness campaigns are needed to
be undertaken on a regular intervals. A plan may be chalked out to infuse professionalism.
(Para 3.2.8)
NEED FOR BROAD BASING CIVIL DEFENCE
The Committee is dismayed to note that in the 36 districts, out of the 100 districts
identified for multi-hazard prone districts, Civil Defence setup does not exist. The
Committee strongly recommends that steps be taken to raise civil defence infrastructure in
these districts as soon as possible. The Committee hopes that after the successful
completion of the first phase, and based on the feedback received from the 100 CD districts,
the plan to cover all the 600 districts in the country as CD districts in phases may be
prepared and implemented soon. (Para 3.3.6)
INTEGRATING CIVIL DEFENCE ORGANIZATION WITH NCC/NSS AND NYKS
The Committee is of the view that the vast population of less educated youth still
remains untapped. The services of such vast resource in far flung areas should not be
ignored. A proper institutional mechanism can efficiently tap this huge potential. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Government should not only make legal
frame-work and institutional arrangement for the purpose, but motivational schemes may
also prepared and implemented for attracting the educated as well as the less educated
youth. (Para 3.4.7)
PUBLIC-PRIV ATE PARTNERSHIP IN CIVIL DEFENCE
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may follow up with
Department of Revenue for tax-exemption under Income-Tax Act on donation/contributions
given by the private/corporate sector to Civil Defence activities and the response of the
Department of Revenue may be informed to this Committee. (Para 4.1.6)

21
MINUTES

XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11 May, 2011 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Raman Deka
9. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Adv. A. Sampath
12. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
15. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
16. Shri Harsh Vardhan
17. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sharada Subramaniam, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
2. The Chairman welcome the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda
for the meeting.
23

24
3. The Committee then took up the draft 152 nd Report on the Action Taken by the Government
on the observations/recommendations contained in the 136 th Report on Revamping and Revitalisation
of Civil Defence in the Country. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the report with
some changes.
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 11.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.