 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AF 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
ONE HUNDRED NINETY E 
DISASTER IN CHENNAI 
AND CONSEQUENT FLOODING 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 12 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AF FAIRS 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka)  
ONE HUNDRED NINETY E IGHTH REPORT 
 
DISASTER IN CHENNAI CAUSED BY TORRENTIAL RAINFALL 
AND CONSEQUENT FLOODING  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 12 TH  AUGUST, 2016) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12 TH  AUGUST, 2016) 
 
 
 
 
Y STANDING  
REPORT NO.  
198  
IGHTH REPORT  
CAUSED BY TORRENTIAL RAINFALL 
AUGUST, 2016)  
AUGUST, 2016)  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
DEPARTMENT 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AF 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED NINETY E 
DISASTER IN CHENNAI CAUSED BY TORRENTIAL RAINFALL AND 
CONSEQUENT FLOODING 
                             
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 12 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2016/ Sravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available         
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AF FAIRS 
ONE HUNDRED NINETY E IGHTH REPORT 
 
 
DISASTER IN CHENNAI CAUSED BY TORRENTIAL RAINFALL AND 
CONSEQUENT FLOODING  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 12 TH  AUGUST, 2016) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12 TH  AUGUST, 2016) 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August, 2016/ Sravana, 1938 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
1  
Hindi version of this publication is also available         
 
C.S. (H.A.)-______      
Y STANDING  
IGHTH REPORT  
DISASTER IN CHENNAI CAUSED BY TORRENTIAL RAINFALL AND 
AUGUST, 2016)  
AUGUST, 2016)  

2  
ACRONYMS 
 
IMCT Inter-Ministerial Central Team  
 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs  
 
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development 
 
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority  
 
NDRF 
 
National Disaster Response Force 
OMCs Oil Marketing Companies OMCs 
 
OSOCC On-site operations coordination center 
 
SEOC State Emergency Operations Centre  
TANGEDCO  Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited  
 
SDRF State Disaster Response Fund 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

3  
C O N T E N T S 
                                                                                                                                                         
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                            (i)   
                                                                               
2. PREFACE                                                                                                                (ii) – (iii) 
  
3. REPORT     
DISASTER IN CHENNAI CAUSED BY TORRENTIAL RAINFALL  
AND CONSEQUENT FLOODING                                       
                 
             
4.          OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS-AT A GLANCE...      
             
*5.    RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMM ITTEE  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended at printing stage 
  

4  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st  September, 2015) 
 
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya   - Chairman  
       RAJYA SABHA 
2. # Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan 
4. @Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
5. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
6. Shri Derek O'Brien 
7. $ Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
8. Shri D. Raja 
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury 
 
      LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan  
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
15. Shri Ramen Deka 
16. *Shri Prataprao Jadhav 
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge 
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar 
21. ^Shri Mohammed Faizal PP 
22. Shri P. Nagarajan  
23. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
24. Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda 
25. Shri Dilip Patel 
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
28. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil 
29. Shri Bishnupada Ray 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director 
* Shri Prataprao Jadhav, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e .f. 9 th  September, 2015 to fill the vacancy caused by shif ting of  Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire, MP, Lok 
Sabha  to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 9 th  September, 2015 
^Shri Mohammaed Faizal PP, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f 14 th  March, 2016 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting  of Shri Harish Chandra Meena, MP, Lok 
Sabha to Committee on Transport, Tourism  Culture w .e.f 14 th  March, 2016 
@ Dr. Subramanian Swamy, M.P. Rajya Sabha nominated  w.e.f. 20 th  May, 2016 to fill the vacancy caused by the retire ment of Shri Avinash Rai Khanna from 
Rajya Sabha on 9.4.2016. 
$Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti, M.P., Rajya Sabha nomin ated w.e.f. 3.8.2016 to fill the vacancy caused by the retirement of  Shri Baishnab Parida, from  Rajy a 
Sabha on 1.7.2016. 
#  Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla, M.P., Rajya Sabha nomin ated w.e.f 25 
th  July, 2016 to fill the vacancy caused by the appoi ntment of Shri Vijay Goel, MP, Rajya 
Sabha  as MOS (I/C) w.e.f. 5 th  July, 2016.   
(i) 

5  
PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs, having been authorized by the Committ ee to submit the Report on its behalf, 
do hereby present this One Hundred and Ninety Eighth Report on 'Disaster in Chennai caused 
by torrential rainfall and consequent flooding in the Country'. 
2. The chairman of the Committee in the meeting hel d on 8 th  December, 2015 drew the 
Committee’s attention to the recent disaster in Che nnai caused by the torrential rains and 
consequent flooding. The Chairman expressed his con cern for people affected by this 
disaster. The Committee then decided to examine in detail the issue of 'Disaster in Chennai 
caused by torrential rainfall and consequent floodi ng' under the subject “Disaster 
Management”. The Committee also decided to hear the  Home Secretary and concerned 
disaster management officials on the quantum of dam age that occurred in Chennai and 
measures taken for complete restoration and rehabil itation. The Committee in its sitting held 
on 18 th  January, 2016 heard the presentation of Home Secre tary and representatives of the 
Government of Tamil Nadu on this subject. The Commi ttee in its meeting held on 28 th  
January, 2016 further heard the Home Secretary and representatives of the Government of 
Tamil Nadu to conclude the examination of subject.  
3. The Committee considered the draft Report in its  sitting held on 10 th  August, 2016 and 
adopted the same.  
4. The Committee, while making its observations/rec ommendations, has relied mainly upon the 
following papers: - 
(i) Background Note on the subject 'Disaster in Chennai  caused by torrential 
rainfall and consequent flooding' as furnished by Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(ii) Copy of presentation  on the subject "Disaster in C hennai caused by Torrential 
Rainfall and consequent Flooding" made by represent atives of the State 
Government of Tamil Nadu; 
(iii) "Memorandum on Damages caused by Floods" received f rom State 
Government of Tamil Nadu; 
(iv) Verbatim Records of the proceedings of the Committe e's meetings alongwith 
the replies of the Ministry of Home Affairs in response to the queries raised by 
the Chairman and Members; 
(v) Annual Report of the Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(ii)  

6  
5. For the purpose of reference and convenience, th e observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
10 
th  August, 2016  
 
P. Bhattacharya  
Chairman  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs  
 
 
 
 
 
                                     
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

7  
REPORT 
1.0 The National Disaster Management Authority (NDM A)  the apex body, 
which functions under the administrative jurisdicti on of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, is responsible for tackling all emergent s ituations arising out of natural 
disasters. The unprecedented torrential rain in Chennai and the havoc created by 
it opened a gamut of issues concerning the prepared ness of the Country to fight 
out such eventualities so as to protect civic life,  property, monuments & 
heritage sites and most importantly the vital institutions and installations located 
in the affected city. As per the mandate of the Committee it took up examination 
of relief and rehabilitation works in Chennai after the floods of 2015. 
2.0 The flood which struck the city of Chennai in t he year 2015 was resulted 
due to unprecedented heavy rainfall generated by th e annual northeast 
monsoon that usually affects the weather conditions  in the months of 
November–December every year. This flood affected t he Coromandel 
Coast region of the South Indian states of Tamil Na du, Andhra Pradesh and the 
Union Territory of  Puducherry.  As per the informa tion provided by the State 
Government of Tamil Nadu, the Chennai City particul arly, was worst affected. 
Approximately 470 people were killed, 12,000 heards  of cattle were lost and 
lakhs of people were displaced in the State. Beside s, around 4.92 lakh houses 
got destroyed/ damaged in addition to heavy loss of  public property. The crop 
area that got damaged was also extensive measuring up to, 3.83 lakh hectares. 
3.0 The State Government of Tamil Nadu vide  their Memoranda informed the 
Committee that the State usually receives around 48 % of the precipitation from 
the North East monsoons during the period October t o December. The rainfall 
during this season takes place in multiple spells, following formation of systems 
of low pressure area over the Bay of Bengal, which often gets intensified 
leading to deep depression and cyclones accompanied by high speed winds. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee tha t the weather in various 
parts of the State of Tamil Nadu changed rapidly ca using deep depression 
between 8 th November and 10 th November, 2015; that formed low pressure zones 
over South West Bay of Bengal between 28 th November and 4 th December 2015. 
On 1 st  December depression struck Chennai and the adjoini ng Districts with 
such great intensity that large parts of the Metrop olis got marooned, causing 
untold suffering and destruction. The devastating f lood also affected the 
adjoining Districts particularly, Cuddalore, Tiruvallur and Kancheepuram. 
4.0 The consequence of this unprecedented level of downpour proved to be 
disastrous as major water bodies got filled up and flowed into major rivers, 
Adayar, Coovum and Kosathalaiar coupled with the he avy downpours in the 
city which could not drain into the Adayar River. T his transformed the densely 
populated areas of Chennai City into islands of hou ses in vast expanse of water 

8  
that filled roads and streets for many feet. The St ate Government further 
apprised that heavy rains inundated areas all over Chennai and the situation was 
rendered worse with major water bodies reaching two  feet below the full tank 
level and consequent discharge from them causing th e major rivers, Adayar, 
Coovrum and Kosasthalaiar to overflow. With heavy r ains in the catchment 
areas of Chemberambakkam reservoir, 29000 cusecs of water had to be released 
into Adayar river from the reservoir.  The State Go vernment also submitted that 
even before the release of water from the Chembarambakkam Tank again heavy 
rain of around 47 cm occurred that further worsened  the situation.  Thus, in 
view of the incessant rains in the city and catchme nt areas of Adayar river, rain 
water could not drain and thereby, caused inundatio n in the city.  Roads were 
flooded and essential services, including trains an d bus transport had to be 
suspended in most locations.  Several areas remaine d heavily inundated for few 
days.  Water entered buildings even to the first fl oors in some areas leading to 
residents stranded on building roof tops and in the ir homes without essential 
commodities and electricity, besides completely dam aging all their household 
durable assets and motor vehicles. 
5.0 Due to the unprecedented magnitude of the calam ity and the huge 
damage it caused, on 18 
th  January, 2016 the Committee took extensive oral 
evidences of the representatives of the Ministry of  Home Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance, Ministry of Defence, Indian Meteorological  Department, National 
Disaster Response Force,    National Disaster Manag ement Authority, Railway 
Board, Directorate General Health Services and the State Government of Tamil 
Nadu.    
6.0 The Committee again held a meeting on 28 
th  January, 2016 to hear the 
views of the all these Organisations and discussed the subject threadbare.  The 
major issues taken up by the Committee, replies of the Government thereto and 
the recommendations of the Committee on each issue have been given in the 
subsequent paragraphs.    
7.0 REASONS BEHIND THE FLOOD 
7.1 (a)  Carrying Capacity of the Water Bodies 
7.1.1  The Ministry of Home Affairs obtained the co mments detailing the 
reasons behind flood in Tamil Nadu from the Ministr y of Water Resources and 
submitted to this Committee for its perusal. Accord ing to them the flooding in 
Chennai city and other adjoining regions was attrib uted to a combination of 
factors viz. high intensity rainfall, large release s from storages beyond channel 
carrying capacity of the channels, encroachments in  lakes and river channels, 
drainage congestion etc. Heavy to very heavy rainfa ll due to the influence of 
depression under the North-Eastern monsoon system, initially during the period  

9  
15-21 November 2015 followed by second spell during  30 th  November to 2 nd  
December was the primary reason. But the secondary reason cited by them was 
the complex drainage system of the city.    Several  small lakes and rivers in and 
around Chennai city contributes towards this comple x drainage system. Three 
main rivers viz. Cooum, Adyar and Kosasthalayar flo w through Chennai city 
and its suburbs and join the Bay of Bengal. These predominantly seasonal rivers 
are small in length, predominantly run dry through urban and peri-urban areas. 
The discharging capacity of these small rivers is o f the order of few hundred 
cusecs. Further, encroachments along these rivers h ave reduced the carrying 
capacity of these rivers significantly. In and arou nd Chennai, there are four 
major reservoirs/lakes viz. Poondi, Cholavaram, Red  Hills (Puzhal) and 
Chembarambakkam which are used for drinking water s upply to Chennai city, 
which, otherwise, faces acute water crisis during s ummers. Hence, these 
reservoirs are the life-line for the city. Chennai metropolitan Water supply and 
Sewerage Board operate these reservoirs. 
7.1.2  The Committee was informed that due to heavy  rainfall, the lakes 
and reservoirs in the Chennai and adjoining districts got filed up. As a result, the 
concerned authorities from Chennai Metropolitan Wat er Supply and Sewerage 
Board released water from these reservoirs discharg ing into Kosasthalayar, 
Adyar and other riverine systems. The rivers overfl ew their respective banks on 
either side at many places and have therefore inund ated the low lying adjoining 
areas. The other lake surrounding Chennai city viz.  Puzhal (Red hills) and 
Cholavaram also got filled up and water was released from these reservoirs. The 
Committee was also apprised by the Ministry that se veral lakes in the city have 
been encroached upon by buildings. Rivers’ carrying  capacity has been 
significantly reduced due to encroachments. Due to lack of timely de-silting of 
the storm water drains and lakes has further compou nded the problems. In 
addition to that inadequate flood zone planning and  large scale settlements in 
low lying were also major contributors to the havoc. With only certain degree of 
protection available against floods of significantl y higher magnitudes 
widespread damages took place in the city.  
7.1.3  The Committee takes note of the submission o f the Ministry of 
Water Resources that the encroachment of lakes and river beds played a 
major role in causing massive flood in Chennai.  Th e Committee feels that 
the State Government should check mafia involved in  illegal construction 
for business and usurping water bodies for their re al estate business.  The 
flood channels and riverbed should be cleared as so on as possible by 
removing illegal/ unauthorized constructions.  
7.1.4  The Committee also observes that the drainag e system got 
chocked in Chennai and the city was flooded badly i n the aftermath of 
heavy torrential rainfall. The Committee notes that   the Ministry while 

10  
deposing before the Committee too had admitted on 28 January 2016 to the 
fact that, “there is a need to keep all our drains clean, there is need to make  
sure that all the storm water drains function and the outlets function…” 
7.1.5  In view of the above, the Committee recommen ds that regular 
maintenance of the drainage system should get topmo st priority however 
daunting the task may be. The Chennai Metropolitan Development 
Authority and Chennai Municipal Corporation should pay attention to this 
issue seriously and act accordingly. The drainage s ystem of the city should 
be flawless so as to prevent any kind of water logging.   
7.2 (b)  Illegal Construction and Encroachment 
7.2.1  The Committee further probed the matter pert aining to illegal 
constructions and encroachment taking place in and around the Chennai City. 
During the meeting of the Committee held on 28 
th  January, 2016 some members 
of the Committee raised the issue of the lapses on the part of the local city 
administration which caused floods in Chennai. On b eing inquired by the 
Committee over illegal encroachments of water bodies, the State Government of 
Tamil Nadu submitted in writing that there were 117  encroachments over a 
length of 500 m in vayalaur Chennai in Thirukazhuku ndram Taluk of 
Kancheepuram District. 41 encroachments had been ev icted by the Public 
Works (Water Resources Department) and action was being initiated to evict the 
remaining encroachments also.  Besides, in the bank s of the Adyar River, 4046 
houses, identified as encroachments over a length o f 839 m in the river bank, 
have been evicted and demolished.  According to the  State Government, 
Periodical instructions are issued to the District Collectors to evict  all the 
encroachments including the ones on the water courses.  
7.2.2  The Ministry of Home Affairs vide  their written submission also 
intimated the Committee about the views of the Ministry of Urban Development 
that no assessment for reasons of floods in Chennai  has been made by them and 
agencies of the State Government such as Chennai Me tropolitan Development 
Authority and Chennai Municipal Corporation are responsible for Layout Plans/ 
Building Plans approval to take necessary steps for  ascertaining the reasons that 
have caused floods in Chennai. Besides, the monitor ing of the construction 
activities and encroachment in the city also vest w ith these agencies. According 
to the Ministry of Urban Development, it had issued  an advisory to all States/ 
UTs on action plan for Flood Proofing of Cities/ Towns on 3 rd  September, 2013. 
7.2.3 About illegal encroachment and faulty town pl anning, the Committee 
observes that these are the major causes behind the  havoc that was 
wreaked by floods in the year 2015 in the city of C hennai.  The Committee 
appreciates the action taken by the State Governmen t to remove the 

11  
unauthorized constructions but still feels that thi s is inadequate and all 
illegal encroachment and construction should be rem oved.  However, the 
Committee is of the view that the process of removing encroachment should 
be a balanced one as it has human and social conseq uences.  There should 
be proper blue print and planning for rehabilitatin g and resettling those 
who are living on encroached settlements before removing encroachment.  
7.2.4 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry o f Urban Development 
(MoUD) had issued an Action Plan to all States and  Union territories for 
“Flood Proofing of Cities/ Towns” well in advance i .e., on 3 rd  September, 
2013 itself. The MoUD should also play a pro active  role in ensuring its 
implementation as well, in terms of urban planning and development 
especially of metro cities.  
7.2.5 The Committee is given to understand that unp lanned urbanization 
and growth of cities are also the main contributing factors for floods in and 
around Chennai. The Committee, therefore, recommend s that the Centre 
should come out with a proper long-term master plan  for metro cities to 
prevent such disasters in future. The committee is also of the opinion that it 
is an eye opener and other metro cities must also learn from it.  
8.0 ROLE AND RESPOSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT CONCERNED  
AGENCIES 
8.1 With regard to the preparation for mitigation o f disaster, the Home 
Secretary informed the Committee that this is a Sta te subject and the city 
administration is responsible for maintenance of th e local lakes and water 
bodies.  Moreover, the current disaster was unprece dented and the Relief 
Commissioner, Tamil Nadu, in his presentation expla ined that the rainfall that 
occurred in those 72 hours was more than the averag e of over 100 years.  So, 
basically there can be no reparation for a disaster  of such serious magnitude 
because the cost of preparing for the disaster woul d be disproportionately high. 
In this regard the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affa irs deposed before the 
Committee as follows: 
“So, basically, obviously all State Governments do take steps to prevent 
disasters…  So, there are laid down procedures with  State Governments as to 
how to prevent any unnatural event from happening….  But, even if everything 
had been functioning absolutely perfectly, this kin d of rainfall would inevitably 
have led to flooding.  There was no way of preventi ng that occurrence.  It 
happened once in 100 years.” 
8.2 While probing into the response of various conc erned agencies the 
Members raised several queries regarding the respon sibilities shared between 

12  
the Centre and the States. The Home Secretary expla ined that the primary 
responsibility and the first response for disaster management rest with the 
States.  The Central Government can, at best, assis t or supplement the efforts of 
the State Government by providing some logistics, e xpert care or special 
equipment, etc., wherever it is felt to be necessar y.  It is the State Government 
which deploys the State and district machinery with  all resources for immediate 
relief and rescue work.  Accordingly, in this case also Center came to the 
assistance of the State Government of Tamil Nadu as  per their requirement and 
request.  The Army, the Indian Air Force, the Navy,  the Coast Guard and the 
NDRF personnel were engaged on the request of the S tate Government. The 
Committee was informed that in terms of numbers, 14  Indian Air Force and 6 
Coast Guard helicopters, 9 IAF planes, 5 Indian Nav y ships, 3 Coast Guard 
ships, 12 Army columns, about 877 persons, 1,820 Na vy and Coast Guard 
personnel and 48 teams, with 1,700 personnel of the National Disaster Response 
force, along with 194 boats and other necessary res cue equipment were 
deployed in Tamil Nadu at that time for providing relief and rescue assistance to 
the State Government, which carried the major burden.  It did the major work in 
providing relief. 
8.3 As regards the role of the National Crisis Mana gement Committee, 
headed by the Cabinet Secretary, the committee was informed that it met daily 
from 2 
nd  to 5 th  December and then again, on 7 th  December, to ensure that 
necessary relief and assistance was provided immedi ately for rescue operations 
and restoration of essential services. In addition to that, the National Executive 
committee which is located in the Home Ministry als o met daily from the 2 nd  to 
the 5 th  of December and again, on the 7 th  and 11 th  December, to coordinate the 
various operational matters in connection with work  that was being done by the 
various Ministries of the Government of India.  The se agencies including the 
Ministry of Home Affairs independently remained con stantly in touch with the 
Administration in Tamil Nadu, speaking to the Chief  Secretary and other 
concerned officers, including the Relief Commission er.  The Prime Minister 
visited the State on the 3 rd  December and reviewed the progress of the relief and 
rescue work with the Chief Minister.  
8.4 The Committee was further informed that after t he first spell of rainfall, 
which was between the 8 
th  and 10 th  of November, the Tamil Nadu Government 
had given a Memorandum of Assistance to the Central Government. In response 
to that the MHA had mounted its team to go to Tamil  Nadu between 25 th  and 
29 th  November. But, before they could submit their repo rt, there was a fresh 
spell of rainfall between 1 st  December and 4 th  December due to which part of 
the team got stranded in Chennai and returned later .  Subsequently, after the 
second spell of rainfall, the Government of Tamil N adu submitted a fresh 

13  
Memorandum in addition to the first Memorandum.  Th e Central team had then 
visited the State between the 4 th  and 6 th  January again. 
8.5 The Committee strongly recommends that the Mini stry of Home 
Affairs through its subordinate concerned agencies has to bolster its 
disaster preparedness.  The Committee suggests that separate action should 
be taken to prepare calamity map of all important c ities by developing 
standard vulnerability indices so as to minimize lo ss of life, loss of private 
and public property and vital installation.  The Co mmittee does not quite 
accept the argument that since the rainfall was unp recedented and was 
more than the hundred years average therefore the d amage was also huge. 
In this context exact statement of the Home Secreta ry while deposing 
before the Committee is reproduced below: 
“So, basically there can be no preparation for a di saster that occurs 
once in hundred years, because the cost of preparin g for the disaster would 
be disproportionately high.” 
8.6 In the opinion of the Committee, any natural di saster of bigger 
intensity has the propensity to cause extensive dam age.  Thus, instead of 
putting the blame on the forces of nature, we shoul d use advanced 
technology to fight it out.  Moreover, the administration of both Centre and 
State should work together and remain vigilant to t ackle the situation. The 
Committee also observes that natural disaster of hi gh magnitude will 
always adversely affect people in large number and the administration has 
to respond in a fastest possible manner. Accordingl y, the NDMA and all 
concerned bodies of Central and State Governments s hould have 
established procedures so that vital time is not lo st in wriggling out 
procedural delays. 
8.7 The Committee also observes that the NDMA plays  a very crucial 
role in mitigating problems of disaster victims. Th erefore, its vacant posts 
should be filled up on priority. The Committee also  recommends that after 
any disaster in future, the NDMA should meet urgently. 
8.8 The Committee further observes that as per the submission of the 
Member Secretary, NDMA they have already issued gui delines on 
mitigating and managing floods and urban floods. In  this context the 
Committee notes that since now urban floods are tak ing place more 
frequently in the Country, i.e. , Mumbai, Surat, Srinagar, and then Chennai 
all these in tandem indicate that the problem may f urther escalate in 
future. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the guidelines prepared 
by NDMA should be scrupulously followed and they sh ould also review 
town planning of each city by giving due importance  to clear flood 

14  
channels, proper drainage, safe-passage to excess w ater in lakes, other 
water bodies, de-siltation of river bed,  removal o f illegal encroachment, 
etc.  
 8.9  The Committee impresses on the fact that scientists all over the world 
are now highlighting on global warming and its cons equences like, 
unusually high rain fall and sea cyclones. These wo uld be rather more 
common phenomena and happen frequently in coastal s tates then a rare 
instance. Therefore, the Committee recommends the M inistry of Home 
Affairs and NDMA to keep their preparedness at optimum level. 
8.10 The Committee observes that there are multiple  agencies involved in 
the disaster management process and feels that desp ite the best efforts all 
these take lot of time and consequently the administration fails to reach out 
to the victims. The Committee recommends that there  should not be so 
many layers and NDMA has to revamp the process in c o-ordination with 
the Centre and the State. 
8.11 The Committee is of the considered view that t here should be an 
emphasis on pre-disaster preparedness in disaster m anagement set up of 
the State as the same would minimize the loss of li ves and property in the 
situation of any unforeseen eventuality. Had this m echanism of prevention 
and mitigation been in place in the State to the re quired extent, the loss of 
lives and property could have been minimized.  
9.0 EXTENT OF DAMAGE DUE TO FLOODING 
9.1 The floods which affected the State of Tamil Na du caused incalculable 
damage to the people in terms of human losses as well as property losses.  Many 
persons lost their lives, livelihood and their dwel lings. Standing crops were 
completely submerged and damaged in most of the vil lages affected by the 
floods. In many areas agricultural losses were furt her compounded by loss of 
cattle and poultry and for poor households having livestock as their main source 
of income were devastated. As per the Memoranda sub mitted by State 
Government of Tamil Nadu to the Central Government, the nature and extent of 
damage caused is as follows: 
(i) Agriculture and livestock damage: 
Agriculture crops like paddy, millets, pulses, cott on, sugarcane and 
oilseeds and horticulture crops/plantations were destroyed due to floods. Floods 
also caused damaging of agricultural lands due to s and casting and heavy 
siltation. As on 15th December, 2015, the total loss of livestock in the State was 
9992.  In addition, 5223 poultry birds died due to heavy rains.   

15  
(ii) Damage and Disruption of Essential Services an d Amenities: 
Inundation and flooding of large parts of the Chenn ai city and suburbs of 
the adjoining two districts, as well as towns and v illages of Cuddalore caused 
disruption of existing drinking water supply system s. Besides about 38.20 lakh 
households in flood affected districts did not have  LPG connections or had lost 
their LPG cylinders in the floods, and thus suffere d due to non availability of 
dry fuel wood due to incessant rains and floods. Fl oods also caused damage to 
health infrastructure.  Incessant rains in the State caused damages to buildings in 
112 PHCs, 124 HSCs and 11 medical colleges.  Beside s, it also caused damage 
of medical equipment and machineries worth Rs.95.35  lakh in these medical 
institutions. A total of 2066 ICDS centres suffered  damage due to the floods in 
nine districts. Similarly, 334 Noon Meal Centres su ffered damage in seven 
districts. There was extensive damage of electrical  power infrastructure in 
Chennai on account of inundation of large areas in the city and consequent 
submergence of electrical distribution system in wa ter, which rose more than 4 
feet in many places. In all, 53 substations in the State were damaged, including 
22 substations in Chennai district, 13 substations in Kancheepuram district and 
6 substations in Tiruvellur district due to which s upply of electricity to Chennai 
Metropolis suffered. The flood waters flowing throu gh streets of affected areas 
of Chennai deposited a large amount of garbage and debris all over.   Due to 
this, a massive exercise had to be undertaken for r emoval of deposited debris 
and garbage by mobilising sanitary workers and equi pment/ machinery from 
Chennai Municipal Corporation and other local bodie s as well as by hiring 
manpower and equipment/ machinery.  
(iii) Damage of Lives and Livelihood: 
Due to torrential rains and the consequent floods, fishing implements, 
which are the main source of livelihood to fishing community suffered 
considerable damage in the various flood affected d istricts of the State.  314 
mechanized boats, 556 FRP Vallams and 420 catamaran s were partially 
damaged.  6 mechanized boats, 15 FRP Vallams and 25  Catamarans had been 
damaged fully.  1430 engines and 5274 nets belonging to the fishermen had also 
been damaged.  
There were extensive damages to looms, accessories and raw materials 
affecting as many as 3694 handloom weavers in the d istricts of Cuddalore, 
Kancheepuram, Tiruvannamalai, Erode and Viluppuram.  726 potters have also 
suffered badly during the floods in the four affect ed districts.  They have lost 
their livelihood as they have suffered damage of po tter wheels and other 
implements of pottery and loss of raw materials and  finished goods comprising 
pots and earthen ware.   

16  
 (iv) Damage to Private Property: 
The total number of 3,59,171 huts were damaged in t he State since 23 rd  
November, 2015 out of which 2,23,610 huts were full y destroyed and 1,35,561 
huts were partly damaged.  In addition, 65 pucca houses were severely damaged 
and 13,601 were partly damaged in the State. Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance 
Board constructs and maintains tenements to accommo date slum dwellers in 
Chennai. There were nearly 1,01,000 tenements in Ch ennai City alone. Most of 
the tenement schemes unfortunately are in low lying  areas as they were 
constructed in situ, in the locations where the slu ms existed earlier. The floods 
in November and December, 2015 and the incessant ra ins in this period caused 
rapid deterioration of the roofs slum housing schemes were inundated with level 
of water ranging upto 8 feet, completely rendering the lower floors of the 
tenement buildings uninhabitable. The number of sub merged houses has been 
assessed to be 26,90,660 in Chennai, Cuddalore, Thi ruvallur, Kancheepuram 
and other affected districts.  This resulted in almost complete erosion of lifetime 
savings of most affected families, a large proporti on of which are lower and 
middle income families.  Besides, they also lost cl othing, children’s textbooks 
and uniforms, utensils, grains and other food artic les stored in their households 
and other household articles. 
(v) Damage to Public Property: 
Chennai metropolis including the suburban areas of Kancheepuram and 
Thiruvallur districts were ravaged by floods, with flood waters flowing through 
roads like river streams and water logging of roads  for many days. This had 
resulted in substantial erosion of the riding surfa ce of the roads and streets in 
Chennai metropolis requiring renewal of surface of almost the entire length of 
roads and streets. Street lights in urban as well as rural areas were also damaged 
due to inundation. 
Besides, heavy incessant rains and floods caused ex tensive damage to the 
road infrastructure in the affected area. Schools a nd colleges in flooded areas 
were badly affected as waters entered class rooms a nd campuses and remained 
stagnant for many days. This resulted in decay of d oors, windows and furniture, 
spoiling of electrical wiring and installations as well as pump-sets and pipelines 
of drinking water system in the schools.   Apprisin g the Committee about 
consequences of floods on social and physical infra structure in its sitting held 
on 18 th  January, 2016, the relief commissioner of the Stat e Government of 
Tamil Nadu submitted that extensive disruption was caused to essential 
services.  Roads were flooded and essential service s, including trains and bus 
transport had to be suspended in many locations dur ing floods. Chennai Airport 
was closed and not operational for 5 days from Dece mber, 1st to 5th, 2015. 
Electricity supply had to be switched off in the in undated parts of the City to 

17  
prevent risk of electrocution. Telecom services wer e severely disrupted. 
Banking services were affected badly, with ATMs becoming non-functional due 
to inundation.  
9.2 The Committee is appalled by the extensive dama ge caused to social 
and physical infrastructure such as roads, drinking  water, sewerage, 
drainage systems, health centres, schools and colle ges in flood-affected 
areas of the state. Considering the severity and extent of the damage caused 
by torrential rains and consequent floods to the St ate of Tamil Nadu, the 
Committee is of the opinion that the Centre should bolster its support and 
does not quite agree with the view that the primary  responsibility and the 
first response for disaster management rests with the State.    
9.3 The Committee understands that damage to social  and physical 
infrastructure and financial loss to individuals an d micro and small 
industries due to unprecedented torrential downpour in Chennai and other 
parts of Tamil Nadu if calculated properly, may run  into thousands of 
crores. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ce ntral Government to 
look sympathetically into the needs of the State Go vernment in terms of 
reconstruction and rehabilitation and immediately a nnounce a special 
relief and rehabilitation package which is in conso nance with the demands 
of the State. 
10.0 RELIEF & REHABILITATION EFFORTS AND MEASURES  
10.1 Role of State Government 
10.1.1  The State Government of Tamil Nadu informed  the Committee that 
they took prompt action on a war footing at every stage to mitigate the suffering 
and damage caused by the floods.  According to the State Government, the 
entire administrative machinery was pressed into ac tion and service, gearing 
them for facing the situation that had arisen out of the calamity.  The Committee 
was informed that in the rescue operations,  accord ing to the inputs from the 
Tamil Nadu Government, as many as 19.35 lakh person s were rescued, 
evacuated and moved to safer places and accommodate d in as many as 7,069 
relief camps.  Of these, about 50,000 persons were evacuated and rescued by the 
Central forces.  Just the proportion of 50,000 to t wenty lakhs indicate that the 
role played by the agencies of the Central Governme nt plays a secondary role 
while assisting to the State Government. 
10.1.2  The State Government further informed the C ommittee that they 
sanctioned Rs. 500 crore from the SDRF to meet immediate expenses relating to 
rescue and relief operations and immediate temporar y restoration works.  

18  
Besides, the Government further sanctioned Rs. 1300  crores towards relief and 
restoration works.  
10.1.3  The State Government also apprised the Comm ittee that the 
Ministers and senior officers of the State Governme nt were deputed to the 
districts to monitor the relief and rehabilitation works in the flood affected 
areas.  Besides, the State Emergency Operations Cen tre in the office of the 
Commissioner for Revenue Administration, Disaster M anagement and 
Mitigation Department were activated and functioned  round the clock with the 
presence of senior officers including the Revenue S ecretary and Commissioner 
for Revenue Administration.  Other senior officials  and Secretaries to 
Government were also drafted in.  The State Governm ent also furnished details 
of other steps of relief and rehabilitation measure s which were taken to 
minimize damage caused by floods which are given below:- 
(i) Rescue and Evacuation Efforts: 
6 teams of the State disaster Response Force, 6 tea ms of the Coastal 
Security Group, 1400 personnel of the fire and resc ue department, 30000 
personnel of the Tamil Nadu Police and 45,000 staff  drawn from the Revenue, 
Municipal Administration, Rural Development, Public  Works, Highways, 
Health, Animal Husbandry, Municipal Corporation of Chennai and other local 
bodies and from TANGEDCO were deployed.  In all, mo re than 80,000 
personnel from the State Government's side were inv olved in round the clock 
rescue and relief operations. 
1200 Army personnel, 600 personnel from Navy, Coast  Guard and Air 
Force and 1920 NDRF personnel were engaged in rescu e and relief operations. 
Six helicopters of Air Force and two helicopters ea ch of Navy and Coast Guard 
participated in rescue operations in marooned areas  and airdropping of food 
material and drinking water.  
In all, 17,42,470 persons were rescued, evacuated o r moved to safer 
places throughout the State and put up in 7004 reli ef camps. Floor mats and bed 
sheets were provided to these persons in the relief camps. 
(ii) Distribution of Essential Items: 
Food, milk and safe drinking water were provided to  all affected persons.  
As on 15 
th  December 2015, total 1,24,38,281 food packages had  been 
distributed to persons in relief centers as well as  others affected by the floods. 
690 metric tonnes of milk powder were also distribu ted to the families with 
young children in the relief camps. Despite extensi ve flooding and damages to 
the Ambattur, Madhavaram and Sholinganallur dairy u nits, milk supply was 
continued throughout the period and it reached near normalcy by the morning of 

19  
5th December, 2015 when 10.2 lakh liters as against  the normal supply of 11 
lakh liters was ensured. 
To provide supply of vegetables and to control the rise of vegetable 
prices, 90 fixed shops and 13 mobile shops were ope ned by the Co-operative 
societies through which vegetables were sold at bel ow the rate of market prices 
to the public in Chennai.  
(iii) Health & Sanitation Measures:   
31,320 Medical Camps were conducted and about 32.46  lakhs were 
treated in these camps (figures as on 15 
th  December, 2015). Nearly 5 lakh 
sanitary napkins were distributed to women in the flood affected areas including 
in relief centers.  Diapers were provided to the ch ildren in the relief camps. 
Disease surveillance was done by 30 dedicated teams to monitor any spurt in the 
flood affected localities for communicable diseases .   Adequate quantity of 
medicine to last 31/4 months had been stocked in al l the Government Hospitals, 
Urban and Rural Primary Health Centers and drug warehouses. 
Often after the floods generally different diseases  spread due to lack of 
basic civic amenities, drinking water and hygiene a nd cleanliness in public 
places. But the Committee was informed by the relie f Commissioner of the 
State Government of Tamil Nadu that there was no medical disaster. The details 
were given to the Committee that 32,000 medical camps were established by the 
State Government. Almost each and every lane of Chennai was sanitized, timely 
medical relief was provided, and double chlorinatio n was given.  Each family 
was given half kilogram of bleaching powder.  There  were training camps for 
them.  There has not been any epidemic.  In fact, d iseases declined because of 
so much of medical efforts being undertaken.  Even from other States, doctors 
had come. 
(iv) Efforts to Eliminate Water Logging & Restore N ormalcy of 
Essential Services: 
The problem of inundation was addressed on a war fo oting.  470 heavy 
duty pumps of capacities ranging from 10 hp to 200 hp were deployed at 
various locations to pump out the water.  Pumps of the Corporation of Chennai, 
Chennai Metrorail Limited Neyveli Lignite Corporati on and from various other 
private sources both from within and outside the St ate were deployed.  Heavy 
duty pump sets were also airlifted from New Delhi. In addition, 71 super sucker 
machines, 49 Fire and Rescue Department vehicles, 8 2 JCBs/Poclains, 111 jet-
rodding machines and 200 desalting machines were de ployed to pump out the 
water or to cut open channels to dewater flooded areas.  

20  
Complete inundation had resulted in disruption of s upply of drinking 
water.  Generators were deployed in various locations to enable supply of water, 
besides mobilizing water tanker lorries for supply of potable water in urban and 
rural areas.  In Chennai, regular drinking water su pply was maintained at 830 
million liters per day.  This included 4000 trips o f tanker lorries every day 
besides piped water supply.  In addition, packaged drinking water supply was 
resorted to in the flood affected areas and relief centers and more than 10 lakh 
litres of packaged drinking water were distributed.  To assure safety of potable 
water in the present circumstances, double the usua l dosage of chlorination was 
done at the source and chlorine levels were being m onitored at source, supply 
and retail points by specially deployed public health teams.  
As a precautionary measure, electricity supply to several parts of Chennai 
city and other flooded parts of the state had to be  switched off to prevent death 
and injury by electrocution that could arise due to  heavy flooding and 
inundation of electrical systems. In addition, ther e was also damage to 
substations, transformers and conductors. All of th is was rectified on a war 
footing.  In Chennai city, electricity was restored  by the night of 6 th  December, 
2015 in 95% of the areas, except in areas which sti ll had some residual 
inundation.  100% electricity distribution was restored by 14 th  December, 2015. 
Flooding in the Chennai Petroleum Company Limited R efinery at Manali 
and depots of Oil Marketing Companies had caused te mporary disruption of 
supply of motor fuels at retail outlets.  The State  Government worked closely 
with the OMCs to ensure that 85% petrol and diesel pumping stations were 
functioning with sufficient stock in Chennai by the  evening of 6 th  December 
2015.  The situation returned to near normal within  2 days. LPG supply was 
also ensured. With the cooperation of the Departmen t of Telecommunication, 
telephone connectively was restored to the extent o f 75 per cent on 5 th  
December 2015 and subsequently restored completely.  
(v) Financial Measures: 
The Government of Tamil Nadu initially sanctioned R s. 500 crores 
towards various relief operations on 17 
th  November 2015 from the State 
Disaster Response Fund.  On 15 th  December 2015, the State Government 
sanctioned a further sum of Rs. 1000 crores for pay ment of ex-gratia relief to 
affected households and Rs. 300 crores for immediate restoration of roads.  
In addition, a massive exercise was undertaken for enumerating and 
identifying affected families, whose houses got flooded thereby displacing them 
and damaging all their household items.  4159 perso nnel were mobilized for the 
purpose in Chennai.  The State Government provided an ex-gratia relief of Rs. 
5000 to hut dwellers whose huts were partly or full y damaged.  As per the 

21  
SDRF norms, the State Government sanctioned an ex-g ratia relief of Rs. 5000, 
besides providing 10 kg. rice, a saree and a dhoti,  to affected families who lost 
their clothing, utensils and other household articl es due to inundation of their 
huts or houses for more than two days.  
(vi)   Administrative Measures: 
People of the affected areas lost their valuable be longings in the great 
floods, which include important record such as patt a, educational certificates, 
Aadhar Card, voter ID cards, bank pass books, RC bo oks, driving licences etc. 
The State Government took a special initiative to e xpeditiously provide 
duplicate copies of these important documents.  Spe cial camps were organized 
at Taluk level for two weeks beginning 14 
th  December, 2015 for issue of 
certificates to persons who have lost them in the f loods.  Arrangements were 
made to receive applications for replacement of suc h documents at Common 
Service Centres.  37,707 students who have lost the ir text books, note books 
etc., have been issued text books, note books and one set of school uniforms. 
Further, the State made the following demands from the Prime Minter on 
9th  December, 2015:  
• to direct insurance companies to settle claims of d amage to homes 
and loss of personal effects, domestic durable asse ts and personal 
vehicles on a campaign mode; 
• to direct banks to provide a limited moratorium on repayment and 
rescheduling of loans for homes, vehicles and other  personal 
effects of flood affected families; 
• to direct banks to extend soft loans for purchase o f vehicles, 
educational loans and personal loans upto Rs. 5 lak hs to finance 
essential domestic durable assets; and 
• to extend excise duty exemption till 31 st  March, 2016 for white 
goods and kitchen equipment to be sold in the flood  affected 
districts.   
10.2 Role of the Central Government 
10.2.1  Regarding the role played by NDMA/ NDRF in providing 
immediate relief to the flood victims; the Ministry  apprised the Committee that 
the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) played a vital role in rescue and 
relief operation immediately after deployment of it s teams during Chennai 
rescue operation.  According to the Ministry, to su pplement the efforts of the 

22  
State Government, NDRF deployed 48 Teams (1700 pers onnel) along with 194 
boats and other necessary rescue equipment.   
10.2.2  According to the Ministry, the NDMA is inst rumental in 
formation/ preparation of policies, guidelines, plans.  During this disaster, as per 
information from the Ministry of Home Affairs, NDMA  operated toll free 
Disaster Helpline (number 1078) at NDMA and a team of Officers was 
deployed to monitor the situation and receive reque st for the instant relief.  The 
Committee has been apprised that details of all suc h inputs received at NDMA 
Control Room were conveyed to the State Emergency O perations Centre 
(SEOC) and on-site operations coordination center ( OSOCC) of NDRF for 
necessary action.  Besides, NDMA also coordinated r elief efforts with other 
Ministries and a list of do’s and Don’ts for flood affected areas and suggestions 
for the Post Floods management were shared with the  Government of Tamil 
Nadu by the NDMA.  The Ministry further mentioned t here was no technical or 
procedural lapse on the part of NDRF in plunging in to action to save the lives 
and properties. 
10.2.3  The Committee emphasises that disaster mana gement requires 
coordinated and holistic approach from all Ministri es, Departments of 
Central as well as State level. The Committee notes  that the Central 
Government extended support to the Government of Ta mil Nadu by 
providing timely support to supplement the efforts of the State 
Government for tackling the situation effectively i n the wake of flood 
situation in Chennai during 2015. But at the same t ime, the Committee 
observes that the NDMA meetings should take place i mmediately to 
monitor the situation depending upon the gravity of  the disaster, since they 
only play the most crucial role in coordinating mul tiple agencies belonging 
to the Centre and the State who are involved in mitigating the disaster. The 
Committee however, appreciates the work done by the state Government as 
well as Chennai Corporation, in terms of relief and rehabilitation works.  
11.0  FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE  
11.1  The Ministry has informed the Committee that the Government of 
India has released Rs. 2560.715 crore from SDRF/ ND RF and Special 
Assistance to Tamil Nadu for management of relief n ecessitated by natural 
disasters during 2015. 
11.2  Detailing this assistance, the Ministry in th eir written replies has 
given following information: 

23  
(i) In the instant case, the Government of India had re leased the 1 st  
installment of Central Share of SDRF amounting to R s. 254.625 
crore for the year 2015-16, to the State on 27 th  May 2015.  
(ii) Further, in order to support the affected people of  the State, the 
Government of India had released assistance of Rs. 388.42 crore 
(Rs. 133.795 cr. + Rs. 254.625 crore), in advance, from SDRF and 
Rs. 552.00 crore from Special Assistance of central  plan schemes 
to Tamil Nadu on 23 rd  November 2015.   
(iii) Besides, an amount of Rs. 1000 crore (Rs. 866.31 cr . +133.69 cr.) 
released, ‘on account’ basis from NDRF to the State  Government 
on 3 rd  December 2015 and 16 th  December 2015 respectively, for 
immediate relief operations. 
(iv) Besides, an amount of Rs. 365.67 crore was released  from NDRF 
to the State Government on 29 th  April 2016.  
(v) As such, GOI has released Rs. 2560.715 crore from S DRF/ NDRF 
and Special Assistance to Tamil Nadu for management  of relief 
necessitated by natural disasters during 2015. 
11.3  The Ministry informed that in response to the  demand of Tamil 
Nadu State Government for Rs 25912.46 crore for rel ief, rehabilitation, 
rebuilding and restoration till the end of December , only Rs 2195 crore was 
provided, which was one-fourth of the amount requir ed for temporary relief 
projected by the State Government.  
11.4  Explaining the mismatch between projected req uirements of the 
State Government and allocation made by the Central Government, the Ministry 
submitted that the State Government projected requirement for items outside the 
purview of SDRF and NDRF norms. Accordingly, no assistance was considered 
for those items.  Assistance from NDRF is considere d on assessment based in 
conformity with the norms and not demand/ projectio n of the State. For the 
components of permanent reconstruction, restoration and mitigation measures in 
respect of damaged infrastructure given in the memo randum, the State 
Government was advised to seek support from concern ed line Ministries/ State 
Plan. 
11.5  The State had also projected relief & scale o f assistance for 
damages to the different categories of mitigation measures at a much higher rate 
than what is permissible as per the SDRF/ NDRF norm s. According to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs the difference in demand o f the State and actual 
approval from the Government of India in terms of a ssistance from SDRF/ 
NDRF comes because it is provided only for immediat e relief as per the 

24  
established norms to the victims of notified disast ers and not for compensation 
of loss as suffered/ claimed by the State.   
11.6  When the Ministry was asked about assistance for rehabilitation 
and restoration from the Centre to the State Govern ment after the disaster, the 
Ministry replied that the primary responsibility fo r disaster management rests 
with the States.  Besides, to meet the expenditure on relief of immediate nature, 
a State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) has been crea ted for each State.  
According to the Ministry, the Central share of SDRF is released to the States in 
June and December, subject to fulfilling conditions of the scheme. The SDRF is 
a resource readily available to the States to meet the expenses of relief, 
rehabilitation & restoration works activities of im mediate nature, for a range of 
specified disasters.  The State Governments are required to meet the expenditure 
for providing immediate relief to the victims of no tified natural disasters, 
including flood, from readily available fund under the SDRF in accordance with 
the approved items & norms of assistance.   
11.7  The Committee notes that there is significant  gap between the 
demand for financial assistance made by the State a nd the actual help 
extended to them by the centre.  In this context, t he Committee takes note 
of the representative of the Ministry of Finance wh ile deposing before the 
Committee which are as follows: 
“The State Government normally gives the Memorandum  that 
includes damages, infrastructure and long-term miti gation also.  The 
assistance normally from the Government under the NDRF is for the short-
term repair and relief only.  We only supplement th e short-term measures 
because it is a supplementary approach.  Normally, there is a gap between 
the demand of the State Government and the actual assistance.  There is an 
Inter-Ministerial Committee which gives its comment s on the report and 
then this Executive Committee and the high level Committee see to it that it 
is as per the set norms.  The norms have been set b y the Government as to 
which are the items that are admissible for relief from the NDRF.  So, 
normally, this difference takes place.  But, in this case, for Tamil Nadu, still 
that document has not been examined.” 
11.8  However, the Committee recommends that in vie w of the 
extraordinary circumstances and the huge damage cau sed to the State and 
particularly to the Chennai city, necessary assista nce may be provided 
without further delay. The Committee feels that huge damage has occurred 
to the road infrastructure and restoration thereof is a gigantic task.  
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that adequate  grant should be 
given to the State for this purpose.  

25  
11.9  Besides, the Central Urban Development Minist ry should also  
provide a special package for rehabilitation and  r estoration work in the 
urban local bodies including Chennai Municipal Corp oration of the state 
which have been severely affected due to torrential  rains and consequent 
floods. Since, these local bodies are dependent on their own small source of 
tax revenue, they require substantial amount for re storation and 
rehabilitation works. The committee while consideri ng the magnitude of 
the devastation caused also recommends the Central Government to 
consider granting a sufficient sum for construction  of houses for the people 
who lost their dwellings in the flood devastation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT 
A GLANCE 
 
REASONS BEHIND THE FLOOD 
 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Water 
Resources that the encroachment of lakes and river beds played a major 
role in causing massive flood in Chennai.  The Comm ittee feels that the 
State Government should check mafia involved in ill egal construction for 
business and usurping water bodies for their real e state business.  The 
flood channels and riverbed should be cleared as so on as possible by 
removing illegal/ unauthorized constructions. 
(Para 7.1.3)  
 The Committee also observes that the drainage syst em got chocked in 
Chennai and the city was flooded badly in the aftermath of heavy torrential 
rainfall. The Committee notes that  the Ministry wh ile deposing before the 
Committee too had admitted on 28 January 2016 to the fact that, “there is a 
need to keep all our drains clean, there is need to  make  sure that all the 
storm water drains function and the outlets function…” 
(Para 7.1.4)  
 In view of the above, the Committee recommends tha t regular 
maintenance of the drainage system should get topmo st priority however 
daunting the task may be. The Chennai Metropolitan Development 
Authority and Chennai Municipal Corporation should pay attention to this 
issue seriously and act accordingly. The drainage s ystem of the city should 
be flawless so as to prevent any kind of water logging.   
(Para 7.1.5)  
About illegal encroachment and faulty town planning, the Committee 
observes that these are the major causes behind the  havoc that was 
wreaked by floods in the year 2015 in the city of C hennai.  The Committee 
appreciates the action taken by the State Governmen t to remove the 
unauthorized constructions but still feels that thi s is inadequate and all 
illegal encroachment and construction should be rem oved.  However, the 
Committee is of the view that the process of removing encroachment should 
be a balanced one as it has human and social conseq uences.  There should 
be proper blue print and planning for rehabilitatin g and resettling those 
who are living on encroached settlements before removing encroachment.  

27  
(Para 7.2.3)  
 
The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Urba n Development 
(MoUD) had issued an Action Plan to all States and  Union territories for 
“Flood Proofing of Cities/ Towns” well in advance i .e., on 3 rd  September, 
2013 itself. The MoUD should also play a pro active  role in ensuring its 
implementation as well, in terms of urban planning and development 
especially of metro cities.  
(Para 7.2.4)  
 
 The Committee is given to understand that unplanne d urbanization 
and growth of cities are also the main contributing factors for floods in and 
around Chennai. The Committee, therefore, recommend s that the Centre 
should come out with a proper long-term master plan  for metro cities to 
prevent such disasters in future. The committee is also of the opinion that it 
is an eye opener and other metro cities must also learn from it. 
(Para 7.2.5)  
 
 ROLE AND RESPOSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT CONCERNED 
AGENCIES 
 The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministr y of Home 
Affairs through its subordinate concerned agencies has to bolster its 
disaster preparedness.  The Committee suggests that separate action should 
be taken to prepare calamity map of all important c ities by developing 
standard vulnerability indices so as to minimize lo ss of life, loss of private 
and public property and vital installation.  The Co mmittee does not quite 
accept the argument that since the rainfall was unp recedented and was 
more than the hundred years average therefore the d amage was also huge. 
In this context exact statement of the Home Secreta ry while deposing 
before the Committee is reproduced below: 
“So, basically there can be no preparation for a di saster that occurs 
once in hundred years, because the cost of preparin g for the disaster would 
be disproportionately high.” 
(Para 8.5)  

28  
 
 In the opinion of the Committee, any natural disas ter of bigger 
intensity has the propensity to cause extensive dam age.  Thus, instead of 
putting the blame on the forces of nature, we shoul d use advanced 
technology to fight it out.  Moreover, the administration of both Centre and 
State should work together and remain vigilant to t ackle the situation. The 
Committee also observes that natural disaster of hi gh magnitude will 
always adversely affect people in large number and the administration has 
to respond in a fastest possible manner. Accordingl y, the NDMA and all 
concerned bodies of Central and State Governments s hould have 
established procedures so that vital time is not lo st in wriggling out 
procedural delays. 
(Para 8.6)  
 
The Committee also observes that the NDMA plays a v ery crucial 
role in mitigating problems of disaster victims. Th erefore, its vacant posts 
should be filled up on priority. The Committee also  recommends that after 
any disaster in future, the NDMA should meet urgently. 
(Para 8.7)  
 
 The Committee further observes that as per the sub mission of the 
Member Secretary, NDMA they have already issued gui delines on 
mitigating and managing floods and urban floods. In  this context the 
Committee notes that since now urban floods are tak ing place more 
frequently in the Country, i.e. , Mumbai, Surat, Srinagar, and then Chennai 
all these in tandem indicate that the problem may f urther escalate in 
future. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the guidelines prepared 
by NDMA should be scrupulously followed and they sh ould also review 
town planning of each city by giving due importance  to clear flood 
channels, proper drainage, safe-passage to excess w ater in lakes, other 
water bodies, de-siltation of river bed,  removal o f illegal encroachment, 
etc.  
(Para 8.8)  
 

29  
  The Committee impresses on the fact that scientists all over the world 
are now highlighting on global warming and its cons equences like, 
unusually high rain fall and sea cyclones. These wo uld be rather more 
common phenomena and happen frequently in coastal s tates then a rare 
instance. Therefore, the Committee recommends the M inistry of Home 
Affairs and NDMA to keep their preparedness at optimum level. 
(Para 8.9)  
 
 The Committee observes that there are multiple age ncies involved in 
the disaster management process and feels that desp ite the best efforts all 
these take lot of time and consequently the administration fails to reach out 
to the victims. The Committee recommends that there  should not be so 
many layers and NDMA has to revamp the process in c o-ordination with 
the Centre and the State. 
(Para 8.10)  
 
 The Committee is of the considered view that there  should be an 
emphasis on pre-disaster preparedness in disaster m anagement set up of 
the State as the same would minimize the loss of li ves and property in the 
situation of any unforeseen eventuality. Had this m echanism of prevention 
and mitigation been in place in the State to the re quired extent, the loss of 
lives and property could have been minimized.  
(Para 8.11)  
 
9.0 EXTENT OF DAMAGE DUE TO FLOODING 
 The Committee is appalled by the extensive damage caused to social 
and physical infrastructure such as roads, drinking  water, sewerage, 
drainage systems, health centres, schools and colle ges in flood-affected 
areas of the state. Considering the severity and extent of the damage caused 
by torrential rains and consequent floods to the St ate of Tamil Nadu, the 
Committee is of the opinion that the Centre should bolster its support and 
does not quite agree with the view that the primary  responsibility and the 
first response for disaster management rests with the State.  
(Para 9.2)  

30  
   
 The Committee understands that damage to social an d physical 
infrastructure and financial loss to individuals an d micro and small 
industries due to unprecedented torrential downpour in Chennai and other 
parts of Tamil Nadu if calculated properly, may run  into thousands of 
crores. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ce ntral Government to 
look sympathetically into the needs of the State Go vernment in terms of 
reconstruction and rehabilitation and immediately a nnounce a special 
relief and rehabilitation package which is in conso nance with the demands 
of the State. 
(Para 9.3)  
 
RELIEF & REHABILITATION EFFORTS AND MEASURES  
 The Committee emphasises that disaster management requires 
coordinated and holistic approach from all Ministri es, Departments of 
Central as well as State level. The Committee notes  that the Central 
Government extended support to the Government of Ta mil Nadu by 
providing timely support to supplement the efforts of the State 
Government for tackling the situation effectively i n the wake of flood 
situation in Chennai during 2015. But at the same t ime, the Committee 
observes that the NDMA meetings should take place i mmediately to 
monitor the situation depending upon the gravity of  the disaster, since they 
only play the most crucial role in coordinating mul tiple agencies belonging 
to the Centre and the State who are involved in mitigating the disaster. The 
Committee however, appreciates the work done by the state Government as 
well as Chennai Corporation, in terms of relief and rehabilitation works.  
(Para 10.2.3) 
11.0 FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE  
 The Committee notes that there is significant gap between the 
demand for financial assistance made by the State a nd the actual help 
extended to them by the centre.  In this context, t he Committee takes note 
of the representative of the Ministry of Finance wh ile deposing before the 
Committee which are as follows: 
“The State Government normally gives the Memorandum  that 
includes damages, infrastructure and long-term miti gation also.  The 
assistance normally from the Government under the NDRF is for the short-

31  
term repair and relief only.  We only supplement th e short-term measures 
because it is a supplementary approach.  Normally, there is a gap between 
the demand of the State Government and the actual assistance.  There is an 
Inter-Ministerial Committee which gives its comment s on the report and 
then this Executive Committee and the high level Committee see to it that it 
is as per the set norms.  The norms have been set b y the Government as to 
which are the items that are admissible for relief from the NDRF.  So, 
normally, this difference takes place.  But, in this case, for Tamil Nadu, still 
that document has not been examined.” 
(Para 11.7) 
 
 However, the Committee recommends that in view of the 
extraordinary circumstances and the huge damage cau sed to the State and 
particularly to the Chennai city, necessary assista nce may be provided 
without further delay. The Committee feels that huge damage has occurred 
to the road infrastructure and restoration thereof is a gigantic task.  
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that adequate  grant should be 
given to the State for this purpose.  
(Para 11.8) 
 
 Besides, the Central Urban Development Ministry sh ould also  
provide a special package for rehabilitation and  r estoration work in the 
urban local bodies including Chennai Municipal Corp oration of the state 
which have been severely affected due to torrential  rains and consequent 
floods. Since, these local bodies are dependent on their own small source of 
tax revenue, they require substantial amount for re storation and 
rehabilitation works. The committee while consideri ng the magnitude of 
the devastation caused also recommends the Central Government to 
consider granting a sufficient sum for construction  of houses for the people 
who lost their dwellings in the flood devastation. 
(Para 11.9) 
 
 
******* 