75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
75
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
CROSS-BORDER TERRORISM AND INSURGENCY IN
JAMMU & KASHMIR
 
                              (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 25 JULY, 2001)
                          (LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 25 JULY, 2001)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
JULY, 2001/SRAVANA, 1923 (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S                                            
                                                                                                                                
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1999-2000)                                                   
2.         COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE (2001)                                                      
3.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                            
4.         REPORT                                                                                                             
            Presentation of officials of State Government    
            Presentation of ITBP officials                                                                           
            Presentation of BSF officials                                                                      
            Presentation of CRPF officials
             Meeting with Governor of Jammu & Kashmir                                                
            Presentation of district officials of Kargil
            Presentation of political parties and public figures of Kargil
            Presentation of army officials at Kargil                                                         
            Presentation of representatives of political parties at Srinagar    
            National Conference
 B.J.P.
Congress (I)                                                                                                    
                        Awami League
                        C.P.I.                                                                                                              

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
                        C.P.I. (M)
            Meeting with Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir
            Presentation of GOC, 15 Corps at Srinagar                                                     
            Presentation of officials of Jammu Division                                                        
            Presentation of representatives of political parties and other   organisations at Jammu                                         
                        Congress (I)
                        National Conference                                                                                        
                        B.J.P.                                                                                                              
                        B.S.P.                                                                                                             
                        Nationalist Congress Party                                                                              
                        Bar Association, Jammu           
                        Vishwa Hindu Parishad                                                                  
                        Sikh Community          
                        Displaced Kashmiris                                                                                                    
                        Border Migrants                                                                                              
                       Visit to a camp of displaced Kashmiris in Jammu                                                                                   
5.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS                                                   
6.         RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                              
7.         ANNEXURE
             List of Members who visited Jammu & Kashmir                                                                        
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (1999-2000)
 
 
1.       Shri Pranab Mukherjee ¾ Chairman
          RAJYA SABHA
2.       Shri Hiphei                                                    
§ 3.  Shri  Surendra Kumar Singh 
4.      Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5.      Dr. L. M. Singhvi                  
6.      Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai  
7.
            Shri K. M. Saifullah              
8.            Shri C. M. Ibrahim
9.            Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
10.    Shri C. P. Thirunavukkarasu 
11.    Shri Drupad Borgohain         
12.    Shri Kuldip Nayyar               
j
  13 .   Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
o  14.    Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
% 15.    Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
            LOK SABHA
16.    Shri Manabendra Shah         
17.    Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari            
18.
        Shri Vinay Katiyar                
19.        Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi    
20.        Shri Anadi Sahu                    
* 21.  Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri                  
22.    Shri Ram Nagina Mishra       
23.    Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt        
24.    Smt. Jayashree Banerjee       
25.    Shri Rajen Gohain                 

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
26.    Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
27.    Shri Rajkumar Wangcha   
28.    Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi
29.    Smt. Nisha Chaudhary          
30.    Shri Jitendra Prasada            
31.    Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel        
32.    Shri M. O. H. Farook
33.    Shri Samar Choudhury          
34.    Shri Subodh Roy                  
35.
        Dr. S. Venugopalachari
36.        Shri Beni Prasad Verma        
37.        Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
38.        Shri Arun Kumar                  
39.    Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
40.    Shri P. H. Pandian                
41.    Shri Shriniwas Patil               
42.
        Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh                         
43.        Dr. Jayanta Rongpi               
44.        Shri S. K. Bwiswmuthiary
* 45.     Shri Vijay Goel
 
________________________________________________________
*Nominated w.e.f. 6 April, 2000.
 
(ii)
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2001)
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee-   Chairman
 
           RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Hiphei
4.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
5.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
6.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
7.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8.         Shri K.M, Saifullah
9.         Shri C.M. Ibrahim
f 10.   Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
11.       Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
12.       Shri Drupad Borgohain
13.       Shri Kuldip Nayyar
14.       Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
15.       Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
 
           LOK SABHA
 
16.       Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
 ª18.                                             Shrimati  Nisha Chaudhary
19.       Shri Samar Chaudhary
20.       Shri M.O.H. Farook

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
21.       Shri Vijay Goel
22.       Shri Rajen Gohain
23.       Shri  Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
24.       Shri Vinay Katiyar
25.       Shri Arun Kumar
26.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
27.       Shri P.H. Pandian
28.       Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel
29.       Shri Shriniwas Patil
 *30.        Shri Jitendra Prasada
31.       Shri Subodh Ray
32.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
33.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
34.       Shri Anadi  Charan Sahu
35.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
36.       Shri Manabendra Shah
 
____________________________________________________________________
f   Ceased  to be Member   w.e.f. 1 March, 2001.
ª  Expired on 30 January,2001.
*   Expired on 16 January, 2001.
(iii)
 
37.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
38.       Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma
39.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
40.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
41.       Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
 f 42.   Dr. S. Venugopal
43.       Shri Beni Prasad Verma
44.       Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
¨ 45.      Shri  Harin Pathak
©46.   Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
_______________________________________________________________________
f   Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19 March, 2001 on being nominated to Committee on  Human Resource Development.
¨ Nominated w.e.f. 20 February, 2001.
©  Nominated w.e.f. 8 March, 2001.
 
(iv)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-fifth Report on the cross-
border terrorism and insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir.
 
2.         The Committee, in its meeting held on 17 May, 2000 proposed to visit Jammu & Kashmir to have a first hand
assessment of the situation in that State as part of its detailed study of the internal security situation in the country. 
Subsequently, it decided to constitute a Study Group for the purpose in its meeting held on 13 June 2000.
 
3.         Accordingly, a Study Group headed by the Chairman of the Committee visited Jammu & Kashmir from 6 to 9 July
2000.  It interacted with the Governor, the Chief Minister, State Government Officials, officials of the Central Para-military
Forces, Army authorities, representatives of political parties, several other associations and representatives of general public
at Srinagar, Kargil and Jammu.  Officials of Intelligence Bureau and Special Bureau also apprised the Study Group of the
situation prevailing in the State.
 
4.         The Study Group submitted its Study Tour Note to the Committee which deliberated upon it in its meeting held on 3
October 2000.
 
5.         The Committee considered and adopted this Report in its meeting held on 28 May, 2001.
6.                  For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
May 28, 2001
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
Chairman
            Committee on Home Affairs                    
                                                                        
 
REPORT
 
A Study Group of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs headed by its
Chairman, Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited Srinagar, Kargil and Jammu from 6 to 9 July, 2000 to have a first hand assessment
of the problems of cross-border terrorism and insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir as part of its larger  study of internal
security scenario in the country. 
 
1.1       The details of the Study Group’s interaction with the Governor, the Chief Minister, the State Government officials,
the officials of the Central Para-military Forces and the Army authorities, representatives of political parties, several other
associations and representatives of public, are given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
 
SRINAGAR (6 July 2000)
 
Meeting with the Officials of the 
State Government
 
2.         The Study Group held discussions with the Chief Secretary, Director-General of Police and other senior officials of
the State in Srinagar on 6 July 2000.
 
3.         The Chief Secretary made a detailed presentation before the Study Group on the current situation obtaining in
Jammu and Kashmir.  Giving a brief historical background of the cross-border terrorism and insurgency, he stated that
Pakistan had always considered the partition of India incomplete as per its concept of two nation theory, with Jammu and
Kashmir being the main focus.  It was precisely for this reason that it made repeated attempts to annex the State.  Three wars
and an impudent intrusion in Kargil were examples of Pakistan’s desperate attempts in that direction.  The failure of
Pakistan in its repeated attempts to annex the State led it to resort to the proxy war.  It all began by misguiding disgruntled
youth in the State by exploiting their sentiments.  It resulted into large-scale exfiltration to Pakistan from the valley in 1989-
90.  Pakistan trained those local youth in subversive activities, equipped them with sophisticated weapons and infiltrated
them back to foment trouble in the valley.  However, with the disenchantment of  their misadventure and fading away of the
initial local support,  Pakistan started pushing in foreign and Pakistani mercenaries into the State.  He stated that Jammu and
Kashmir was not faced with insurgency or indigenous militancy but a clandestine war that could be gauged from the fact that

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
since 1990 to May, 2000, over 33,763 weapons of various calibres,  3 million rounds of ammunition, 1,22,332 explosive
devices and huge volumes of other war materials had been seized.  During  the same period, over 10,000 civilians had been
killed and an equal number injured.  This apart, 2217 security personnel were killed and 6474 injured.  Similarly, the
security forces killed 11,299 militants.
 
4.         Referring to the post-Kargil security scenario, the Chief Secretary stated that the situation up to the beginning of
May, 1999 was fully under control and was, in fact, improving steadily.  Security forces were able to gain an upper hand
over the militants.  As a result, there was a massive inflow of tourists into the valley.  Kargil war not only put an end to
tourism and hopes of the people of renewed economic activities but it also led to deterioration in the overall security
situation.  The major reasons which led to the deterioration in the security situation were as under:
 
(i)
                  Internal security grid was weakened to a large extent with the withdrawal of 58 Army battalions;
(ii)                Para military forces mainly CRPF were quantitatively and qualitatively inadequate;
(iii)               As a result of weakened security grid, a large number of hardcore militants infiltrated into the valley from May,
1999 onwards;
(iv)              The pre-occupation of the central para-military forces and the State police with the making of arrangements for
Darbar move, Independence Day celebrations, Amar Nath Yatra and Lok Sabha elections adversely affected the
operations against the militants and insurgents;
(v)                Increased pressure from Human Rights Organisations on the Special Operation Group of the State police led to the
loss of initiative;
(vi)              Flow of actionable intelligence remained sluggish;
(vii)             Army coup in Pakistan in October, 1999 led to emboldenment and better coordination and mutual support among
the main militant groups;
(viii)           Induction of Fidayeen (suicide) squads of militants led to high profile publicity oriented actions against security
forces which led to the rise in militant morale and fear psychosis among the people; and
(ix)              The release of three hardcore militants in the wake of hijacking of the Indian Airlines plane  in December, 1999 also
led to euphoria and high morale among the militant ranks.
 
5.         Apprising the Study Group of the present situation, the Chief Secretary told that barring a few high profile militant
attacks on civilians and headquarters of security forces, there was a perceptible trend indicating improvement in the
situation. Of late,  however, there had been an increase in the violent activities especially after the induction of a large
number of suicide squads.  Security forces were the main targets of the attacks.  Besides, political workers were also being
targeted.  In a nutshell, the situation could be characterised by the following points:
 
(i)
                  Unabated infiltration of militants from Pakistan/Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) both from the Kupwara-
Baramulla Sector and Rajouri-Poonch Sector;
(ii)                Increase in the component of foreign militants (they constituted 60-70% of the fresh infiltrators and were better
trained and motivated);
(iii)               Passing into the hands of foreign mercenaries the leadership of the militant organisations who now controlled the
cadres, arms/ammunition, finances etc, and using of the local militants mainly as guides and for logistic support;
(iv)              As a matter of policy, militants were targeting personnel of the State Police with the twin objectives of demoralising
them and disrupting the flow of actionable intelligence through them;
(v)                Targeting political workers, especially leaders of the National Conference, informers, Special Police Officers
(SPOs) and members of the Village Defence Committees (VDCs);
(vi)              Concentrating terrorist actions on Srinagar city such as the high profile attacks on Badami Bagh Cantonment and
the Special Operation Group (SOG) Hqrs, grenade attacks on the Civil Secretariat, resorting to killings of a large
number of policemen deployed on duty in Srinagar city with the objective of creating a fear psychosis in the city and
destabilising normal life;
(vii)     Up-gradation in the quality of arms of militants with heavy caliber weapons coming in, although they were not being
used extensively (perhaps being kept in reserve for some future contingencies);
(viii)      Making attempts to engineer communal disturbances;
(ix)       Making attempts to induct more and more local youth in militancy so as to give it a local colour once again and
project it to the world as an uprising of the Kashmiri people;
(x)
                Sizeable infiltration in Jammu region through the International Border (IB) viz. Samba-Hiranagar and Akhnoor
sectors (Earlier the IB was used for purposes of smuggling, limited to that of gold, drugs etc., but of late, the ISI had
been infiltrating militants and arms & ammunitions and explosives through this border); and
(xi)              The objective of infiltrating militants across the International Border in Jammu seemed to be:-
    

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
(a)     Targeting Jammu city and establish hideouts around the city  
                        with a view to creating problems later on;
(b)       Planting explosives on the railway tracks;
(c)        Using this route to reach areas in Udhampur/Doda districts;
(d)       Infiltrating Sikh militants to destabilise Jammu/Punjab; and
(e)        Using this route for infiltrating militants and arms to Delhi.
 
6.         Another noticeable trend was of dumping of arms and ammunition either near the border or near the Leh-Srinagar
national highway.  The dumped arms and ammunition were carried to the destinations by separate couriers.  Gujjars and
Bakerwals living in the border areas helped the infiltrators as guides and porters to enable them to carry the weapons to their
destinations.
 
7.         Touching upon the state of preparedness of the security forces, the Chief Secretary informed that although the pre-
Kargil counter insurgency grid had not been fully restored and there was a shortage in the deployment of armed forces from
the pre-Kargil standard, the forces deployed in the counter insurgency grid and the State police were fully geared to take on
the three thousand odd militants operating in the State.  He stated that there had been a large number of major successes in
the anti-militancy operations in the recent past.  He admitted that the State police had still not achieved the desirable level of
manpower, transport, firearms and communication requirements but efforts were being made under the Action Plan to make
up the deficiencies.
 
8.         The Chief Secretary stated that various measures had been taken to counter the designs of the ISI.  As a result of the
pro-active measures adopted in the recent past, the security forces had achieved major successes in the last few months. 
However, he felt that greater efforts and coordination were needed on the part of BSF, Army and the State Police in order to
curb infiltration at the border as also to deal with militants operating in the hinterland.  He further stated that infiltration was
the source of the whole problem and it needed to be addressed at the border itself by better border management.
 
9.         He felt that there was an urgent need for the enactment of a stringent anti-terrorist law.  There was also need for
devising a mechanism to ensure expeditious positive action/conviction under the existing laws against militants.
 
10.       He further informed that since the assumption of office by the popular government in 1996, two unified
Headquarters, one each for Kashmir and Jammu divisions, had been functioning under the chairmanship of the Chief
Minister to coordinate counter militancy operations in the two territorial divisions of the State.  Similarly, there were District
Level Coordination Committees working for inter-organisational coordination at the district level.
 
11.       Speaking on the people’s disposition with the militancy, the Chief Secretary stated that during the last three-four
years, there had been considerable erosion in the moral and material support base of the militant organisations even from
their traditional supporters.  There had also been disenchantment among the local militants about the misadventure they had
embarked on, with the result that the number of local militants and their motivation for carrying on with the militancy had
come to a low level.  It was due to this reason that ISI had been inducting more foreign mercenaries to see that they
outnumbered the local militants, so that they took over and maintained the command and control of the ongoing militant
movement which had been gradually declining in intensity.  As for the common people, there was yearning to return to
normalcy as quickly as possible.  This was apparent from the support and assistance rendered by the people in restoring the
tourism industry to its past glory as well as the progressively increasing flow of actionable intelligence from the people. 
Even during the current year, the tourist inflow had been considerable.
 
12.       Referring to the security of the minorities, the Chief Secretary stated that following the massacre of 35 members of
the Sikh community in Chittisingpora by militants in March, 2000, provision of a security cover to that particular
community had been taken in hand.  135 villages primarily inhabited by Sikhs had been identified and the security grid
around those villages had been strengthened.  The swift action taken by the Government for the security of the minorities
had helped restore confidence among such communities.
 
13.       While throwing light on the human rights record of the State, the Chief Secretary admitted that when operations were
being carried out at as large a scale as in Jammu and Kashmir, some aberrations and excessive use of force were bound to
take place.  He stated that the State Government exercised complete transparency in that regard.  The approach of complete
transparency had paid dividends.  He further stated that what was important was whether the Government ensured that the
personnel of the forces who violated human rights or whose actions were tantamount to violation of human rights or
excessive force were dealt with appropriately.  Over 300 personnel  of the forces had been proceeded against and punished. 

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
The State Human Rights Commission was also taking cognisance of allegations of human rights violations.  Similarly, the
International Committee of Red Cross  (ICRC) was also visiting jails and detention centres to meet and take stock of the
prisoners and detenues in custody.  The visits of ICRC delegations were covered by Memorandum of Understanding  (MoU)
signed by the Government of India with the former based in Geneva.
 
14.       Highlighting the role of the Village Defence Committees (VDCs) and the Special Police Officers (SPOs), the Chief
Secretary stated that with a view to inculcating a sense of security in far flung areas and to involve the local population in
the fight against militancy as well as to enable remote hamlets and villages to defend themselves, a scheme of appointing
SPOs and VDCs had been formulated and implemented.  The total sanctioned strength was 18000 SPOs and 2486 VDCs. 
Out of the total 18000 SPOs sanctioned, 7458 were members of 2486 VDCs (each VDC had 3 SPOs apart from the
volunteers from the village concerned).  This innovative scheme had been very successful in Doda district and also some
other parts of Jammu Division and had proved to be a cost-effective way of augmenting the manpower resources in the
counter insurgency grid.  The response for creation of VDCs in the Kashmir valley, however, had not been good.  Efforts
were being made to motivate people to form VDCs in the valley also, particularly in the remote areas where there was no
presence of security forces.
 
14.1     The important ingredients of the scheme were: -
(a)
                The VDCs were constituted by motivating the villagers to come forward for their defence voluntarily;
(b)               The SPOs were being paid Rs.1500/- per month.  Each VDC had 3 paid SPOs on it.  The remaining SPOs were used
for operational purposes by the State Police;
(c)                Keeping in view the operational requirements, SPOs and VDC members had been, from time to time, imparted
training through Army, BSF and local police in the handling of weapons, wireless sets, tactics and other defensive
and operational measures;
(d)
               303 Rifles, SLRs, AKs along with required ammunition were provided to SPOs and VDC members.  There,
however, continued to be some shortfall which would be made good with weapons already sanctioned by the
Government of India and were in the pipeline and  expected to be in position soon;
(e)
                400 Wireless sets had been issued to the SPOs/VDCs of the sensitive areas out of the existing resources.  Ministry
of Home Affairs had provided 1200 more Wireless sets in the current year which were in the process of deployment;
and
(f)
                 Apart from the weaponry and wireless sets, a large number of the SPOs had been provided items of
uniform/equipment like jungle shoes, socks, coat parkha, water-proof coat, Bala clava, haversack, sleeping bag,
barrack blankets, jerseys, helmets, steel folding cots and utensils keeping in view the operational requirements.
 
15.       Major achievements of the two institutions included the following:
 
(i)
                  The SPOs and VDCs had played an important role in combating militancy.  They had proved very effective in far-
flung and vulnerable hilly areas where population was scattered.  The existence of VDCs had created a sense of
security amongst the masses and had resulted in preventing migration from hilly areas; and
(ii)
                A large number of SPOs were an integral part of Special Operation Groups (SOGs) and they participated in active
operations.  These operations were conducted either independently by the Special Operation Groups or jointly with
security forces /para military forces.  Collection of intelligence regarding movement/activity of militants and their
mentors was an important role being performed by the SPOs/VDC members.
 
16.       The Chief Secretary while giving details about the strengthening and modernisation of Jammu and Kashmir police
informed the Study Group that a broad perspective plan for strengthening and modernisation of the J&K police and
revamping of intelligence gathering machinery had been sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs.  An Action Plan worth
Rs.192 crore was already under implementation since 1998-99.  Besides, the Ministry of Home Affairs was also preparing
another special Action Plan which was expected to be implemented in tandem with the current Action Plan.
 
17.       He enumerated various requirements of J&K Police as under:
 
(i)
                  Setting up of a Commando Training School;
(ii)                Central Government had sanctioned six India Reserve Battalions for Jammu and Kashmir.  In addition to that
creation of two more India Reserve Battalions had been cleared.  However, provision of funds had not been made for
housing and other infrastructure for the six battalions raised earlier.  A proposal in this regard with a total cost of
Rs.33.50 crore had been sent to the Central Government;
(iii)               Funds to the tune of Rs.3.00 crores and Rs.4.00 crores were required for purchase of 5000 bullet proof jackets and

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
patkas, and bullet proofing of 100 odd vehicles, respectively;
(iv)              Requirement of AK-47 Rifles for the next five years had been projected to the Ministry of Home Affairs.  The
requirement for the current year for these rifles was 6000.  The total requirement for AK-47 rifles stood at 26,625 for
next five years.  This apart, 11066 conventional weapons of various types were also required;
(v)                A proposal for additional funds of Rs.38 crores for strengthening of Special Operation Groups (SOGs) had been
sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs for vehicles, arms, ammunitions, wireless sets and other equipment; and
(vi)              The satisfaction level in respect of housing for J&K police was only 8.3%, perhaps the lowest in the country.  To
enhance the satisfaction level, a demand for Rs.347 crores was projected before the 11 th Finance Commission.  The
allocation of the projected amount would ensure that the satisfaction level went up to 40%;
 
18.       Highlighting the fiscal situation of the State, the Chief Secretary stated that it needed more finances not only to take
on militancy but also to undertake developmental plans.  There had been no increase in the plan fund for the State for the last
two years.  Although, State revenues had increased, the resource base was still very limited.  Moreover, the implementation
of the recommendations of the 5
th Central Pay Commission led to a massive increase in the finance bill of the State.  The
outstanding fiscal deficit of the State was to the tune of Rs.14-1500 crores.
 
19.       In regard to the “Security Related Expenditure” (SRE), he stated that a proposal was submitted to the Ministry of
Home Affairs for making advance payment to the State Government for meeting the expenditure which was approved under
SRE.  He informed that at present the reimbursement under SRE was made only after expenditure was booked which
implied that the State had to raise overdrafts from the Jammu & Kashmir Bank at high rates of interest.  He pleaded that
keeping in view the special circumstances of the State, the facility of advance payment should be extended to it as an
exception.  He drew attention also to the fact that the State was finding it difficult to meet the recurring costs of maintaining
India Reserve Battalions.
 
20.       As for the return of displaced Kashmiris to the valley, the Chief Secretary stated that an Action Plan for their return
was submitted to the Ministry of Home Affairs for approval.  The approval was awaited.  He, however, felt that displaced
Kashmiris were still feeling insecure and wanted to be fully assured of their security in the valley before their return.
 
21.       After the presentation of the Chief Secretary, the Director-General of Police of the State gave a brief description of
the prevailing situation in the State.  He stated that constant infiltration of terrorists from across the border was the biggest
problem being faced by the State.  To check the unabated menace of  infiltration, he was of the view that more CRPF
battalions should be raised exclusively for counter insurgency operations so that BSF and Army could effectively take care
of the borders.  He informed the Study Group that, of late, there was a decline in the local militancy.  ISI operatives and
foreign mercenaries mainly from Afghanistan had taken over the militancy.  He further stated that there was excellent
coordination among security forces engaged in counter insurgency operations.  The Unified Command was working
effectively.  He, however, felt that there was need for the procurement of modern communication equipment for the forces. 
Intelligence network also needed to be strengthened.
 
Meeting with the officials of Central Para Military Forces
 
ITBP
 
22.       The Inspector-General of ITBP gave a brief account of the activities of the force in Jammu and Kashmir.  He stated
that 10 battalions of ITBP were deployed in the valley for counter insurgency operations.  Besides, ITBP was providing
security to the Jammu-Srinagar national highway.  The most important assignment was guarding of the Banihal tunnel. 
Some equipment were required to be installed in the tunnel for better surveillance.  Rs. 23 crores were required for procuring
the sophisticated surveillance equipment.  The requisite equipment would help ITBP personnel to screen the heavy flow of
traffic passing through the tunnel.  It would also help in deterring the evil designs of militants as several attempts had been
made in the past to blow up the tunnel.  This apart, CCTVs were also required to be installed for monitoring the movements
outside the tunnel.   He further stated that tactical information was very crucial in the counter insurgency operations.  He
stated that there was need for an urgent upgradation of intelligence units of the ITBP.
 
BSF
 
23.       The Inspector-General of BSF also gave a brief description of the activities of the force in Jammu & Kashmir.  He
stated that initially 11 battalions of BSF were deployed in Jammu and Kashmir primarily along the Line of Control (LoC). A
long stretch of 220 Kms. of LoC was directly being looked after by the BSF.  It meant that BSF was operationally deployed

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
with the Army on the LoC.  At present, 48 battalions of BSF were deployed in the State.  BSF was playing four roles (i)
deployment along LoC with the Army; (ii) counter insurgency operations; (iii) anti-infiltration operations; and (iv) security
of vital installations. Apart from these roles, BSF was also engaged in several civil operations. He informed the Study Group
that militant activities had been largely reduced to sensational attacks as most of the leadership of the militants had either
been arrested or killed by the security forces.  Suicide squads were now active.  A worrisome development was the large-
scale exfiltration of local youth to the PoK in the post-Kargil phase of militancy.
 
CRPF
 
24.  The Inspector General of CRPF also apprised the Study Group of the activities of the force in Jammu and Kashmir.  He
stated that at present 39 battalions of CRPF were deployed in the State.  CRPF battalions were not only assisting the State
police in maintenance of law and order but also guarding vital installations and providing security cover to VVIPs.  He drew
the attention of the Study Group to the fact that CRPF did not have its own intelligence units as a result of which it was
totally dependent on the intelligence inputs provided either by the State police or other intelligence agencies.  He informed
that CRPF had lost 187 men in counter insurgency operations since 1989-90.
 
Meeting with Governor of Jammu & Kashmir
 
25.       The Study Group called on the Governor Shri G. C. Saxena at Raj Bhawan on 6 July 2000. The Chairman first
introduced members of the Study Group to the Governor and apprised him about the purpose of the visit to the State of
Jammu & Kashmir. The Chairman  requested the Governor to share his views about the current situation in the State.
 
26.       The Governor traced the roots of current insurgency in the State and stated that after Kargil war ground realities had
changed drastically. Now it was no more a secret as to who was aiding and abetting terrorism in the State. The State was
facing two major challenges i.e. holding of panchayat elections on non-party basis and the return of migrants to the valley.
 
27.       The Governor told the Committee that during Kargil crisis forces deployed for internal security and counter
insurgency operations had to be deployed along the LoC to push back Pak infiltrators. The diversion of forces helped
militants sneak into the valley from other sectors where the force level was brought down so as to maintain adequate force
level in the war zone.
 
28.       The Governor informed that local militants had either surrendered or had been apprehended by the security forces.
They were only in microscopic minority. They had realised the fact that Azadi was not possible and they could not match the
strength of the Indian Army. Now foreign mercenaries and Pak Army regulars were operating in the valley in a big way.
These mercenaries were getting financial assistance from ISI. Heavy machine guns, automatic weapons and certain
incriminating documents recovered from the slain militants gave enough evidence of this fact. He informed that recently
security forces busted a militant hideout where they had stored heavy weapons that had not been used so far in the valley. As
per the assessment of intelligence agencies such weapons were stored to be used on special occasions to inflict heavy
damages. The Governor pointed out that ratio of security forces killed in the counter insurgency operations had increased
which was a disturbing situation. It was mainly due to the fact that militants were better equipped and trained in the art of hit
and run. The militants had also started targeting installations and posts of the security forces. The attacks on BSF and CRPF
camps had increased since Kargil crisis. There was a very strong need to have anti-insurgency law which could give more
powers to security forces so that cases could be decided in a time bound manner.
 
29.       The Governor told that communalisation was on the retreat in the State. Three years back around 90% of the women
were forced to be in Burqah, now 90% of them had shed their Burqah which was a positive trend. However, regional
polarisation had crept into the psyche of the people in the State. The people of Jammu felt that their voice was not being
heard. Similarly, the people of Leh and Laddakh were also feeling alienated. Laddakh Autonomous Hill Council had certain
grievances that they had not been given certain powers which were promised to them initially. The Council Chairman had
not been accorded Cabinet rank by the State. The people of valley felt that they were also being marginalised and were not
getting their due. The Governor emphasised upon the overall development of the State and sought the intervention of the
Committee to recommend opening of more vocational colleges, schools and educational centres and also establishment of
industries in the State so that people of the State could get enough employment opportunities.
 
KARGIL (7 July 2000)
 
30.       The Study Group visited Kargil on 7 July 2000. It had interaction with civil and military authorities as also with the

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
representatives of political parties and prominent public figures of Kargil.
 
Meeting with the District Officials of Kargil
 
31.       The Deputy Commissioner of Kargil apprised the Study Group of the specific problems being faced by the people of
Kargil. He stated that Kargil was a land locked area situated at an altitude of 2750 metre from the sea level. Due to its
peculiar climate, it remained cut-off from rest of the country during winter season. He drew the attention of the Study Group
to the services rendered by the local people during Kargil war. He gave the details of the financial relief provided by the
Government to the people for the loss of life and property during the war. He informed that the local airport was almost
ready and was to become operational by the year-end. Some airlines companies were being requested to operate their
services on the sector so that Kargil could be brought on the tourism map of the country. He drew attention to the following
specific problems of the area:
 
(a)
                The loss of people’s livestock during the Kargil war amounted to an approximate Rs.505 lakhs. Compensation to the
people for the loss of their livestock had not yet been paid by the Central Government;
(b)               The airport at Kargil was due for completion in September 2000. Airlines companies should be persuaded to run
small aircraft services as soon as the construction of the airport was over;
(c)                Telecommunication system of Kargil did not function properly due to the lack of adequate technical staff at the
local satellite earth station. That apart, INTERNET facility should be provided to the district of Kargil through local
telephone exchange; and
(d)               The Border Road Organisation should take over the Shilikchay bypass constructed by the  State PWD for diversion
of the traffic from national highway which otherwise passed through the main town causing pollution.
 
Presen
tation of Political Parties and Public Figures of Kargil
 
32.       Representatives of the political parties and prominent public figures of Kargil raised the following issues before the
Study Group:
 
(i)         There should be a separate Kargil unit in Laddakh Scouts;
(ii)        Local boys should be recruited in the Army. There should be a quota for the region for recruitment in the Army;
(iii)
               Local porters who helped the Army during war, were not being recruited by the Army;
(iv)              There should be representation of residents of Kargil in central para-military forces;
(v)                Adequate relief was not provided by the Government for loss of livestock;
(vi)              Region was facing severe drought yet no relief was forthcoming from the Government;
(vii)             Newly constructed airport should be made operational at the earliest with air services to different parts of the
country;
(viii)           Discrimination against the people of Kargil should be stopped;
(ix)              Adequate compensation should be provided to the people for damages to their houses by Pak shelling;
(x)                There was massive unemployment in the region. Employment opportunities should be created; and
(xi)              Acute shortage of electricity was also a major problem.
 
Meeting with Army Officials of  Kargil
 
33.       Local Army officials also apprised the Study Group of their preparedness to deter any intrusion from across the
border. They assured that they were fully prepared to meet any challenge from the enemy. The Study Group was also
apprised of the developmental works being undertaken by the Army in the region. It was impressed upon that central para-
military forces should be entrusted the task of guarding 26 odd bridges located in the region as also of the national highway
so that Army could concentrate on its primary duties.
 
SRINAGAR (7 July, 2000)
 
Pres
entation  of Representatives of Political Parties at Srinagar
 
34.       The Study Group interacted with representatives of various political parties in Srinagar on 7 July 2000. The details of
the submissions of the representatives who appeared before the Study Group are as follows:
 
National Conference

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
 
(i)                  Militancy had broken the back of Kashmir economy;
(ii)                People of Kashmir were caught between the security forces and the militants;
(iii)               400 people were missing. Most of them were abducted by the security forces;
(iv)              Security forces were harassing innocent people either on one pretext or the other. The behaviour of the security
forces was not tolerable. They should learn to exercise restraint;
(v)                Whenever there was any militancy related violent incident involving Hindus, officials of Government of India
rushed to the spot but they never came to enquire about the plight of the Muslims. A common Kashmiri Muslim felt
as if he was living in a Hindu State;
(vi)              Central Government had not released the plan budget for the State even after the lapse of four months of the work
season;
(vii)             Kashmir could not be held as part of India on the gunpoint. It could only be kept as  part of Union of India only by
winning the hearts of Kashmiris;
(viii)           The Jammu & Kashmir Assembly passed the autonomy resolution by majority vote but it had been ruthlessly
rejected by the Central Government;
(ix)              The constitutional relationship between the State of Jammu & Kashmir and Union of India as envisaged under
Article 370 of the Constitution had eroded to a large extent over the years;
(x)                On what basis the Central Government was going to hold talks with the Hurriyat Conference. Hurriyat wanted
secession of Kashmir from India. Was the Central Government ready to allow Kashmir to secede from India?
(xi)              Kashmiris living in Jammu and Kashmir were living a far better life than the Kashmiris living in the PoK;
(xii)             Rejection of autonomy resolution would have a serious fall out;
(xiii)           National Conference wanted the restoration of 1952 status as agreed by the then Prime Minister under Delhi
Agreement;
(xiv)           Government employees were not getting salaries;
(xv)            There were no industries in the State;
(xvi)           Kashmir problem was not just a security or a law and order problem;
(xvii)         Restoration of trust by Central Government would bring back alienated Kashmiris to the national mainstream;
(xviii)        Until border with Pakistan was sealed, the problem of militancy  could not be removed; and
(xix)           Unemployment was also one of the causes for rise in militancy.
 
B.J.P
.
 
(i)
                  Thousands of Kashmiris had lost their lives over the last decade;
(ii)                The move to hold talks with Hurriyat Conference was an appreciable step;
(iii)               An effort should be made to resolve Kashmir problem within the democratic and constitutional framework of India;
(iv)              1987 Assembly elections were rigged by the ruling party which led to the rise of militancy;
(v)                Unemployment had been growing.  It was forcing Kashmiri youth to resort to gun culture;
(vi)              Tourism had suffered badly;
(vii)             Funds were being misutilised.  There was no financial accountability.  There was rampant corruption;
(viii)           Security forces should not be demoralised.  Special Operation Groups of State police were more notorious than
Central forces.  Special Operation Groups had let loose a reign of terror;
(ix)              Political workers belonging to opposition parties were not being given adequate security cover by the State
Government; and
(x)                State Assembly should be dissolved and President’s rule be imposed.
 
Cong
ress (I)
 
Various Governments in the Centre were responsible for the present State of affairs in Jammu & Kashmir.  A whole
lot of experiments carried out by various Governments added to the confusion.
 
Awami 
League
 
(i)
                  People at large wanted peace;
(ii)                ISI was pumping in billions of rupees to foment trouble in the valley;
(iii)               There were cases of atrocities by security forces;
(iv)              Unemployed youth of the State should be given employment; and
(v)                The confidence of the people needed to be restored.

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
 
C.P.I.
 
(i)                  Security forces should be restrained from committing excesses on innocent people; and
(ii)                Employment opportunities should be created for Kashmiri youth.
 
C.P.I. (M)
 
(i)
                  Kashmir problem was a political issue;
(ii)                People of Kashmir had been alienated from the mainstream over the last 10-12 years;
(iii)               Outright rejection of autonomy resolution had sent a wrong signal to the people of the State;
(iv)              Jammu & Kashmir should be given maximum autonomy;
(v)                The proposals for the division of the State on communal lines should be rejected at once;
(vi)              Excesses of security forces on the people should be checked; and
(vii)             The economy of the State needed to be revived.
 
Meeting with the Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir
 
35.       At the outset, the Chairman drew the attention of the Chief Minister towards the mushrooming of militant
organizations in the valley and continuing environment of fear and death. The Chairman pointed out that the Kashmir Valley
was experiencing unprecedented rise of terrorism particularly after Kargil crisis and asked the Chief Minister to share his
views and experiences and apprise the Study Group of the difficulties being faced by the State and also how the problem of
terrorism could be tackled.
 
36.       The Chief Minister informed the Study Group that the entire State of Jammu and Kashmir was fighting a proxy war
against Pakistan. The militancy in the State was being supported and entirely financed by Pakistan. When our troops were
fighting in Kargil and the concentration of entire nation was diverted towards that region there came unrestricted infiltration
from across the border from different sectors. The exact figures about intrusion were still not known to anybody. The border
area from Uri to Kupwara, Gurez, Kuthawa, Rajouri and Poonch was porous. Most of the militants crossed the border from
those sectors.
 
37.       The Chief Minister told that areas along the LoC were very rugged and difficult to guard physically. In spite of that
the security forces had been able to contain infiltrators. Now they had changed their strategy. Instead of crossing border
through these areas, they were now coming to Jammu and Kashmir via Indo-Nepal border. The area along the border of
Indo-Nepal was porous. The militants easily crept in U.P. and Bihar on their way to Jammu and Kashmir.  Militants were
getting help from certain people in Nepal also. Apart from Indo-Nepal border, militants were also coming through Indo-
Bangladesh border.  The Chief Minister insisted that infiltration must be stopped to contain terrorism in the region.
 
38.       The Chief Minister apprised the Study Group that militants went to the villages and asked for food and shelter and
when the villagers denied they faced their bullets. Villagers were forced to provide food and shelter to the militants. Once
the security forces came to know about such incidents they harassed the villagers terming them as the well wishers of the
militants. Such complaints were frequently coming in. In the past, some complaints of rape, molestation and killings of
innocent persons by security forces were received. The authorities examined those complaints and in some cases guilty
personnel had been punished.
 
39.       The Chief Minister told that the human rights activists had also compounded the problem manifold. They had made
the work of the security forces very difficult. Whenever any terrorist was killed in any encounter or there was any operation
by the security forces against the militants, the issue of human rights was raised by them.  Abductions for ransom had also
increased. There had been some cases where police personnel were also found involved in such kind of activities.
 
40.       The Chief Minister drew the attention of the Study Group to the rehabilitation of surrendered militants. He stated that
such militants were inducted into para-military forces. Recently it had come to the knowledge of authorities that about 200
such surrendered militants had gone back to Pakistan with arms and ammunition. It was suspected that those militants might
be part of a broader Pak ISI design and might be Pak army regulars. In future, he felt that the security agencies should keep a
track of such surrendered militants to find out whether they were Kashmiris or Pak army regulars in the guise of Kashmiri
militants.
 

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
41.       The Chief Minister informed that there had been no industrial development in the State. There were only two
industries established by the Government of India i.e. ITI and HMT. Both the units were lying  idle and not producing
anything. Tourism used to be the main source of employment for the Kashmiri people but since the outbreak of militancy
that source had also been dried up. Now due to income from the Vaishno Devi Shrine, State had been able to provide some
succour to the people. The State was also facing an acute power crisis and for many months there had been no power in
several parts of the State. The financial position of the State was also not good. The State was on the brink of bankruptcy.
Moreover, the 5
th Pay Commission had left the State coffers depleted. The Chief Minister stressed the need for an early plan
approval that was delayed even last year.
 
42.       The State was running on overdraft of about 750 crores of rupees. Some money was provided to the State to take up
the civil works and in the recent past about 90 crores of rupees had been spent on major roads. During United Front regime,
the then Finance Minister had promised to provide some financial assistance to meet the plan gap but unfortunately the
promise was never fulfilled. The Government of India had also promised to meet the security related expenditure of the State
as most of the areas had been declared disturbed areas under the Disturbed Areas Act. About 8000 crores of rupees were still
to be paid to the State. About 1600 crores of rupees had been paid so far. As the State of Jammu and Kashmir was fighting a
war for the country and continuously facing the brunt of the hostile neighbour, it was the duty of the entire nation to fulfil
the needs of the State.
 
43.       The people employed in the schools, colleges, and hospitals and in other offices, who had  left the valley in the wake
of militancy, were still being paid by the State. The new recruits had filled their vacancies since then. Consequently, the
State was paying double salaries for the same posts. Such expenditure should be termed and accepted by Government of
India as security related expenditure and be duly reimbursed.
 
44.       The Government of Jammu and Kashmir was asked by Government of India to raise additional battalions of police
for counter insurgency in the State. The State was promised additional financial assistance but the assistance never came. In
spite of that the State police had been doing its best to contain terrorism. The coordination between the security agencies was
better than earlier. There had been continuous shelling in the border areas due to which people in the border areas were
suffering and many human lives and livestock had been lost.
 
SRINAGAR (8 July  2000)
 
Meet
ing with GOC, 15 Corps
 
45.       The Study Group visited the Headquarters of 15 Corps at Srinagar on 8 July 2000.  The GOC, 15 Corps briefed the
Group about the situation obtaining in Jammu and Kashmir and the role being played by the Army in curbing militancy and
insurgency in the State.
 
46.       He stated that militancy started in 1988-89.  As the situation started deteriorating the Army was deployed in the State
in 1990.  Militancy reached its peak during 1992-94.  However, army operations brought the situation under control.  As a
result of that local  support to militancy began to vanish and recruitment of local boys in the militant groups came down. 
Then began forced recruitment and seeking of support for separatist movement through coercion.  This led to the
disillusionment of local militants.  Subsequently, foreign mercenaries were inducted in large numbers to sustain militancy. 
 
47.       Highlighting the role being played by Pakistan in fomenting large scale trouble in the State, the GOC told that
repeated failures of Pakistan to annex Jammu and Kashmir, led it to “Low cost/No cost” option of bleeding India by a
thousand cuts.  Then began a proxy war fully supported and financed by Pakistan.  The strategy adopted by Pakistan was to
train Kashmiri militants, provide arms and ammunition, and funds to them.  It also helped trained militants infiltrate into
India.  Besides, Pakistan was engaged in massive propaganda aimed at internationalization of Jammu & Kashmir issue.  Of
late, the aim was to project Jammu & Kashmir as the nuclear flash point.
 
48.       He informed that around 1500 militants belonging to different Tanzeems (militant organisations) were active at
present.  About 2400-2800 militants were under training in the camps located in PoK as well as Pakistan.  Similarly, 1700-
2300 militants were waiting across LoC to infiltrate.
 
49.       Giving details of the results of army operations in Jammu & Kashmir, the GOC informed that since 1990, 11205
terrorists had been  killed and 34360 weapons had been  recovered.  Besides, 2001 foreign terrorists had been killed till June
2000.

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
 
50.       Apprising the Study Group of the latest trends in militant activities, he stated that militants were engaging in stand
off attacks against security forces.  They were targeting sources/informers of security forces and people belonging to
minority communities.  Suicide squads were becoming active.  Women and children were being used as couriers.  This
apart, there had been enhancement in training activities  in the camps located near LoC.  The claims of militants’ success
were being exaggerated while vernacular press was being used to discredit the security forces.
 
51.       The Study Group was also apprised of the developmental projects being undertaken in various parts of the State by
the Army under “Operation Sadbhawana”.
 
JAMMU (8 JULY 2000)
 
52.       The Study Group visited Jammu from 8 to 9 July 2000.  It had interaction with the Government officials and
representatives of political parties and various other organisations on the situation prevailing in the State. 
 
Meeting with the Officials of Jammu Division
 
53.       The Divisional Commissioner, Jammu, briefed the Study Group about the situation.  He stated that after the Kargil
war was over, there had been an increase in infiltration on Line of Control i.e. through Rajouri and Poonch districts of
Jammu division.  Similarly, there had also been an increase in infiltration from the international border.  The infiltration
taking place was being facilitated by the residents of the villages located along the LoC as well as the international border. 
Those people acted as guides for the militants for pecuniary benefits.  He further stated that of late, Pakistan had once again
started recruiting local Kashmiri boys for militant activities in order to show to the world community that the ongoing
trouble in the State was the genuine movement of Kashmiris for self-determination and not a Pak sponsored terrorist
movement.
 
54.       Another worrisome thing was the recovery of a large number of arms and ammunition this year as compared to the
previous year.  The attempt from across the border was to push in more militants and arms.
 
55.       He informed that recently a new trend of opening up of a large number of Madarsas was noticed especially in
Poonch district.  Those Madarasas were being used by fundamentalist elements to indoctrinate young boys.  Young minds
were being preached hatred against the country. He stated that Pakistan was trying to create a communal wedge between the
Hindus and Muslims in the State.
 
56.       Touching upon the purpose behind the infiltration from across the international border, the Divisional Commissioner
stated that the aim was to (i) directly target Jammu (ii) target railway network (iii) reach Doda and Udhampur through
Jammu (iv) infiltrate Sikh militants in order to destabilise Punjab and (v) smuggle in arms for being used not only in the
State but also in different parts of the country.
 
57.       After apprising the Study Group of the prevailing situation, the Divisional Commissioner apprised it about the
measures needed to be taken to check the menace of militancy and cross- border terrorism.  He was of the view that
following measures were needed to be taken:
 
(i)
                  Efforts should be made to stop exfiltration and infiltration across the LoC as well as the international border;
(ii)                Surgical strikes should be carried out against the terrorist training camps located across the LoC;
(iii)               Leadership of the militants should be identified and neutralised;
(iv)              Terrorist hideouts located in the hinterland should be identified and busted; and
(v)                There was need for a stringent anti-terrorist law.
 
58.       Speaking on the role being played by Village Defence Committees, he stated that VDCs and SPOs had done an
excellent job in the Jammu division.  There was demand for more VDCs but lack of funds was a hurdle in the creation of
VDCs.  VDCs had helped in stopping large-scale migration of people as they were able to win the confidence of the people. 
He felt that the institutions of VDCs and SPOs needed to be strengthened.
 
59.       On the Human Rights record, the Divisional Commissioner was of the view that false propaganda being spread
against the security forces be checked.  He admitted that there were isolated cases of human rights violations.  He felt that
such violations could not be ignored and every effort must be made to protect people’s human rights. However, violations by

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
militants were not being reported whereas in case of security forces even a minor incident was being blown out of
proportion. He suggested that human rights violations by militants should be fully propagated and shown to the international
community in order to set the record straight.  Similarly, the punishment given to 300 odd security personnel by the
Government for human rights violations should also be highlighted to prove to the international community that the
Government of India was not turning a blind eye to such violations.  He suggested also that the Government should hire
world-class media experts to prepare a strategy to counter Pakistani propaganda on Kashmir.
 
60.       The Deputy Inspector-General, Jammu division also briefed the Study Group.  He also emphasised the need for an
anti-terrorist law to deal effectively with the menace of cross-border terrorism.  Besides, he drew the attention to the fact that
border fencing work on the 180 Km. Indo-Pak international border had not yet started.  He felt that border fencing would
help curb infiltration from across the border.  Referring to the role of VDCs, he appreciated the role being played by them in
Jammu division.  He advocated for strengthening of VDCs and creation of more VDCs as they were the best examples of
people’s participation in the fight against militancy.  He was of the view that VDCs needed to be set up in the villages
located along the international border.   
 
Presentation of  Representatives of Political Parties and other  Organisations at Jammu
 
61.       The Study Group interacted with the representatives of various political parties and some other
organisations/associations in Jammu on 8 July 2000.  The details of the submissions of the representatives who appeared
before the Study Group are as follows:
 
Congres
s (I)
 
(i)                  Autonomy move would have serious implications for the integrity of the nation. Therefore, autonomy resolution
should not be implemented;
(ii)                All political parties in the State should be taken into confidence before initiating any political measure to restore
normalcy to the trouble torn State;
(iii)               Pak shelling was killing people living in border areas.  Victims of the shelling should be given adequate
compensation for loss of life and property;
(iv)              Training camps for militants located across the LoC should be smashed;
(v)                Village Advisory Committees should be set up to advise the security forces in their counter insurgency operations;
(vi)              Unemployed youth of the State should be recruited into Army as well as civil Departments of the Government;
(vii)             Crops in border areas had been ruined due to shelling by Pakistan Army.  Farmers should be given adequate
compensation for the loss of their crops;
(viii)           Fencing of international border in Jammu should be taken up immediately even in the face of shelling from across
the border.  Besides, fencing should be done at the edge of the border instead of 5 to 6 Kms. away from the border;
(ix)              Efforts should be made for the safe return of Kashmiri migrants to the valley.  Till their return, the Government
should give them adequate relief;
(x)                Children of displaced Kashmiris should be provided separate quota in admissions into technical institutes across the
country;
(xi)              Migrants from border areas living in tented accommodations were facing a lot of hardships; and
(xii)             The monthly quota of foodgrains and cash relief provided to them should be raised.
 
National Conference
 
(i)                  Border migrants were going through a lot of sufferings.  They should be provided with adequate compensation. 
Central Government should release additional funds to the State Government for this purpose;
(ii)                Border migrants should also be treated like Kashmiri Pandits who migrated from the valley;
(iii)               Surrendered militants and rescued boys from the hands of militants should be given employment;
(iv)              Employment opportunities should be created in the State by setting up labour intensive industries;
(v)                Outstanding loans of the State should be waived off as was done in case of Punjab;
(vi)              The Centre should provide liberal financial assistance to the State;
(vii)             The potential of power generation available in the State should be tapped.  Central Government should offer
counter guarantee for power projects to lure investments in the power sector;
(viii)           Border fencing should be started at the earliest;
(ix)              Adequate compensation should be given to the farmers for loss of their livestock due to shelling from across the
border; and
                

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
(x) The Centre should provide timely funds to the State Government.
 
B.J.P.
 
(i)                  Regional autonomy move was fraught with the spectre of communal division of the State.  Interestingly, ISI had
also divided the State on communal lines;
(ii)                All the three regions of the State viz. Kashmir, Jammu and Laddakh should be treated equally;
(iii)               An effort was being made to confine the Hindus to Jammu;
(iv)              Demographic pattern of Jammu was being sought to be altered by settling Muslims in Jammu;
(v)                Sikhs living in the valley were also being driven out;
(vi)              The real issue was militancy not autonomy;
(vii)             Kashmiri Pandits should be sent back to their ancestral homes in the valley;
(viii)           People were more concerned with their security and least interested in the autonomy;
(ix)              Representatives of Jammu and Laddakh should also be invited whenever talks were held with Hurriyat Conference;
(x)                Separate regional councils for each of the three regions of the State should be created and statutory powers be
vested in them;
(xi)              Civil and human rights of displaced Kashmiri Pandits were being overlooked; and
(xii)             Security cover to political workers was being provided discriminately.
 
B.S.P.
 
(i)                  The root cause of militancy in the State was the unfair nature of elections and the imposition of Governments from
the top;
(ii)                Militancy could not be got rid of by autonomy; and
(iii)               The demand for autonomy was nothing but a move towards secession.
 
Nationalist Congress Party
 
(i)                  State administration had been totally communalised by the present Government;
(ii)                Jammu had not only borne the brunt of militancy but also had been subjected to a lot of hardships by the
Administration; and
(iii)               Jammu & Kashmir was vital to the integrity and security of the country.
 
Bar Association, Jammu
 
(i)                  Security forces should be given free hand to deal with the militancy;
(ii)                People living in border and hilly areas should be imparted with military training for their self-defence.  Arms should
also be provided to the people;
(iii)               Regional autonomy report sought to divide State on communal lines;
(iv)              If autonomy was granted to the State as per the Autonomy Committee Reports, we would demand trifurcation of
Jammu and Kashmir wherein Jammu and Kashmir would be two new States and Laddakh would get the status of
Union Territory; and
(v)                Dogri language should be included in the 8th Schedule to the Constitution.
 
Vishwa Hindu Parishad
 
(i)                  The rejection of autonomy resolution by the Union Cabinet was an appreciable step;
(ii)                Regional autonomy would divide the State on communal lines;
(iii)               The best option was to trifurcate the State.  Jammu should be given statehood and Laddakh be given Union
Territory status;
(iv)              Kashmir should also be made a separate State with a safety zone for Kashmiri Pandits;
(v)                Article 370 should be immediately scrapped; and
(vi)              Muslims were being settled in Jammu in order to effect demographic changes in the region.
 
Sikh Community
 
(i)                  Sikhs who migrated from PoK to Jammu had not been given property rights;

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
(ii)                Sikhs were the worst sufferer in Jammu & Kashmir;
(iii)               No judicial inquiry was ordered to probe the massacre of Sikhs in Chittisinghpora. A judicial inquiry should be
conducted to probe Chittisinghpora massacre;
(iv)              Sikhs were feeling insecure in the valley and there were some cases of migration to Jammu and other places;
(v)                National Human Rights Commission had recommended for the rehabilitation of Sikhs living in Jammu & Kashmir
who migrated from PoK;
(vi)              No relief was being extended to the Sikhs who migrated from PoK on the pretext that they were the citizens of India
because PoK was an Indian territory.  Hence no refugee status to them. Same was the case with Kashmiri Pandits.
They were also refugees in their own country but were being provided with  relief by the State Government.  Then
why the Sikhs were being discriminated against? and
(vii)             Security forces should be rotated regularly so that units deployed for counter insurgency operations did not develop
any vested interests.
 
JAMMU ( 9 JULY 2000)
 
62.       The Study Group interacted with the representatives of displaced Kashmiris and people displaced from the border
areas of Jammu on 9 July 2000 in Jammu. The details of the submissions of the representatives who appeared before the
Study Group are as given below:
 
Representatives of Displaced Kashmiris
 
(i)                  The plight of displaced Kashmiris was eleven years old and they were yet to be rehabilitated;
(ii)                Conducive atmosphere had not been created by the Government for the safe return of Kashmiri migrants to their
homes;
(iii)               The population of Kashmiri Pandits was declining and they were in danger of being extinct;
(iv)              Kashmiri Pandits should be permanently rehabilitated in the valley in an exclusive security zone;
(v)                Not a single displaced Kashmiri Pandit had been recruited into Government service whereas 60,000 posts were
created in last 4 years;
(vi)              Political aspirations of Kashmiri Pandits must be addressed;
(vii)             A separate zone with Union Territory status should be carved out of the valley for Kashmiri Pandits.  Areas north
and east of Jhelum river were the best places for such a zone;
(viii)           There should be quadripartite division of the State whereby Jammu and Kashmir would be two separate States,
Laddakh would be a Union Territory and another Union Territory be created for Kashmiri Pandits in Kashmir itself;
(ix)              A Commission headed by a Supreme Court Judge to look into the problems of displaced Kashmiris should be set
up; and
(x)        Displaced Kashmiris wanted a compact, comprehensive and homogenous rehabilitation in the valley with full
constitutional safeguards.
 
Representatives of Border Migrants
 
(i)                  More than 12000 families had been displaced from the border villages of Jammu as a result of constant shelling by
Pakistan Army since June 2000.  Only 2000 odd families had been provided tented accommodation by the State
Government;
(ii)
                An individual was being provided with Rs.200 cash, 7 Kg. flour, 2 Kg. rice and 10 litre kerosene oil per month. 
The quantity of flour, rice and kerosene should be raised to 15 Kg., 10 Kg. and 15 litres, respectively;
(iii)               A safe residential zone should be created near the border villages;
(iv)              Children belonging to border villages should be provided reservation in academic institutions;
(v)                Better tents should be provided to the migrants;
(vi)              More than 16000 houses of the Pandits had been burnt down in the valley. Similarly, 87 religious places of the
Pandits had been either burnt or demolished;
(vii)             Loans should be granted to the Kashmiri Pandits against their properties left deserted in the valley;
(viii)           The Kashmiri Pandits should be called ‘displaced’ instead of being called ‘migrants’;
(ix)              Funds allotted by the Central Government to the State Government for the welfare of displaced Kashmiris were
being misutilised;
(x)                Displaced employees of the State Government were not being given leave encashment;
(xi)              Displaced employees had been superseded; and
(xii)             Area located in the strike zone of Pakistan shelling should be given the status of backward areas.

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
 
Visit to a Camp of Displaced Kashmiris in Jammu
 
63.       The Study Group visited a camp of displaced Kashmiris located at Purkhoo in Jammu on 9 July 2000.  The
inhabitants of the camp apprised the Study Group of their problems.  They apprised the Study Group that they were living in
very miserable conditions.  The state of civic amenities in the camp was very poor.  The dwelling units provided to them
were too small to accommodate a family of 4-6 persons. There was acute shortage of electricity and drinking water. 
Besides, they were finding it very difficult to run their families out of the relief provided by the Government.  Lack of
employment opportunities was also a big problem. The education of the children was getting affected and the career of
educated youth was in jeopardy because of the prevailing uncertainty. They demanded an early solution to their problems. 
Frustration and anger was quite visible  amongst  the people during the visit.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
64.       On the basis of the Study Tour Note prepared by the Study Group which visited Jammu & Kashmir to assess the
problems of cross-border terrorism and insurgency, the Committee has formulated its
observations/conclusions/recommendations which are given in the following paragraphs :
65.       The Committee notes the fact that a proxy war is being waged in Jammu & Kashmir at the behest of a neighbouring
country.  Foreign mercenaries are being pushed into the valley to engineer large-scale terrorist activities.  Recovery of huge
cache of arms and ammunition, killings of hundreds of innocent people and high rate of causalities of the security forces 
and detention of foreign mercenaries are proofs enough to substantiate the fact that it is, more than anything else, a proxy
war being waged on the Indian soil by Pakistan.  Pakistan is not only aiding, abetting and financing terrorist activities in
Jammu & Kashmir but is also pushing in well equipped and trained mercenaries for the cause of so-called Jehad against
India.   The misadventure of Pakistan in Kargil is the clear manifestation of its nefarious designs on Jammu & Kashmir. 
65.1     The Committee, therefore, has come to the conclusion that a more concerted, well thought out and well planned
strategy should be chalked out to counter the ill designs of Pakistan aimed at destabilising and disintegrating India.
66.       One such attempt to destablise India was made in the form of large scale armed intrusion from across the Line of
Control (LoC) in Kargil during 1999.  The intrusion in Kargil led to the weakening of internal security grid of the security
forces in the entire State of Jammu & Kashmir as forces had to be withdrawn and deployed along the border to repulse
Pakistani attack.  The weakening of security grid  resulted into the terrorists and mercenaries managing to get foothold once
again.  The recent step-up in the strikes by the militants on security installations and innocent people were largely due to the
loosened grip of the security forces.  However, the Committee was given to understand that security forces were trying hard
to restore the grid.
66.1     The Committee notes the efforts being made to restore the security grid and feels that no stone should be left
unturned to strengthen the grip of the security forces on the militants.  The restoration and improvement  of the security grid
in the quickest possible time will deal a deathblow to the ever-rearing head of militancy in the State.
67.       Massive intrusion in Kargil in particular and the unabated growth of militancy in general have proved that
management of Indian border along LoC is not adequate enough to  check unstopped exfiltration and infiltration.  The
porosity of India’s international border with Pakistan and Line of Control is providing safe passage to the militants.  Large
scale exfiltration of Kashmiri youth for undergoing training at the terrorist training camps located across the border and
infiltration of trained and armed militants into Jammu and Kashmir was taking place.  Huge quantity of arms and
ammunition is dumped near the LoC and international border for the use of militants and mercenaries.  All this calls for
better border management on the LoC and the international border.  However, due to extensive deployment of paramilitary
forces especially Border Security Force for internal security duties, it  has  not been possible to spare adequate forces to man
LoC and international border.
67.1     The Committee is of the view that effective border management is key to the curbing of exfiltration and infiltration
across LoC and international border with Pakistan.  For that to happen, adequate force level is needed to be maintained to
plug the exfiltration and infiltration routes along the border.  The Committee understands the necessity for deploying
security forces extensively for maintenance of internal security in Jammu & Kashmir.  But at the same time, it is of the
considered view that unless exfiltration and infiltration is effectively checked, the problems of cross border terrorism and
proxy war cannot be overcome.  Moreover, so long as country’s borders remain porous, there cannot be a foolproof internal
security.  It is, therefore, essential to relieve as many BSF battalions as possible of their internal security duties so that they
are pressed into their primary responsibility i.e. guarding of country’s borders.  Army detachments are also guarding the
highway from  Srinagar to Laddakh.  They need  to be  relieved  of such duties.  The task of guarding the highway and the

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
bridges   located along it  should be  entrusted  to the para military forces.
67.2     Apart from effective border management, strengthening of intelligence network in and around border areas is also
the need of the hour.  Since borders play a crucial role in exfiltration and infiltration of militants and dumping of arms and
ammunition near them, it is imperative to strengthen the intelligence network in border areas.  Vital intelligence inputs could
go a long way in helping security forces to check militant activities.  It  could also  go a long way in checking the Kargil
type infiltration.
68.       In the post-Kargil era, there has been increase in the number of attacks on security forces and their installations. 
Induction of ‘Fidayeen’ i.e. suicide squads into militant organisations had also led to the increase in the frequency of such
attacks.  The ratio of casualties of security personnel against the militants killed had also increased.  Such a trend has a direct
bearing on the morale of the forces especially when militants are resorting to frontal attacks on the camps and convoys of
security forces.  A slight fluctuation in the morale of the forces helps the militants and mercenaries to gain an upper hand
over them.
68.1     Keeping this in view, the Committee feels that there is need for further tightening of security cover for the camps of
security forces.  Effective deterrents are needed to see that attacks on camps of security forces are minimised. Basic
facilities  like lighting etc. and other infrastructure  should be provided to such camps.
69.       The decade long militancy in Jammu & Kashmir led to the weakening of police system.  However, in the recent past,
there has been revival of police system in the State.  Still, there is scope for improvement and further strengthening.  The
police of the State needs to be equipped with sophisticated arms and equipment as it was yet to achieve desirable level of
manpower, transport, firearms and communication requirements.  The Committee is made to understand that a broad
perspective plan for strengthening and modernisation of Jammu & Kashmir police including the revamp of intelligence
gathering machinery has been sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs by the State Government.
69.1     The Committee recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should extend all possible assistance to the Government
of Jammu & Kashmir in its efforts to prop up an effective, reliable and efficient police system in the State.
70.         The Committee has been given to understand by the State Government authorities  that after the lapse of Terrorist
and Disruptive Activities Act (TADA), law enforcement agencies are finding it extremely difficult to cope with the
challenges being thrown up by the terrorists.  The absence of an anti-terrorist law is proving to be a major handicap for the
police.  In spite of committing  heinous crimes, terrorists go scot free as the existing laws fall short of leading to their
conviction.
70.1     Keeping this in view, the Committee is of the view that in order to enable the police to curb the activities of
terrorists, a suitable law needs to be enacted with adequate in-built safeguards to prevent misuse as had happended in the
past in case of TADA.  
71.       The role of Village Defence Committees (VDCs) and Special Police Officers (SPOs) has also drawn the attention of
the Committee.  During the visit of the Study Group to Jammu and Kashmir, it was given to understand that both VDCs and 
SPOs were playing an important role in combating terrorism especially in the Jammu division.  People living in remote
villages have shown keen interest in setting up such committees.  However, the lack of funds is hampering the efforts of the
State Government to further strengthen VDCs.  It was also impressed upon the Study Group that by providing better
weapons and communication equipment, VDCs could be made even more effective.
71.1     The Committee, having been apprised of the role being played by Village Defence Committees (VDCs),
recommends that more funds should be earmarked for the strengthening of VDCs.  It further recommends that efforts should
be made to set up such committees in the Kashmir division also.
72.       Recent massacres of local Sikhs and migrant labourers from other parts of the   country   have   exposed   the 
vulnerability    of  minorities  living in the State.  These massacres have also proved the fact that they were part of a well-
planned strategy to attack ‘soft targets’ in order to create fear psychosis among minorities.  It also reveals the contours of a
sinister game plan on the part of terrorists to engineer  mass exodus of minorities from the State.
72.1     In this regard, the Committee notes the steps taken by the State Government to tighten the security grid around the
villages  inhabited by the minorities especially Sikhs.  It, however, feels that a comprehensive exercise should be undertaken
to identify hitherto unattacked and potential soft targets so that preemptive measures could be taken to deter any attack on
them by the militants.  Efforts should also be made to set up Village Defence Committees (VDCs) in such villages.
73.       In a situation like the one obtaining in Jammu & Kashmir where innocent people are caught between the terrorists on
the one end and the security forces on the other, the violations of human rights  can take place.  However, any violation of
such rights by security forces is hyped and over-publicized which  leads to the widening of  the gulf between the people and
the State.  It is so, primarily because of the fact that State which is meant for the welfare of the people, is perceived  to be

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
working against its very own people.  And, in the process, a common man feels isolated and alienated from the mainstream. 
In sharp contrast to this, the human rights’ abuses by the militants get overlooked for different reasons.  The net result of all
this is that the State is perceived as an enemy of the people.  It becomes all the more glaring when it receives open support of
the propaganda machinery of a hostile neighbour.
73.1     The Committee notes the efforts being made to set the human rights record straight by the Government.  It, however,
feels that security forces should win the confidence of the people by exercising utmost restraint while launching search and
combing operations to nab the militants.  Security forces should remember that in their battle against militants, they will not
be able to have the last laugh until they enjoy the support of the local people.
73.2     At the same time, the human rights violations committed by the militants and the mercenaries should also not be
allowed to get overlooked.   People in general  and   international community   should  be kept abreast of such violations
through print and electronic media.  The very fact that acts of violations by militants do not receive due attention of human
rights bodies has a very demoralising impact on the psyche of the security personnel.  Human rights bodies, national as well
as international, must realise the fact that in a situation like this, human rights of the security forces as well as of the people
being killed and harassed by the militants are also at stake.  As a matter of fact, it is not the loss of any particular individual
or group or community rather it is a loss of everyone.  In other words, the entire nation is at a loss.
74.       The Committee is given to understand that there are three types of migrants in Jammu & Kashmir.
(i)         One is the group of migrants who had come in the wake of armed attack in 1948;
(ii)        The second group is the Kashmiri Pandits who have been given some help in Jammu region; and
(iii)       The third group is the border migrants who had to flee the borders because of constant firing by the Pakistan
rangers and Pakistan Army on international border running along Jammu Division.
74.1     There is growing discontent among these three groups of migrants  who continue  to reel under the unabated spate of
terrorism.  These people have been rendered  homeless as well as jobless due to the ongoing violence in the State.  Their
agony is further compounded  by the fact that the Government, on the one hand, is rehabilitating the surrendered  militants
by giving them Government jobs  while on the other nothing has been done to provide them employment. This has forced
them to believe  that it is better to be a militant for a while and then surrender so that they can also get Government jobs. 
Some of these unemployed migrants are also falling into the ISI’s trap and are now on the pay rolls of it.
74.2     The ten year long strife in Jammu & Kashmir has taken a very heavy toll on the people of the State.  Thousands have
lost their lives and lakhs have been displaced due to the ongoing bloodshed.  The agony of those who have been uprooted
from their native places is insurmountable.  Uncertainty dogs these people who were forced to flee their homes leaving
behind everything they had inherited from their ancestors.  Today, their ordeal continues with no end in sight.  These
displaced people better  known as ‘Kashmiri migrants’ are having to live in miserable conditions in different parts of the
country.  They are refugees not only in their own State but in their own country as well.
74.3     The Committee expresses its deepest sense of sorrow on the seemingly unending plight of displaced Kashmiris.  It is
told that an action plan has been sent by the State Government to the Union Government for the return of displaced
Kashmiris  to the valley.  The Committee is of the view that sincere efforts should be made to facilitate smooth and safe
return of displaced people to their native places.  However, this could be possible only when an atmosphere of peace and
security is created in the valley and displaced people are convinced of their safe return.  Meanwhile, all possible help should
be extended to them to ensure a respectable and dignified standard of living for them.  Special care needs to be given to the
educational requirements of the children and youth so that they are not left behind in pursuit of their chosen careers.  It
should also be ensured that wards of displaced people have no difficulties in getting admission into the educational
institutions located in different parts of the country.
75.       Besides the people displaced from the valley, the plight of thousands of people displaced from the border areas of
Jammu division situated along the international border also deserves to be taken care of.  These people living in the villages
located near the international border have had to bear the brunt of Pakistani  shelling.  They have also gone through the
devastation caused during three Indo-Pak wars.  During the Kargil conflict, they came under direct attack of Pakistani guns
which led to the loss of livestock and human lives and damage to standing crops and property.  Constant threat to their lives
and property forced them to migrate to safer places where they are put up in make shift tented accommodation.
75.1     The Committee sympathises with the people displaced from the border villages of Jammu division and hopes that
solution to their problems will soon be found by the State Government.  It recommends that Government should come
forward with a long term rehabilitation programme to put an end to the miseries of the affected people.  The programme
should inter alia address  their various problems such as alternative accommodation, adequate compensation for the loss of
crop and livestock, enhanced ration, creation of employment opportunities, etc.
76.       Another human suffering which needs attention is the misery of Sikhs who migrated from Pakistan Occupied

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
Kashmir (PoK) to Jammu & Kashmir.  The irony of their fate is that the Government does not consider them refugees.  The
Government’s stand is based on the premise that since PoK is a part of Jammu & Kashmir,  people living there are also
residents of Jammu & Kashmir and hence cannot be accorded the status of refugee within their own State.  This stand of the
Government deprives these migrant Sikhs of the benefits which accrue to the people who have migrated from the valley to
Jammu division.
76.1     The Committee is of the considered view that these migrant Sikhs should not be left to fend for themselves.  They
crossed over  to  the Indian  side of LoC with  high hopes and a sense of belonging.  It is, therefore, incumbent upon the
Government to extend a  helping  hand   to   them in their hour of crisis.  Moreover, when a set of benefits are accruing to
the people displaced from Kashmir, it defies the logic of comprehension as to why they should not be extended to the people
displaced from PoK.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Government should favourably consider the case of
Sikhs who have migrated from PoK and extend all the benefits to them which are available to the displaced Kashmiris.
77.       As a result of the ongoing violence, the people of the State have lost their traditional means of livelihood.  A large
number of uneducated and unemployed youth are falling prey to the militancy.  The dearth  of adequate educational and 
vocational institutions  in the State is one of the causes for growing number of uneducated youth.  The current situation calls
for opening up of sufficient number of educational and vocational institutions so that human resource of the State could be
nurtured.
77.1     The  Committee is, therefore, of the view that special attention should be paid to the setting up of adequate  number
of educational and vocational institutions.  Such a step will  help  the State not only to overcome the scourge of illiteracy but
will also enable the youth to be proficient in various self-employment  trades.  Besides, the Government should also make
efforts to generate employment opportunities by setting up small and medium industrial establishments and also by reviving
cottage industries in the State.
 78.      It has been over ten years ever since Jammu & Kashmir is in the grip of a turmoil.  The resources meant for
developmental activities had to be diverted to tackle militancy.  It goes without saying that developmental activities have
taken a backseat.  But with the rise in the scale of militancy, the funds earmarked for security related heads are also proving
to be inadequate.  As things stand today, there is lack of funds on both  fronts.  Though, Union Government has been
meeting the funds requirements of the State Government for both development as well as security related activities, there is
always a crunch situation as State’s own sources of income generation have suffered badly due to ongoing strife.  The
State’s expenditure for maintenance of law and order is met from the funds provided by the Union Government as “Security
Related Expenditure” (SRE).  In view of the special circumstances being faced by Jammu & Kashmir, the State Government
has been demanding that the facility of advance payment under this head should be extended to it so that it does not have to
run on overdrafts which accrue high rate of interest.  In regard to the plan allocation, the delay in approval was a major
stumbling block.  This delay in release of funds causes many difficulties for the State.  Because of a very short work season,
the delayed arrival of funds means that a large chunk of it remains unutilised.
78.1     The Committee understands the kind of difficulties being faced by Jammu & Kashmir and feels that keeping in view
its special circumstances, an out of the way mechanism should be found to ensure timely allocation and speedy release of
requisite funds so that the very purpose behind the desired funds does not get defeated. 
 79.      Central para-military forces   are  playing a crucial role in the fight against   militancy.  Indo-Tibetan   Border  Police
(ITBP) is one of these forces.  It has been assigned the task of guarding Banihal tunnel on Jammu-Srinagar national
highway.  This tunnel is a vital link between Jammu and Srinagar and has been in the eye of militants for long.  ITBP has
been doing commendable work by keeping round the clock vigil on the tunnel.  In order to maintain foolproof security of the
tunnel, ITBP requires sophisticated surveillance equipment for keeping watch on the movement of traffic passing through it.
79.1     The Committee appreciates the role being played by ITBP in guarding the Banihal tunnel and recommends that its
requirement for installation of State-of-the-art surveillance equipment in the tunnel should be accorded highest priority by
the Government .
80.       Kargil has borne the brunt of Pakistan’s misadventure of altering the Line of Control (LoC).  The exchange of
gunfire between Pakistani and Indian army, left the houses shattered, livestock dead and people homeless.  In the post-
conflict period, the wounds of the affected people seem to have not been assuaged by the Government.  The compensation
for the loss of livestock amounting to Rs.505 lakh has not yet been paid by the Central Government.  This apart, the state of
telecommunication and electricity services is in total disarray.
80.1     The Committee recommends that monetary compensation due to the people of Kargil for their losses during the
conflict with Pakistan, should be released without any further delay.  Besides, the electricity and telecommunication
requirements of the region should be looked after by the Government.  The operationalisation of the airport being built in
Kargil should be expedited so as to bring the region on the tourism map of the country.  The development of the region as a

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
tourist destination could provide the people of Kargil better means of livelihood.  
 
________________________________________________________________________
 
MINUTES
________________________________________________________________________
 
 
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 17 May 2000 in Committee Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hiphei
3.         Shri Surendra  Kumar Singh
4.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam   
5.
            Shri Drupad Borgohain
6.            Shri Kuldip Nayyar
 
            LOK SABHA
           
7.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari                                   
8.         Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi 
9.          Shri Anadi Sahu                
10.       Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri                
11.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra    
12.
        Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt     
13.        Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
14.        Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel
15.       Shri Samar Choudhury
16.
        Shri Subodh Roy
17.        Shri Beni Prasad Verma
18.        Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
19.        Shri Arun Kumar
20.        Shri Shriniwas Patil
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                  *                                  *         
                                                                                                                                                         
2.1       *                                  *                                  *
_____________________________________________________________________

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
***Relates to other matters.
3.         Thereafter the Committee decided to visit J&K, subject to Hon’ble Chairman’s permission, tentatively, in the gap
between the first and the second rounds of its proposed sittings i.e. between 2 and 12 June, 2000, to have a first hand
assessment of the problem of terrorism in that State, as part of its detailed study of the subject.
3.1       The Committee, accordingly, authorised its Chairman to obtain permission of Hon’ble Chairman to undertake the
proposed visit.
4.         *                                              *                                                          *
5.         *                                              *                                                          *
6.         *                                              *                                                          *
7.      The  Committee    then     adjourned   at  10.45 A.M.   to   meet   again at 3.00 P.M. on Monday,
29th May, 2000.
 
______________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
 
XXII
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday,  13 June 2000, in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground   Floor, Parliament
House Annexe,  New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
3.         Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
4.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
5.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar
 
LOK SABHA
 
6.         Shri Manabendra Shah
7.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
8.         Shri Vinay Katiyar
9.         Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
10.       Shri Anadi Sahu
11.       Maj.Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri
12.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
13.       Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
14.       Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
15.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
16.       Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi
17.       Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel
18.       Shri M.O.H.Farook
19.       Shri Samar Choudhury
20.       Dr. S. Venugopalachari
21.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
 
 

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Chairman informed the Committee about the communication received from the Ministry of Home Affairs
conveying that the Jammu & Kashmir Government had suggested the rescheduling of the proposed study visit of the
Committee to that State, to the first week of July, 2000 due to commencement of the Summer Session of Legislative
Assembly and observance of certain holidays.
3.         The Committee after some deliberations decided to visit J&K from 6 to 9 July, 2000.  The Committee, for that
purpose authorised its Chairman to constitute a Study Group.
4.         *                                                          *                                              *
4.1       *                                                          *                                              *
5.         *                                                          *                                              *
5.1       *                                                          *                                              *
6.         *                                                          *                                              *
7.         *                                                          *                                              *
7.1
        *                                                          *                                              *
7.2       *                                                          *                                              *
7.3       *                                                          *                                              *
8.         *                                                          *                                              *
9.         *                                                          *                                              *
9.1       *                                                          *                                              *
9.2       *                                                          *                                              *
10.       A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11.       The Committee   then adjourned at 5.00 P.M to meet again at 11.00 A.M on Wednesday, 14  June, 2000.
 
_____________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
XXXVI
THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 3 October 2000, in Room No. 63, First  Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                  Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
3.                  Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
4.                  Shri K.M. Saifullah

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
5.                  Shri C.M. Ibrahim
6.                  Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
7.                  Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
8.                  Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
9.                  Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
 
LOK SABHA
 
10.              Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
11.              Shri Vinay Katiyar
12.              Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
13.              Maj.Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri
14.              Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
15.              Shri Rajen Gohain
16.              Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
17.              Shri Iqbal Ahamed Saradgi
18.              Shri Dahyabhai  V. Patel
19.              Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
20.              Shri P.H. Pandian
21.              Shri Shriniwas Patil
22.              Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                              *                                              *
2.1       *                                              *                                              *
____________________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
2.2       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
2.3       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
2.4       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
2.5       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
3.         Thereafter, the Chairman invited the observations of the Members on the Study Note of the Study Group which
visited Jammu & Kashmir.  He stated that the Study Note contained the factual information based on the Group’s interaction
with officials of the State Government, officials of CPMFs and Army and representatives of various political parties and
organisations.
 
3.1       He then observed that he entirely agreed with the Government’s assessment that it was not just terrorism rather a sort
of proxy war being waged against India.  A huge number of killings of civilians and militants and a high rate of casualties of
the security forces, substantiated that assessment.  In the last two and a half years, there was a step-up in the killings.  A
large number of arms and ammunition had been recovered.  The rise in militant activities could partly be attributed to certain
logistical arrangements made during the Kargil war.  Another assessment was that the leadership of the militants was now
falling into the hands of foreign mercenaries.  He further stated that the issue of autonomy also came up for discussion
during the visit.  Though it was not within the ambit of the Study Group.
 
3.2       Thereafter, the Chairman requested the Members to suggest improvements, amendments, additions or alternations, if
any, so that the Report of the Committee could be prepared on those lines.
 

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
3.3       One of the Members stated that he fully agreed with the observations of the Chair and proposed that Committee
should also endorse them.  Other Members present consented to the proposal.
 
3.4       One Member was of the view that security forces should not be allowed to be maligned as it affected their morale. 
Therefore, certain unnecessary comments about the security forces needed to be ignored.  Secondly, human rights violations
by the militants should be properly highlighted.
 
3.5       After the observations of the Members were over, the Chairman in his concluding remarks stated that he had taken
note of the views of the Members and the same would be reflected in the Report of the Committee.
 
4.         A verbatim of the proceedings was kept.
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 11.40 A.M.
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
XVI
SIXTEENTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 28 May, 2001 in Committee  Room ‘A’,  Ground  Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
4.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
5.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
6.         Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri Samar Chaudhary
8.         Shri M.O.H. Farook
9.         Shri Vijay Goel
10.       Shri Arun Kumar
11.        Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
12.       Shri P.H. Pandian
13.       Shri Subodh Roy
14.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
15.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
16.       Shri Anadi Sahu
17.       Shri Iqbal  Ahmed Saradgi
18.       Shri Manabendra Shah
19.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
20.       Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma
21.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
22.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
23.       Shri Harin Pathak
24.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                  *                                  *
____________________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
 
2.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
2.2       Thereafter, he touched upon Committee’s Study Tour Report on Cross-border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu
and Kashmir based on Study Group’s visit   to that   State in July 2000.  He stated that the Committee would supplement this
Study Tour Report by another Report on the basis of developments   that had unfolded in the State after the visit of the Study
Group.
3.         *                                                          *                                                          *
3.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
3.2       *                                                          *                                                          *
4.         *                                                          *                                                          *
4.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
5.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
5.1.      *                                                          *                                                          *
5.1.1    *                                                          *                                                          *
5.2.      *                                                          *                                                          *
5.2.1    *                                                          *                                                          *
5.2.2    *                                                          *                                                          *
5.3       *                                                          *                                                          *
5.3.1    *                                                          *                                                          *
 
5.4       *                                                          *                                                          *
5.5       *                                                          *                                                          *
6.         *                                                          *                                                          *
7.         The Committee, thereafter, took up consideration of the draft Report on Cross-border Terrorism and Insurgency in
Jammu and Kashmir and adopted the same with minor changes.   The Committee decided to forward the Report to the
Ministry of Home Affairs without   presenting the same to the Parliament.
8.         The Chairman requested the Members to forward their suggestions/amendments on both the Reports, in case they felt
necessary.
9.         *                                  *                                  *
(The representatives of the Ministry withdrew)
10.       The Committee adjourned at 3:45 P.M. to   meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 29 May 2001.
 

75th report on Department-related parliamentary standing
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/75threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:52]
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
 
ANNEXURE
 
ANNEXURE –I
 
A  STUDY GROUP CONSISTING OF MEMBERS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS WHO
VISITED THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukerjee, Chairman
2.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
3.         Shri Kuldip Nayyar
4.         Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
5.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
6.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
7.         Shri Anadi Sahu
8.         Shri Vaidya Vishnu Dutt
9.         Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
10.       Shri Subodh Roy
11.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
12.       Shri Arun Kumar
13.       Shri P.H. Pandian
14.       Shri Shriniwas Patil
15.       Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
16.       Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
17.       Shri Samar Choudhury
 
E.mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in
Visit:http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
§ Nominated w.e.f. 15 March, 2000 vice Shri Akhilesh Das.
j Nominated w.e.f. 28 February, 2000.
o Re-nominated w.e.f. 5 May, 2000.
% Nominated w.e.f. 29May , 2000.
*Ceased to be member  w.e.f.  7  November,  2000 on being appointed as a Minister.
 
(i)