PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE WORKING OF THE CENTRAL BUREAU OF 
INVESTIGATION (C.B.I.) AND THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE 
COMMISSION (C.V.C.) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 17ni MARCH, 1994) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 17Tn MARCH, 1994) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 1994/P HALGUNA , 1915 (SAKA) 

1. Composition of the Committee. 
n. Introduction . . . . . . . 
Report on the working of C.B.I. 
Report on the working of C.V.C .. 
v. Appendix 
CONTENTS 
·• Minutes of the meetings of the Committee . 
• • • • • • 0 0 • • 0 
PAOES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-7 
7-12 
13-19 

• 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
-1. Shri M.M. Jacob - Chairman 
A SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
' 4. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
·_5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Sbri Gaya Singh 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
_*8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri Rafique AJam 
10. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
11. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
12. Shri Krishan La! Sharma 
13. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
14. Shri Subramanian Swamy 
,15. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
SABHA 
16. Dr. C. Silvera 
17. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
18. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
:19. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
20. Prof. M. Kamson 
21. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
22. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
23. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
'24. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
25. Kum. Mamata Banerjee 
-26. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
27. Shri Dhanuskodi Athithan 
•J!l--',.··"''. Dr. Girija Vyas 
29. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
30. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
31. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
32. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
Shr~ Ram Singh 
34. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
35. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
.,._._~_._Ju. Shri Yinaya Katyar · 
~~t\e<'<ominatcd un the 30th August , 1993 in the vacancy caused by the retirement of Shri Samar Mukherjee from the 
bcrship of Rajya Sabha on lhe 9th July. 1993. 
(i) 

. 
' 
37. Mahant A bedya Nath 
38. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
39. Shri Rabi Ray 
40. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
41. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
42. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
43. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
44. Shri Bhubaneshw ar Prasad Mehta 
45. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
, 
(ii) 
'. 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Depar tment-re lated Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf , do hereb y 
t this Seventh Report of the Committ ee on the working of the Central Bureau of 
... _ ... , .. r•a,.tion (C.B.I. ) and the Central Vigilance Commission (C. V.C. ). These organisations fall 
r the administrative jurisdiction of Department of Personnel & Training in the Ministry of 
nel , Public Grievances & Pensions. 
2. The Committee held 5 sittings in all. 
3. The decision to examine the working of the CBI & eve was taken at the first meeting of 
Committee held on the 27th May , 1993. 
4. The Committee heard the views of the Central Vigilance Commissioner and the 
tative of the Department of Personnel & Training and the Central Vigilance Commission 
its meeting held on the 5th July , 1993. 
5. As its meeting held on the 21st July , 1993, the Committee heard the views of the 
, Central Bureau of Investigation and the representatives of the Department of Personnel 
Training and the Central Bureau of Investigation. 
6. The Committee discussed the working of these two organisations, in detail , at jrs meeting 
held on the 4th October, 1993. 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 
l2th January, 1994. 
8. The Committee expresses its appreciation for the concerned officials of the CBI, eve and 
tlte Department of Personnel & Training for their cooperatio 'n and furnishing the material and 
required by the Committee. 
New lJELHl; 
January 12, 1994 
(iii) 
M.M. JACOB 
Clu:lirman 
Depanment-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 

REPORT 
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
Role and Responsibili ty 
9 The CBI came into being in the year 1941 during the war period, at Lahore. At the time 
of it~ inception, irs role and responsibilities were mainly circumscribed to investigate offences of 
bribery and corruption connected with the transactions relating to War and Supply Department, 
Governmem of India. Over the years, with the changing crime pattern cutting across the 
international boundaries, the character of the Central Bureau of Investigation ll~S undergone a 
sea-change cove ring varied areas, such as vigilance and anti-corruption, conventional crime:;, 
banking and economic offences, etc. Besides , investigation of crimes, the CBI is also entrusted 
with the task of collection of information relating to corruption and certain specialised types of 
crimes having inter-state or international ramifications. 
10. The legal basi:; of CBI's modern structure can be traced in the enactment of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment Act which came into force in the year 1946. The Special Police 
Establishment now forms a pa.rt of the CBI. The main investigation wing of the CBI has two 
main divisions, anti-corruption division which handles all cases registered unde r the Prevention of 
Corruption Act and other related statutes. The Special Crime Divis ion, on the othl!r hand, 
, handles all cases relating to economic offences and those perta ining to conventional crimes, such 
as offences relating to internal security, espionage, sabotage, narcotics, antiquities, murder, 
dt!coity, cheating, criminal breach of trust, etc. 
11. CBI .presently has 11 regional offices, 27 territorial branches, 27 central branches, and 
12 sub-units. Gene rally, the Organisation is based on territorial jurisdiction. Of the support 
services there is a strong nucleus of law officers not only at each branch or unit level but aJso at 
regional and headquarter levels. It is headed by legal advisor, belonging to the Ministry of Law , 
" Justice and Company Affairs taken on deputation basis to CBI. 
Staff Pattern 
12. To manage the 54 investigating units. the total sanctioned staff strength of the Central 
Bureau of Investigation at present is 3584, including the vacancies. The pattern of staffing , over 
the years. has not changed much with a view to ensuring that the C.B. I. basically remains a 
deputationist organisation. Presently on an average, the overall percentage of the depentationists 
· among different cadre is 60. Officers come on deputation for three to five years. The maximum 
period of deputation is seven years. Extension beyond seven years is given in rare cases 
depending on the merit of each case. The general policy has been to discourage the practice of 
having officers on deputation for longer period. Besides, deputation, 40 per ce.Jt of the posts, on 
an average, is filled up by direct recruitment promotion. 
1 

, .. ~- ., ' 
2 
~ '"' of recruitment at various Jevels from the lowest to the top rank is exh·,b. tted 
Level 
(i) Constable to Sub-Inspector 
(ii) Inspectors 
(iii) Dy. Supdt. of Police 
(iv) S.P . to Director 
Method of recruitmen~ 
Direct recruitment 
Promotion 
Deputation 
By Promotion or Deputation 
Direct recruitment by UPSC 
Promotion 
Deputation 
--
By promotion and deputation from the IPS Cadre 
14. Appointments of personnel to the Interpol and co-ordination wing of CBI are made bv 
the Director on the basis of the special aptitude and skill of the officials. · 
15. After recruitment , need for imparting training to the CBI personnel cannot be over­
emphasised, keeping in view the crime pattern becoming more complex day by day. All the more 
important is to upd<ite the investigative skills of the officials so that they may successfully combat . · 
the upcoming new trends of offences ·. Accordingly, it has been decided that the CBI should 1 
impart, pre-serv ice training to 3 categories of its officials viz. Constable , Sub-Inspector and Dy. 
Supdt. of Police. Considering the necessity for modernisation of training programme , the CBI 
decided to have ·the tmining centre of its own with requisite man-power and equipment. Planning 
Commission has agreed for total outlay of Rs. 1 crore during · the 8th Five Year Plan, out of ' 
which Rs. 20 lakhs have been allocated for the year 1992-93 for modernisation of the training 
centre . 
Method of Iavestigation 
16. CBl derives the investigatin g po wers from the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 
1946. Even though the CBI is empo .. vered to investigate all offences notified by the Central 
Government U/s. 3 of the D.S.P.E. Act, 1946, it does not tak'e up all such cases keeping in view 
the fact that its resources are limited and it<> powers are concurrent and co-extensive with those of 
the State Police Forces which, if exercised without coordination with the State Pol ice, would lead 
ro conflict and duplication of efforts. To avoid such duplication an administrative arrangement 
has been arrived at by the Director, CBI with the State Police Forces, according to which: 
(a) Cases which are substantially and essentially against Centra] Government employees or 
concerning affairs of the Centrul Government shall be investigated by the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment (CB I) inspite of the fact that certain employees of the State 
Government may also be involved. The State Agency, who will be informed of such 
cases involving their employees, will render necessary assistance to the CBI, during 
investigation. 
(b) Cases which are essentially and substantially against servants of the State Government or 
are in respect of matters concerning the State Government, shall be investigated by the 
State Police irr espective of the fact that certain employees of the Central Government 
are also involved as confederates or co-accused. In such cases the Delhi Special Polic~ 
Establishment (CBI) , who will be duly informed, will assist the State Agency, if 
necessary , in completing the investigation. 
l 
I l 
im 
sy~ 
30 
int 
oc 
di~ 
co 
Pl 
th 

' { 
3 
(c) ln addition to cases involving Centrai Government employees , the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment (CBI) is authorised ro investigate cases of the following categories: 
(i) Cases in which the interests of the Cc: ntral Government or of any statutory 
Corporation or Body set up and financed by Government of India are involved 
(particulary those in which public servants are concerned or very large amounts are 
involved). 
(ii) Cases relating to the breaches of Central Laws with the enforcement of which the 
Government of India is mainly concerned. 
(iii) Big cases of fraud , cheating, embezzlement and the like relating to public Joint 
Stock Companies in which large funds are involved. Similar other cases when committed 
by organised gangs or professional criminals having ramifications in several States. 
(iv) Cases having inter-State and international ramifications and involving several official 
agencies where, from all angles, it is considered necessary that a single investigating 
agency should be in-charge of the investigation. 
(d) While this is the general arrangement, it is not possible for the CBI to take up all cases 
falling under these categories because of the paucity of staff and the necessity of its 
concentrating on cases involving bribery and corruption. It is, therefore, a matter of 
discretion whether the State Police or the CBI should investigate a particular offence 
even though it may have been notified under section 3 of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 1946. Ordinary cases of theft, misappropriation, cheating etc., even if 
committed by Central Government employees, have, therefore, to be dealt with by the 
State Police. 
l 
17. Investigation is conducted through a well-structured system of close supervision. In some 
important cas~s. supervision is done by the S.P., D. I. Gs., Joint Directors, Additional Directors 
and Director. To keep a vigilant look on the investigating proceedings, there is a reporting 
system. Progress report of each case under investigation is given in 15 days in general cases, 
30 days in FIR cases and daily in the cases of momentous importance having wider national and 
international ramifications. 
18. Search warrants are obtained from the court to conduct searches. It is only on rare 
occasions, when it is not possible to obtain a search warrant and there is a chance of the evidence 
disappearing then section 165 of the Criminal Procedure Code is invoked and searches are 
conducted by CBI on its own. 
19. The Interpol, Delh i has direct communication links with its counterparts in other 
• countries and request received from various branches of CBI or State Police Agenc ies are 
transmitted to the Interpols of countries concerned . In case of urgent matters, personal contacts 
are established to expedite them. 
PERFORMANCE AT A GLANCE 
20. The following figures furnished by the CBI will show at a glance its performance during 
the years 1991 and 1992:-
I. REG ISTRATION OF CASES 
TARGETS 
ACHIEVEMENT 
VARIATION 
1992 1991 
1189 
1231 
+ 42 
1170 
1180 
+ 10 
t 
.I 
I 

4 
II DISPOSAL OF CASES UNDER lNVESTI GA TIOK 
TARGETS 
ACHlE VEMENT 
VARIATION 
TARGETS 
ACHIEVEMENT 
VARIATION 
TARGETS 
ACHlEVElv1ENT 
VARIATION 
1992 1991 
1323 
1326 
+ 3 
1217 
1133 
- 84 
Ill. DISPOSAL OF CASES UNDER TRIAL 
1992 1991 
327 320 
337 286 
+ 10 - 34 
IV. DISPOSAL OF RDA CASES 
1992 
545 
621 
+ 76 
1991 
530 
563 
+ 33 
REGISTRATION OF CASES IN ANTI-CORRUPTION DIVISION 
Out of 1231 cases registered in 1992, 1021 cases (83%) were registered in Anti-Corruption 
Divisi-on. Out of these, 584 cases (57%) were against Gazetted Officers. 
During 1991, out of a total of 1180 cases registered, 961 cases (81%) were registered in Anti­
Corruption Division out of which 584 cases (60%) were against Gazetted Officers. 
REGISTR.\ lION OF TRAP CASES 
During the year 1992, on the ami ·t:!)JTuption front, special attention was paid on laying traps 
for catching public servants red-handt J while taking bribes . • 
As many as 197 cases were registered in 1992 as again~t 177 cases registered during 1991, 
which is an increase of 11%. 
CASES OF DISPROPORTIONATE ASSETS AGAINST PUBLIC SERVANTS 
57 cases of disproportionate assets were registered in 1992 as against 71 cases in 1991 and 
77 cases in 1990. 
CONVICTIONS 
186 cases ended in conviction during 1992 as against 158 cases during 1991 and 164 cases 
dw·ing 1990. 
Out of 337 court cases disposed of in 1992, 59 cases were disposed otherwise. Of the 
remaining 278 cases. 186 cases ended in conviction while 92 cases ended in acquittal. The 
percentage of conviction in the year 1992 was 67%. 
CASES PENDING INVESTIGATION 
P~ndency of cases under investigation considerably went down during 1992. Only 1192 cases 
were pending investigation as on 31.12. 92 when compared to 1287 cases pending as on 
31.12.1991. 
:tl 
t 
( 
1 
f 

1: 
5 
Pendency of old cases pending investigation also decreased . Only 307 one-year-old case~ are 
pend~ng investigation. as on 3 __ 1.12.92 when compared to 338 cases which were pending on 3!.12 .91 
and .>13 cases pendtng on .>1.12.90. 
The pendency of one-year-old cases decreased by about 10% in 1992. 
cASES PENDING INVESTIGATION (2 ~EARS OLD) 
By the end of 1992, only 148 such cases were.pending as against 169 cases in 1991 end, and 
173 cases in 1990 end. 
Out of 148 cases, 37 cases (26%) are pending due to reasons beyond the control of CBI i.e . 
. sanction for prosecution awaited (24). Court stay (10) & no consent of State Government (3). 
CASES PENDING IN COURT 
Pendency of court cases has been steadily increasing despite the fact that each year more 
number of cases are being disposed. The increase in pendency is because of delays in trials due to 
limited hearings, non-availability of witnesses, dilatory tactics by accused and stays granted by 
courts etc. as weil as inadequ ate strength of prosecution staff and their non-availability due to 
vacancies. The increase is also due to the fact that every year more cases are being sent up for 
trial than disposed of. 
REC0Ml\1ENDATION 
21. While the Committee expresses its general satisfaction ove r the overall performance of 
CBI during the year 1992 as compared to that of 1991, it takes note of the fact that as many as 
1192 cases were pending investigation as on 31st December, 1992, out of which 307 cases were 
one-year-old and 148 cases were two-years-old. The Committee is Jware of the various 
constraints being faced by the CBl in its functioning. At the same time, it feels that necessary 
concerted efforts need be made to minimise the number of pending cases. The Committee abo 
expresses its concern over the steady increase in the pendency of court cases and feels that the 
settiJ!g up of more and more Special Courts for exclusive disposal of CBI cases can help in this 
regard. In this context, the Committee takes serious view of the unduly long time taken by tb~ 
CBI in completing investigations in a number of cases. It, therefore, recommends th~tt 
investigations may be completed with utmost expedition. 
22. The Committee takes note of the following vacancy position at various levels in the CBI 
as on 1.1.94:-
Post Sanctioned Vacancies 
strength 
Jt. Director 11 2 
D.I.G . 32 7 
S.P. 86 15 
D.S.P. 253 76 
Inspector 516 87 
Sub-Inspector 301 80 
I I 
/I 

I 
6 
24. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Director. CBI and is of the view h 
this unhappy situation. if allowed to continue for long. is bound to adversely affect t ~l 
functioning of the CBL The Committee, therefore. strongly recommends that the terms t e 
conditions of service, including pay and allowances of the CBI personnel. should be m~~ 
attractive enough as to improve the overall functioning of CBI and draw the best talents from 
outside. 
! ~I 
I I)U 
25. The Committee understands that a detailed proposal relating to the improved terms r 
deputation, Compensatory Allowance for working on holidays and overtime, Investigati: 
(0 
Allowance, revision in the pay scale of Ss.P .ID.Ss.P., additional benefits to Law Officersn 
promotion benefits to Constables/Drivers, Rent Free Accommodation, and amendment in th~ 
IPS (Tenure) Rules etc. have been . s7n; . by the CBI to the Government. The Committee 
recommends that the~e proposals m~y Q.e~ ~~~mj_n~~ expeditio~sly and a qec~ion tafen thereon. If 
necessary ~ these Jssues can be referred t~."tf;e Fifth Central Pay Comm1ssion. ~ •. t t 
26. The Committee has been informed ' ;hat the proposal for Group Insurance Scheme for the . i 
CBI personnel is pending with the Government. The· Committee will be happy if the Scheme is 
1 
introduced in the CBI early. · -~ 
27. The Committee is of the view that the CBI is yet not equipped with all necessary modem 
facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the CBI should be well-equipped with all 
the modern facilities like fax machines and PCs at its regional and branch offices for its smooth 
functioning. 
28. The Committee feels that there should be an effective communication channel between 
the CBI and the complainant i.e. the complainant should be informed about the progress of the 
case under investigation of the CBI. 
29. The Committee notes that there is a proposal under active consideration to have external 
wings of the CBI in Washington and London to cover the whole of Europe, Canada and U.S.A. 
to create good rapport with foreign police organisations. The Committee has been informed that 
there is an urgent need for having an office of CBI in the Middle East. The Committee urges 1 
upon the Gcvernment to take _expeditious decision in the matter. 
30. The Committee DO'cS that there is always a demand for CBI inquiry from various States, 
Organisations and other quarters. It r~f:ects the credibility of the CBI. But at the same time, 
there are instances where the credibility and impartiality of this organisation have been 1·. 
questioned at different fora. The Committee is, therefore,,constrained to observe that there is a 
need for serious thinking to maintain the independence , impartiality and the credibility of the 
CBI to allay any apprehension in the minds of the general public in regard to the functioning of · ,~_!· 
this organisatjon. .~ 
31. Under Section 6 of the Delhi Special Pol ice Establishment Act, 1946, it is necessary for 
the CBI to obtain the consent of a State Government for investigation of cases within its 
jurisdiction. The Committee notes that though most of the States give their consent for 
investigation by the CBI, sometimes with the change of government or for some other reasons 
certain States at times withdraw their consent before or during the investigation, thus frustrating 
all the efforts of the CBI to bring the culprits to book. 
The Committee is of the opinion that in view of entries 8 (Centra l Bureau of Intelligence and 
Investigation) and 93 (Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in the Union List) 
of the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, CBI can be empower ed by-a 
suitable legislation to investigate all offences under the Central laws like Prevention of 
Corruption Act, Income Tax Act, Central Customs & Excise Act, Foreign Exchange Regulation 
Act, Banking Regulation Act. Companies Act. Securities Contracts (Regulation ) Act. Narcotic 
Drugs and Psychotrophyic Substances Act etc. in any part of the country after obtaining the 

• j 7 
concurrence of the Centr al Government. As regard s offences under the Indian Penal Code and 
others falling in the category of public order, the consent of the State Government will continue 
to be obtained in view of the entry relating to ·public order' in the State List. The Committee 
recommends that this issue be examined by the Government. 
32. The Committee has been apprised that in case any Indian national having committed 
aime in India is found to have gone out and is living in another country, a request is made 
through the I!!terpol as well as Diplomatic Channels, along with a Warrant of Arrest issued by 
the competent court. The country, where such Indian national is living, is under no legal 
obligation to act on such request, unless there is a formal extradition treaty with that country. 
The Committee, therefore , suggests that it would be desirable to have formal extradition treaties 
signed at diplomatic levels with as many countries as possible . 
33. The Committee takes note of the point clarified by the Director, CBI in his oral evidence 
that it is not the policy 'or the intention of the CBI personnel to cause any harassment to the 
accused or to his family members during searches. Nevertheless, the Committee expects the local 
pOlice assisting the CBI personnel in conducting the searches to behave more responsibly and 
with due restraint. The Committee, therefore. feels that necessary instructions/guidelines need be 
issued in this regard and the searches should be conducted under the supervision of a senior CBI 
Officer, who may have adequate control over the local police as well. 
34. The Committee notes that the CBI over the years has evolved as the prime agency for 
investigating cases relating to corruption by Central Government employees, the cases relating to 
the violation of Central Fiscal Laws and commission of various economic offences directly 
impinging on the federal economy. However, in spite of the multifarious role, CBI continues to 
derive its powers from the antiquated Delh i Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. In view of 
the sea-change in the functioning of the CBI in the backdrop of the ever-changing crime scenario, 
the Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for enacting a fresh comprehensive 
legislation for the CBI. 
CENTRAL VIGIT..ANCE COMMISSION 
JURISDIC.."''ION, ROLE AND FUNCTIONS 
35. The Central Vigilance Commission was set up in pursuance of the recommendations of 
the Santhanam Committee on Prevention of Corruption in 1964 to advise the Central 
Government in respect of all matters pertaining to maintenance of integrity in administration. 
Under the terms of the Government ofindia Resolution of 11th February, 1964, the Comm ission 
bas been assigned, inter alia, the following three main functions:-
~ ~~ 
(i) To have complaints of misconduct or lack of integrity on the part of public servants~ 
looked into and thereafter, as may be necessary, to advise as to the disciplinary 
proceed ings or prosecution to be launched. Where disciplinary proceedings are held, 
the Commis~ion also advises the disciplinary autho rity about the penalty to be imposed, 
based on its independent and impartial appreciation of the outcome of the disciplinary 
proceedings. 
ie 
, 
L 
! 
i. ,. 
(ii) The Commission has been given the responsibility of exercising a general check and 
supervision over vigilance and anti-corruption work in the Ministries/Departments and 
Public Undertakings etc. and for that purpose it receives from administrative authorities 
progress reports and statistical returns. 
(iii) When it appears that any procedure or practice in administration affords scope for 
corruption or misconduct, the Commission may advise that such procedure or practice 
should be appropriately changed. 
36. The jurisdiction of the Commission extends to all employees of the Central Government. 
Central Public Secto r Undertakings and other corporate bodies. 

8 
37. The role of the Central Vigilance Commission is advisory, but advisory in the sJme sense 
as that of the linion Pub_lic_ Service Comr:nissio?. By para. 4 of _the said Resolution of 11th 
February. 1964. the Commtsston has been gtven, tn the exerctse of tts powers and functions, the 
same measure of independence and autonomy as the Union Public Service Commission. The 
independent and autonomous status of the Commission, its extens ive powers and jurisdiction and 
the fact that it indicates in its annual report cases in which the administrative authorities have not 
accepted its advice make the Commission an effective instrument for ensuring that all complaints 
of corruption or lack of integrity on the part of public servants are given adequate and due 
attention. 
38. The Commission may on its own direct the Central Bureau of Investigation to invesrioate 
. . 0 
complaint~ and furnish reports. The departments and pubhc undertakmgs may also refer 
complaints to the Central Bureau of Investigation as per the guidel ines laid down by the 
Government for the purpose. In appropriate cases, the Commission resolves differences of 
opinion , if any, between the C.B.I. and the departments concerned. 
ORGAJ~ISATION 
39. The Commission is a one-member body headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner. 
The work of the Commission is officer-oriented and is attended to by the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner assisted by a Secretary, five officers of the rank of Director/Deputy Secretary, 
three Under Secretaries and office staff. There are eleven posts of Commissioners for 
Departmental Inquiries in tl1e Commission. 
40. On the techni cal side, there are two Chief Technical Examiners of the rank of Chief 
Engineer in CPWD assisted by eight Technical Examiners of the rank of Executive Engineer, six 
Assistant Technical Examiners and other staff. 
COMPLAINTS 
41. Complaints constitute an important source of information leading to discovery of 
misconduct and malpractices . The bulk of compla ints are received and initially dealt with by 
various concerned departments, undertakings etc. The complaints received by the Commission 
are often copies of those addressed to other concerned organisations, although some complaints 
are exclusively addressed to the Commission. Irrespective of whether the complaints are directly 
addressed to the Commission or not, each compla int received by it is duly examined to decide 
whether it is to be further pursued and if so how. 
42. It is the experience of the Commission ·that the majority of anonymous/pseudonymous 
complaints are based on misconception and misunderstanding of the facts (quitt? often motivated) 
with a view to spoil the image and reputation of the officers - quite often when they are due for 
advance ment in their career. On the other hand , it has also been the experience of the 
Commission that a number of serious cases of corruption and misdemeanour (particularly against 
powerful individuals) are brought to the Comm ission's notice by such complaints. The 
Commission, therefore , takes adequate caut ion in scrutinising such complaints so that motivated 
and frivolous complaints are not encourage d , while at the same time serio us and verifiable 
allegations are not ignored. 
43. Handling of the complaints directly received in the Commission represents a very small 
part of the Commission's work. The main work that is atten ded to in the Commission in this 
regard is to go through tl1e complaint, assess their prima facie importance and decide either to 
file them, or foiWard them for necessary action as deemed fit to the organisations concerned or 
entrust them to the CVOs or the CBI for further investigation and report to the Commission. 
Subsequent work on the investigation reports etc. received from CVOs and the CBI is dealt by 
the Commission. 
-
' 
a 
r.. 
] 
f< 
a 
{( 
tl 
I[ 
0 
a 
c 
p 
, 
~ 
' l 
i 

.. 9 
VIG1LA..~CE CASES 
~. After a co~plaint (including source information ) is taken up for inve~tig a t1on from 
~i!!ilance point of view it develops into a vigilance case. The Dep:lrtments and other 
~ or~anisations are required to refer certain categories of such cases (generally those involving 
l: se~ior publ ic servants) to the Commission to obtain the Commission's advice normally at 
rwo stages. After investigations are completed by the dep!lrtments or by the CBI, the 
-i Commission has to be consulted as to the further action (prosecution, departmental action , 
'.: , closure etc.) to be taken on them. This is termed as the first stage advice. In cases where 
~ departmental action for major penalty is instituted (after the first-stage advice), the 
4 Commission is required to be consulted again. on completion of the inquiry proceedings by 
the Inquiry Officers, for giving what is termed its second stage advice. The Commission is 
.: · also required to give such second-stage advice where departmental action for minor penalty 
• " is instituted (after the first-stage advice) and the disciplinary authority proposes to close the 
case (without ~posing any penalty) on examination of the defence. The Commission is also 
required to be consulted at other stages of the vigilance case such as consideration by 
appellate, revising and reviewing authorities. The procedure provides for reconsideration of 
advice given by the Commission. The Commission is also consulted by the disciplinary and 
other authorities on miscellaneous issues arising during the course of handling of vigjlance 
cases. 
45. During 1992. 4528 cases were referred to the Central Vigilance Commission for 
disposal. Out of the total cases referr ed to the CVC. 4035 cases were disposed of. The 
Commission recommended action as under on disciplinary cases:-
Prosecution 
Major Penalty 
Minor Penalty 
Other actions 
1st stage 
advice 
48 
845 
2n 
923 
lind stage 
advice 
38:1 
f71 
380 
In other 1007 cases, general advice was given on vapous issues raised by various 
Ministries/Departments. 
1tOLE OF CHIEF VIGILANCE omCERS 
46. The Chief Vigilance Officers (CVOs) in various organisations. act as "eyes and ears .. 
[or the Commission. A CVO plays the most vital' role in the matter of implementation of 
anti-corruption measures in his organisation and maintenance of integrity among its 
employees. While the Heads of Department s and Chief Executives carry the overall 
ltSJ:•onsib:ility to ensure efficiency and integrity of the personnel working onder them, it is 
who ha~ to plan and execute all necessary ground wo.rk in the discharge of this 
function. Wtule tlius the CVO is accountable directlv to the executive head of the 
trgamsatJon. be has also to serve as an important link betwckn his organisation and other 
concerned with vigilance, especially the Central Vigilance Commission and the 
Bureau of Investigation. In performing his vigilance functions, particularly the 
ones, be bas to accord importance to the requirements of justice and fair-play. 
47. Among the different functions of the CVO, more prominent are the following:­
(a) Investigation into complaintS received. 

. -
~ 
I 
10 
(l;J Review of the existing systeEls and procedures with a view to preventing or minim1sin 
factor s which provide opportunities for malpractices. g 
(c) Identification of corruption-prone areas, and sensitive posts, conducting surprise 
inspections and scrutiny of work and conduct ·of personnel posted in sensitive posts. 
(d) Liaison with the Central Vigilance Commission and furnishing the prescribed returns to 
it. 
{e) Maintaining list of officers of doubtful integrity and the. "agreed list" for keeping 
surveillance on such officers. 
(f) Ensuring obta ining in time the first-stuge and second-stage advice of the CVC and 
taking prompt action thereon. 
SELECTION, APPOINTMENT AND TENURE OF CffiEF VIGILANCE OFFICERS 
48. The Chief Vigilance Officers in the departments are appointed in consultation with the 
Central Vigilance Commission and no person whose appointment is objected to by the 
Commission could be so appointed. The Commission has noticed several instances where the 
CVOs had been changed frequently and organisations remained without regularly appointed 
CVOs for long durations. The Commission has been advising the departments to ensure that 
CVOs are appointed in time and they are not changed too often. 
49. The considerations that weigh with the Commission in the matter of selection for 
appointment of CVOs are summarised below:-
(a) Big organisations should have , as far as possible, full-time CVOs taken on deputation 
from other organisations for a fixed tenw-e; 
(b) The CVOs having completed their tenure in an organisation should not be given 
another tenure in the same organisation; 
(c) The CVOs in the Ministries/Departments/autonomous organisations should at least be 
of the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India . The Department of 
~r . ' 
• l 
J (\ 
!l!l 
\d 
tn 
1 Tl 
~ ~ 
T 
v 
( 
t 
( 
Personnel and Administrative Reforms, however , have also laid down that departments ~ 
which handle a large number of vigilance cases e.g. Railway Board, Ministry of Steel, j 
Minfstry of Defence, Ministry of Surface Transport etc. should have CVOs of the rank 
of Joint Secretary or at least Director in the Government of India; 
(d) The Chief Vigilance Officers in the Public Sector Undertakings, in order to be objective 
and effect ive, should atleast be officers of the rank of DIG of Police, or Director in the 
Central Government of India. The Government have exempted such officers from the 
condition · of permanent absorption in the undertakings; 
(e) The Chief Vigilance Officers in nationalised banks, including subsidiaries of State Bank 
of India , should be whole-time CVOs of the rank of General Manager and should 
normally be outsiders, i.e. they should be taken on deputation from other banks for a 
fixed tenure; ana 
(f) Frequent transfer of officers in the posts of CVOs is not desirable. Precaution is, 
therefore , taken to ensure that officers sponsored for the posts of CVOs are , as far as 
possible, available to hold the said post for at least three years , having regard to their 
tenure/date of retirement etc. 
50. During the course of oral evidence, the Committee was apprised by the representative of 
the Department that the following procedure was being followed by the CVC regarding the 
appointment of full-time CVOs: -
"Just as we have a list of eligible officers for central deputation from all the organised 
services which participate in rhe scheme, we also circulate vacancies to invite vclunteers to go as 

11 
CVOYExecutive Directors (Vtgtlance ) and we keep a Jist in the Depar tme nt of Per::.onnel. This 
list is got vette d by the CVC. There are some 28 organisations which are very very imp ort ant and 
which <tre very big in the asses::.men£ of the eve. They clear the names of the officers 
tndividually. Supposing , Mr. A has to go to STC, then the name of Mr. A is cleared by the CVC. 
Then two-three names similarly cleared by him are sent to the concerned administrative Ministry . 
The adm inistrative Ministry, in consultat ion with that particular organisation, sends the propos:.1l 
back and then we take orders of the Cabinet Committee". 
TRAINING 
51. The Commission lays emphasis on the training of Chief Vigilance Officers and o ther 
vigilance staff. The CVOs are the most important field functionaries of the Vigilance 
Commission; It is, therefore, very essential that they are pr-:>perlr ~q uipped for . the task. It js for . ; 
this .purpos.e !h~t ~ ~Qmmission attaches great jmport~ .t~ ~ir 'W>per trdinin·g_ 'Wbile:~~ ·f.l 
Comriiission' itself organises training courses for Chief VIgilance ~Officers , the training for ·other · · 
vigilance functionaries like the Investigating Officers, Presenting Officers and Inquiry Officers is 
arranged by the concerned organisations. The Commission, however , provides assistance for the 
proper organisation/running of these courses by suggesting suitable curriculum , names of 
speakers and provision of faculty from the Commission's own staff, etc. During 1991, four 
training courses for CVOs were held by the Commission in which 67 CVOs participated. Officers 
of the Commiss ion also delivered 63 talks during this period at vigilance training courses 
conducted by different organisations . 
RECOMMENDATION 
52. The Committee shares the concern of the CVC in its Annual Report for 1991 that the 
disciplinary authorities have not been prompt in implementing the advice of eve in many cases. 
Delays in handling cases of alleged misconduct not only involve the risk of effective action getting 
time-barred or losing its impact thus allowing the miscreants to go unscathed but they can also be 
unfair to the suspect public servants who might be innocent and could yet remain under cloud for 
unduly long time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an effective monitoring system for 
expeditious processing of vigilance cnses ut all stages from investigation to the final action should 
be evolved at the earliest. 
53. The Committee finds th:.tt at present there are no guidelines for dealing with anonymous/ 
pseudonymous complaints received by CVC. The Committee feels that necessary guidelines 
should be framed in this regard taking into consideration large number of complaiJ1ts· received by 
~eve. · 
54. The Committee feels that CVOs play important role in th~ vigilance set-up. It is very 
essential that their impartiaUty and independence are ensured. The Committee is not satisfied 
with the present arrangement in this regard and recommends that a thought has to be given as to 
in what way the CVO can be insulated from pressure or influence, whether from his superior 
officer or from outside. During the course of the oral evidence, the Committee was apprised that 
in some cases the CVOs try to get themselves absorbed in the organisations to which they are on 
deputation. This practice inhibits them from discharging their duties impartially and effectively. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that a ban on such absorption should be imposed. 
55. The Committee agrees with the Commissioner's view that setting up of a Training 
Division in the Commission to car ry out vigilance training programmes for the CVOs and other 
vigilance staff would ensure uniformity of appro ach in drawing up training schedules after raking 
into account spec ific vulnerable areas in each individual organisation as well as the latest thinking 
and trends noticed in different vigilance units and in Courts/CATs decisions. The Committee 
accordingly recommends that this issue be examined by the Government. 
56. The Committee strongly recommend s that a system should be introduced in all Banks 
and Public Sector Undertakings for ascertaining the assets of the employees at the time of their 
i 
I 
l 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
1 
' 
I I 
1 
t 
I 

.. 
12 
joinmg service and at regular intervals of two years. When a person is promoted to the officer's 
grade, it should be done compulsorily. The employees should also be made ro report transactions 
above a particular amount. This would be an effective check on persons becoming corrupt. 
57. The Chief Vigilance Commissioner in his oral evidence made the followintt 
observations:- · 
0 
·•r have no ~nvestigating agency under my direct control. I have to depend upon CBr or 
CYOs. This is a lacuna. We are certainly handicapped. While not blaming the CBI, I wish to 
say that they determine their own ~riority of cases when we refer them to the CBI for 
investigation. While there has been no Jack of cooperation, there is a question of delay. [n 
orde r to make this organisation more effective, I have moved the Government that at least a 
small nucleus investigating cell be given directly under the eve which is not there till now. 
They are examining it." 
58. The Committee, while agreeing in principle with the above views of the Chief Vigilance 
Commissioner, hopes that Government would examine this issue expeditiously for speedy 
disposal of vigilance cases. In this context, the Committee is of the view that budgetary 
J constraints should not be allowed to stand in the way of effective functioning of the eve taking 
f into consideration the emerging trends in vigilance cases. 
59. The Committee notes that the Central Vigilance Commission has been set up under a i J Government of India Resolution and not under any Act of Pariiament. The Committee 
1• recommends that Government may examine the feasibility of conferring legal status on the 
Central Vigilance Commjssion. 
l • 

13 
APPENDIX 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE 
VIII 
lEJGHT H MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th May, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi. 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob--Chairman 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Makhan Lal FotedCiJ 
4. Shri Gaya Singh 
5. Shri Rafique Alam 
6. Shri Madhavsinh Solaoki 
7. Sbri Subramanian Swamy 
8. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
9. Dr. C. Silvera 
10. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Sbri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
15. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
16. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
17. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhali 
18. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
19. Dr. Gir ija Vyas 
20. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
21. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
22. Shri Ram Singh 
23. Shri Shyam La! Kamal 
24. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
25. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
26. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
27. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
28. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRET ARIAT I! I 
Shrimati Shovana Narayan, Director 
2. 
1 ~linutc:~ of th<! First to Se·;enth meettn~ of the Commi11ee relate to other maners. 
Rdme to other lll:llle:s 

1~ 
After ~om e dro.;cu::;ston. the Committee decided to have detailed di::;cussio n on the following tssu 
to beg in with and hear the views of the respective hcnds of the departments:- es 
(i) C.B.l. and C.V.C.; 
(ii) ~ • * 
(iii) • • ... 
3. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to obtain further information from the 
Ministry on the issues identified by the Committee for its consideration. 
4. The Comm ittee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday , the 5th July , 1993 in Committee Room 'A' 
Ground F1oor, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. ' 
MEMBERS PRESENI' 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Gaya Singh 
6. Shri Rafique Alam 
7. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
8. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
9. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
10. Shri Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
11. Dr. C. Silvera 
12. Shri Kirip Chaliba 
13. Shri Gurucharan S~gh Galib 
14. Prof. M. Kamson 
15. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
16. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
17. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
18. Shrimati Bibbu Kumari Devi 
19. Dr. Girija Vyas 
20. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
21. Shri Ram Singh 
22. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
23. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
24. Sbri Vinaya Katiyar 
25. Shri Rabi Ray 
26. Slui Ram Sharan Yadav 
27. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
28. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
29. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
*Rclutes to other matter. 
s 
\ 
f 
J 
1 
a 
a 
1 
' J 
D 
l 

es 
US!UI:a 
-'" ;,wJ 1e 
JO d$01 
lO]l!PUC 
~;)1 U!P. 
sz 
"l uo 
. ·zz 
.na!lSdA • 
U! J8 
J ·p;c ~ 
ln ~U!ll 
~;)ss;ud.: 
);)).ld:lUt 
U!lUlSU• 
·l U;)A-;)1 
~sr.:> Z6 
!Jnp 18 
~ Tl 
!J<\IOJ3 
J nt;l pl 
Sd!:>UP.:>" 
tl ;l Sl.IO• 
l{ p;l l!U 
) JdQWl 
pU;ld 
l S'3S" 
UO!l:>U 
lOQ 
);)$t!j £ 
ll ,\g 
i S3S'" 
;41 
n£ p· 
! autpU 
pt:;ld 
15 
I ] SECRETARlA T 
Director ~ Shrimati Shovana Narayan 
Shri Tapan Chatte rjee 
Shri Surindcr Kumar 
WITNESSES 
Under Secretary 
Committee Officer 
1. Shri V. Lakshmi Ratan , Joint Secretary, Department of Personnel & Training. 
2. Shri T. Y. Vijayasekharan, Central Vigilance Commissioner. 
3. Shri R.D . Chowdhury, Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission. 
2 The Committee considered the letter dated the 2~l th June, 1993 of the Director , Central 
Bureau of Investigation, intimating his inability to appear before the Committee and deputing the 
Joilll Director. Central Bureau of Investigation, to appear before the Committee on his behalf. 
The Committee decided that the Director, Central Bureau of Investigation, may be requested to 
uppear before .the Committee in its next meeting. 
3. The Committee then took up for discussion the working of Central Vigilance Commission 
und heard the above-mentioned witnesses in the matter. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
4. :ao * 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 P.M . to meet again on Wednesday, the 21st July, 
1993. 
X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 21st July, 1993 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Dell1i. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
5. Shri Makban Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Gaya Singh 
7. Shri Rafique Alam 
8. Shri Krishan La! Sharma 
9. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SAI3HA 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Slui Shantaram Potdukhe 
15. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
16. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
17. Shri Dhanuskodi Athithan 
. 
Relate ~ to other matter . 

~so. 
!PU< 
um 
z 
uo 
:z 
!lS;:Jfl 
r ra 
pl t?~ 
~U!ll 
S;:JJd: 
J;:JJU• 
!llSU• 
::lA-;}t 
:> <:6 
lp 18 
TZ 
0:)3 
il (ll 
:>ue:> 
sun• 
p;:>l!U 
dqwt 
dd 
53S~ 
O!PU 
lQ 
;e:i £. 
.\g 
S3:S\ 
4l 
~ ~ p 
iU!PU· 
dd 
16 
18. Shri Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuw:tn Chandra Khanduri 
19. Shri Ram Singh 
20. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
21. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
22. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
23. Shri Rabi Ray 
24. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
25. Sbri Saifuddin Choudhury 
26. Sbri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
27. Shri B . Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Shov ana Narayan-Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee-Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar-Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. 
2. 
Shri 
Shri 
J .S. Mathur , Joint Secretary, Depa11ment of Personnel & Training 
C.P. Singh Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training 
3. Shri S.K . Datta, Director, CBI 
4. Shri P.G.J. Nampoothiri , Joint Director (A) , CBI 
5. Shri P.C. Sharma, Joint Director (P), CBI 
2. At the outset, the Committee had a preliminary discussion on the working of the Central 
Bureau of investigation . Thereafter, the Director, CBI made a representation on the CBl und 
also made some suggestions for improv ed functioning of the organisation. Members sought · ,• 
clarifications thereon. The Chairman directed the representatives of the CBl to furnish notes on 
the points raised by the members as also notes on the suggestions made pertaining to the 
function ing of the CBI, for cons ider ation of the Committee. 
A verba tim record of the oral evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 P.M. 
XI 
*TWENTY -FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 4th October , 1993 in Committee Room No. 
62 First Floor , Parliament H ouse. New Delhi. 
l'vlEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mad an Bhatia, 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R.K . Dhawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Gaya Singh 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Rafique Alam 
•Minutes of the Eleventh to Twentieth meetings of the Comminec relate 10 other m:lllcrs. 

ttral 
and 
tght 
· on -
the 
l 
I 
i 
lo. 
l 
\ l 
\ 
l 
\ 
f 
t 
} 
17 
9. Mufri Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Subramanian Swamy 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
13. Shri Sudhir Snwant 
14. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
15. Prof . M . Kam son 
16. Shri Shantaram Potd ukh e 
17. Shri M.O.H . farook 
18. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhnri 
19. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
20. Shri Dhanu skodi Athithan 
21. Dr. Girija Vyas 
22. Maj. Gen. (Retd .) Bhuwun Chandra Khanduri 
23. Shri Ram Singh 
24. Shri Shyam La! Kamal 
25. Shri Ram Nag ina Mishra 
26. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
27. Ram Vilas Paswan 
28. Shri Rabi Ray 
29. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
30. Shri Ram Sharan Yad<tv 
31. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
32. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
33. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee-Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai-Committee Officer 
4. 1l1e Chairman then requested the Members to suggest specific points / issues relating to 
the CBI and CVC which they would like to be included in the draft report of the 
Committee. Some !vfember s pointed out that certain replies furnished by the Ministry of 
Perso nnel, Public Grievances and Pensions in regard to CBI and CVC on the queries 
referred to them , were evasive, incomplete and unsatisfactory, the Member s desir ed that the 
Ministry may be asked to furnish complete and detailed infonpation on those points. 
5. The Members, thereafter, expressed their vievts on the working of CBI and CVC and 
also offered suggestions for strengthening the working of these organisations. Several 
Member s felt that the Committee should have a sitt ing exclusively to discuss this subject in 
detail. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 P.M . 
• Relarcs 10 or her maner. 

lS 
XXII1 
"'TW E~'TY- TIDRD r\IEETING 
The Commitree met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday. the 12th January, 199-t in Commttree Roo 
No. 63, First Floor , Parliament House, New Delhi. m 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l. Shri M.M. Jacob-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
3. Shri Makhan La! Fotedar 
4. Shri Gaya Singh 
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri Rafique Alam 
7. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
8. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
9. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
12. Shri Kirip Chaliba 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Sbri A. Venkatesh Naik 
15. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
16. Shri M.O .H. Farook 
17. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
18. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
19. Dr. Girija Vyas 
20. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
21. Shri Guman Mal Lodba 
22. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
23. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
24. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
25. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
26. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
27. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee-J.Jnder Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai-Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up for consideration its draft Seventh Report on the working of the 
Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission. The Chairman briefed the 
Committee about the suggest ion received from the Members and the modifications made in the 
Report in the light of those suggestions. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the 
Report. 
3. The Committee decided that the oral evidence tendered before it in this regard may be laid 
on the Table of both the Houses alongwith the Report. 
•Minutes of the twenry-second meeting of the Committee relate to other ma!lcrs. 

19 
t The Committee authorised the Chairman to decide the date of presentation of the Report 
nug the Budget Session and also to nominate two members each from Rajya Sabha and Lok 
bha to present /lav the Report in Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha. 
I • 
s. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 
e 13th January, 1994. 

, 
RRRATA. 
to the 
~. 
Seven:tn aeport of the Q::mmittee on HOlle Arta.irs 
••••o 
Fare. ~ !tr .rW 
}i), 
-. Sl., No, $J Sari Vi~a Sb....~ Vina.ya 
Xatyer Katiyar 
31 last lime Psychotropbyic Psy:Qotic 
!rom bot to• 
Sl,lb. '18 i§le~ 'Sb.ri' before the 
name or Maj. ~n. ca·etd.) 
Bbcvan QlaMra ll'aa.n4ur1 
Above the n m 
Headinc 
Twenty-First 
•eetinc 
•.. ' .... 