PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 102
ND
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22  JULY, 2003)
ND
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22  JULY, 2003)
ND
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22  JULY, 2003)
ND
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22  JULY, 2003)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY, 2003/ASADHA, 1925 (SAKA)JULY, 2003/ASADHA, 1925 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED-SECOND REPORT
ON
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
AND
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-NINTH AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2003

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED-SECOND REPORT
ON
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
AND
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-NINTH AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2003
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 22 ND JULY , 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 ND JULY , 2003)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY , 2003/ASADHA, 1925 (SAKA)
CS(H.A.)-195

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—5
Chapter-I – The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003 ........ 1—4
Chapter-II – The Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003 ........................ 5
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. 7—15
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 17 —33

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri Motilal V ora
5. Shrimati Ambika Soni
6. Shri B.P. Singhal
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
11. Shri Lalu Prasad
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain
13. Shri Ram Jethmalani
∉14. Shri Pramod Mahajan
LOK SABHA
15. Shri Adhi Sankar
16. Begum Noor Bano
17. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
18. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
19. Shri M.O.H. Farook
20. Shri Rajen Gohain
21. Shri Vinay Katiyar
22. Shri K. Karunakaran
23. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
24. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
26. Shri P.H. Pandian
27. Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy
28. Shri Subodh Roy
29. Shri Anadi Sahu
30. Shri P.A. Sangma
31. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
32. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
(i)
∉  Nominated w.e.f.  27th February, 2003.

(ii)
33. Shri Manabendra Shah
34. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
35. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
36. Capt. (Retd.) Inder Singh
37. Sardar Buta Singh
38. Shri Ramjilal Suman
39. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
40. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
41. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
42. Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
£43. Dr .(Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
ν44. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
£ Nominated w.e.f.  27th February, 2003.
ν Nominated w.e.f.  7th April, 2003.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Hundred-second Report of the Committee on the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003.*
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the
two Bills, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 9 May, 2003 and pending therein, to the Committee
for examination and report.
3. The Committee considered both the Bills in its sitting held on 26 June and 14 July, 2003.
3.1 The Committee took oral evidence of representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs in its
sitting held on 26 June, 2003. In the same sitting, the Committee discussed the general principles
of the Bills and also took up clause-by-clause consideration thereof.
3.2 The Committee considered the draft Report on the Bills and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 14 July, 2003
4. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background notes on
the Bills and other relevant documents received from the Ministry of Home Affairs and replies of
the Ministry to the queries raised by the Members in its sitting.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
14 July, 2003. Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
* Bills Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 9th May, 2003.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, No. 40687 dated 23rd May, 2002.

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003
The Bill seeks to create an autonomous self-governing body to be known as the Bodoland
Territorial Council (BTC) within the State of Assam under Schedule VI of the Constitution of India
which shall have legislative, administrative and financial powers in respect of specified subjects.
The Bill further seeks to provide for adequate safeguards for the non-tribals in the BTC areas in
regard to rights and privileges including land rights presently enjoyed by them at the
commencement of BTC.
2. During his deposition before the Committee on 26 June, 2003, the Joint Secretary (NE),
Ministry of Home Affairs traced the genesis of the Bill and informed the Committee that the Bodos
were the largest recognized plain tribe in Assam comprising 1.2 million people or 5.3 % of the total
population of Assam of 22.4 million as per 1991 census. They were chiefly inhabitants of Dhubri,
Kokrajhar, Bongaigaon, Barpeta, Nalbari, Kamrup and Darrang Districts of Assam.
2.1 He also apprised the Committee that the Bodo problem primarily arose due to perception of
negligence of the Bodo areas by successive Governments in Assam since independence, influx of
migrants from other parts of Assam, West Bengal, Bihar and Bangladesh, which led to alienation
of tribal land, though prohibited by the Assam Land Revenue (Rules and Regulations) 1886 and
search for separate Bodo identity. The proposed BTC areas would also include other tribes living
in Deori, Hojai, Kachari including Sonowal, Lalung, Mech, Miri and Rabha.
3. He further stated that in order to address and solve the Bodo problem, the Government of
India signed the Bodo Accord on February 20, 1993 with All Bodo Students Union and Bodo
People’s Action Committee with the following salient features:
(i) a Bodoland Autonomous Council (BAC) to be formed by an Act of Assam Legislative
Assembly;
(ii) the Council to have powers to make bylaws, rules and orders for application within
the BAC areas on the specified subjects;
(iii) the geographical area of the BAC as agreed upon can be changed with the mutual
consent of the BAC and the Government of Assam;
(iv) the BAC will have power to regulate trade and commerce within its jurisdiction, in
accordance with the existing laws;
(v) the Government of Assam will deposit in the BAC fund, revenue collected from the
tea gardens falling within the BAC area;
(vi) the BAC would also receive grant-in-aid from time to time within the principles and
policies enunciated by the Government of India; and
(vii) the Government of Assam and the BAC will jointly ensure that all rights and interests
of the non-tribals as on date living in the BAC area in matters pertaining to land as
well as their language are protected.
3.1 In pursuance of the Bodo Accord, the BAC Act was passed by the Legislative Assembly of
Assam which came into force on 13 May, 1993. The Act provided for the establishment of an

2
administrative authority known as Bodoland Autonomous Council (BAC) and for certain matters
incidental and connected thereto.
3.2 The Joint Secretary further stated that the BAC had, however, failed to achieve the
objectives for which it was set up and the Bodo groups were of the view that Bodo Accord had
become unworkable due to non-implementation of the Accord in letter and spirit and were making
renewed demands for separate State of Bodoland for the following reasons.
(i) No elections could be held to the General Council of BAC so far;
(ii) There was also dispute over the areas to be included in the BAC;
(iii) BAC had no legislative powers; and
(iv) Allocation and transfer of adequate funds for development works to BAC was not
assured.
3.3 Thus, the BAC had failed to achieve the objectives for which it was set up leading to
renewed demand for separate State of Bodoland.
4. It was against this backdrop that the Government of India initiated a fresh process of
dialogue with the Bodos in September, 1997. In  response to the initiative of the Central
Government, the Bodo Liberation Tigers (BLT) unilaterally suspended its operations with effect
from 14 July, 1999. This was followed by a series of tripartite talks between Government of India,
Government of Assam and BLT. After twenty one rounds of tripartite talks, a Memorandum of
Settlement (MoS) was signed on 10 February, 2003. The main terms of agreement inter alia
include:
(i) Creation of an Autonomous District to be known as Bodoland Territorial Council
(BTC) Areas D istrict within the State of Assam and provision of Constitutional
protection under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India;
(ii) The Government of Assam to repeal the BAC Act, 1993 and dissolve the existing
Bodoland Autonomous Council (BAC);
(iii) Adequate safeguards to ensure that the non-tribals in the BTC area are not
disadvantaged in relation to any rights and privileges including land rights presently
enjoyed by them at the commencement of BTC;
(iv) Increasing the number of members for BTC upto 46 out of which 30 will be
reserved for Scheduled Tribes, 5 for non-tribal communities, 5 open for all
communities and 6 to be nominated by Governor of Assam from the unrepresented
communities from BTC area of which at least 2 should be women. Nominated
members will have the same rights and privileges as other members, including voting
rights. Election for 40 constituencies of the BTC shall be on the basis of adult
franchise. The term of the elected members of the BTC shall be for 5 years;
(v) The Council shall have legislative, executive, administrative and financial powers in
respect of 40 subjects to be entrusted to it;
(vi) Additional financial assistance of Rs. 100 crore per annum (over and above normal
plan assistance to the State of Assam) for next five years for projects to develop the
socio-economic infrastructure in BTC areas;
(vii) The Government of India has also agreed to consider favourably the inclusion of
Bodo language in Devnagri script in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution;

3
(viii) A C entrally funded Central Institute of Technology (CIT) to be set up to impart
education in various technologies and vocational disciplines such as information
technology, bio-technology, food processing, rural industries, business management,
etc. The CIT to be subsequently upgraded to a centrally-funded State University with
technical and non-technical disciplines to be run by the BTC; and
(ix) The Government of India to consider sympathetically the inclusion of Boro Kacharis
living in Karbi Anglong and North Cachar Hills Autonomous Councils area in the
Scheduled Tribes (Hill) List of State of Assam.
5. Here, it may be pertinent to compare the distinct features of the proposed BTC under the
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and the BAC under the State Act;
(i) The BTC will be created under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India
whereas the BAC was created under the State Legislation;
(ii) The number of members for the BTC will be 46, out of which 30 will be reserved
for Scheduled Tribes, 5 for non-tribal communities, 5 open for all communities from
BTC areas of which at least 2 will be women. On the other hand, the number of
members of BAC was 40, of which, 30 seats were reserved for Scheduled Tribes
and 10 seats were open seats;
(iii) BTC will have a defined territory whereas BAC territory was not defined:
(iv) Elections will be ensured in BTC after every five years, while no elections could
take place in BAC in the last ten years;
(v) BTC will have legislative powers over specified subjects which was not so with
BAC;
(vi) Adequate safeguards for the non-tribals in regard to rights enjoyed by them including
land rights have been provided in the BTC and the existing representation of
Scheduled Tribes and non-scheduled tribes from BTC area in the State Assembly is
to be kept intact.
6. Further, while touching upon the earmarked area and population of the proposed BTC, the
Joint Secretary stated that 3082 villages were to be included in the BTC area. Besides, a decision
was to be taken to add 95 more villages in it. He informed that the total area of BAC as against
proposed BTC included 2941 villages and approximately 8300 sq. kms. of land with a population
of around 25 lakhs. Out of which total Bodo population was 9.84 lakhs. However, the area as well
as population of the proposed BTC may undergo slight change with the increase in number of
villages.
7. The Joint Secretary also apprised the Committee of the steps already taken by the
Government to implement the Memorandum of Settlement such as repeal of BAC Act, 1993 and
dissolution of BAC by the State Government, agreement on 3082 villages to be included in BTC,
consideration of proposal for grant of Scheduled Tribe (Hill) status to Boro Kacharis living in North
Cachar Hill and Karbi Anglong districts as also the proposal for inclusion of Bodo language in the
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. The allocation of Rs.100 crore per annum to BTC and
establishment of centrally funded Central Institute of Technology was also under consideration of
the Government.
7.1 While justifying further the inclusion of proposed BTC in the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution, he drew the attention of the Committee to the recommendation of the National
Commission to review the working of the Constitution that the Sixth Schedule should be extended
to the BAC with protection for non-tribal and non-Bodo groups.

4
8. Before winding up the presentation, the Home Secretary proposed further additions/
amendments in the Bill which was under consideration of the Committee Explaining the need for
additions/amendments in the Bill, the Joint Secretary stated that in the State of Assam, Scheduled
Tribes were divided into two categories viz. Scheduled Tribes of Autonomous Districts and
Scheduled Tribes of areas other than Autonomous Districts. Bodo Kacharis were at present
included in the list of Scheduled Tribes of areas other than Autonomous Districts and were
popularly known as Scheduled Tribes (Plains). Consequent upon the formation of BTC Area District
and its inclusion in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India, the Bodo Kacharis residing in
the plain districts of Assam would stand disqualified from the Scheduled Tribes (Plains) status. In
order that Bodo Kacharis continue to enjoy the Scheduled Tribes status, amendments were
proposed to be carried out in the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes Order, 1950) in
Part-II Assam as under:
(a) In item No.I “in the Autonomous Districts” be substituted by “in the Autonomous
Districts of Karbi Anglong and North Cachar Hills”.
(b) In item No.II for “in the State of Assam excluding the Autonomous Districts” be
substituted by “in the State of Assam including the Bodoland Territorial Council Areas
District and excluding the Autonomous Districts of Karbi Anglong and North Cachar
Hills”.
8.1 He informed the Committee that the proposed additions/amendments would be included in
the Bill as “Miscellaneous Provisions”.
9. After due deliberations, the Committee expressed its whole hearted support to give
a fair trial to the tripartite agreement signed by the Government of India, Government of
Assam and the Bodo Liberation Tigers (BLT) on 10 February, 2003 by way of the proposed
legislation.
10. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
11. The Committee having adopted the clauses of the Bill without any amendments and
having approved the Government amendments to be included as ‘Miscellaneous Provisions’
in the Bill, recommends that it may be passed.

5
CHAPTER-II
The Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003
This Bill is a natural corollary to the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment)
Bill, 2003 which has been dealt with in Chapter-I of this Report. Accordingly, this Chapter is
devoted to the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003. This Bill has also emanated from
the Memorandum of Settlement (MoS) signed between the Government of India, Government of
Assam and Bodo Liberation Tigers (BLT) on 10 February, 2003. It fulfills one of the terms of the
agreement which reads as under:
“Provisions of Article 332(6) of the Constitution will be so modified that the existing status
of representation of BTC area in the State Assembly is kept intact. After the creation of
BTC, the Parliamentary and  Assembly Constituencies shall be delimited by the Delimitation
Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.”
1.1 Thus, this term of the MoS seeks to protect the existing status of representation of
proposed BTC area in the State Assembly by way of amending Article 332(6) of the Constitution.
2. Before having a look at the provisions of the proposed Bill, it may be pertinent to delve into
Article 332(6) of the Constitution. It stipulates that no person who is not a member of a Scheduled
Tribe of any autonomous district of the State of Assam shall be eligible for election to the
Legislative Assembly of the State from any constituency of that district.
2.1 Thus, Article 332(6) prohibits election of non-tribals to the State Legislative Assembly from
the constituencies which fall within an autonomous district. Now with the creation of one more
autonomous district in the State of Assam, namely, Bodoland Territorial Council Area District, the
provision under Article 332(6) will also apply mutatis mutandis  to it unless it is amended or
modified otherwise. In other words, if the provision under Article 332 (6) is not amended, it will
deprive the non-tribals living in BTC area of their representation in the State Assembly. Hence, the
need for amendment.
3. Against this backdrop, this Bill seeks to insert a proviso in clause 6 of Article 332 of the
Constitution which aims at protecting the political rights of the non-tribals by ensuring that the
existing representation of scheduled tribes and non-scheduled tribes from the proposed BTC areas
in the State Assembly remains intact.
4. The Home Secretary along with other officials made a brief power point presentation on the
Bill before the Committee in its meeting held on 26 June, 2003.
5. The Committee also took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in the same meeting.
6. The Committee, having adopted the Bill without any amendments, recommends that
it may be passed.
5

MINUTES

XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 24 June, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
3. Shrimati Ambika Soni
4. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri Drupad Borgohain
7. Shri Pramod Mahajan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
9. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
10. Shri M.O.H. Farook
11. Shri Rajen Gohain
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar
13. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
14. Shri Subodh Roy
15. Shri Anadi Sahu
16. Shri P.A. Sangma
17. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
18. Shri Manabendra Shah
19. Shri Ramjilal Suman
20. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
21. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
22. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
9

10
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
1. Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Sharma, Special Secretary (FFR)
3. Shri K.P. Singh, Additional Secretary (BM)
4. Shri K.S. Ramasubban, Joint Secretary (BM)
5. Shri Pravin Srivastava, Joint Secretary (F)
6. Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Joint Secretary (NE)
7. Shri J.K. Banthia, RGI
BORDER SECURITY FORCE
Shri Ajai Raj Sharma, Director-General
DELHI POLICE
Shri R. S. Gupta, Commissioner of Police, Delhi
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
Shri B.A. Agarwal, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
1. Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
2. Shri N.L. Meena, JS & LC
3. Dr. S.D. Singh, DLC
2. The Chairman welcomed a new Member to the Committee and hoped that the Committee
would be immensely benefited by his presence. He then apprised the Members about the agenda
of the series of meetings for considering legislative business and that the Committee was taking
up to transact the Illegal Migrants Laws (Repealing and Amending) Bill, 2003 on that day. He briefly
mentioned the circumstances in which the IMDT act, 1983 was enacted and the reason which led
to the proposal of the Government to repeal it. He then welcomed the Home Secretary along with
his colleagues to make a presentation on the Bill and apprised them about the procedures followed
by the Committee.
3. The Home Secretary thanked the Chairman and Members for giving him the opportunity to
make the presentation and took permission for his Joint Secretary to make the detailed presentation.
3.1 The Joint Secretary made an audio-visual presentation touching upon all the aspects related
to the IMDT Act, and the repealing Bill under consideration. His presentation included aspects such
as the objectives of the Act; whether they were achieved; what was the purpose of the Act;
whether it was implemented as intended or not; what were the difficulties in the implementation;
and what difficulties would arise on its repeal. And lastly he mentioned as to what the Bill sought
to achieve.
3.2 Dwelling upon the objectives of the Act i.e., speedy detection and deportation of illegal
migrants and protecting the genuine citizens of India and the interests of the general public he
stated that these could not be achieved which were supported with statistical data. He mentioned
that performance of the tribunals created under the Foreigners Act was better.

11
3.3 Highlighting the shortcomings of the Act, he mentioned that the onus of proving an alleged
person to be a foreigner was on the prosecution and the Act was applicable only to Assam. Further
he mentioned about the Assam Accord and said that the amendment brought in the IMDT Act in
1988 did not satisfy the then Government of Assam and the AASU. Besides the report of the
Governor of Assam to the President submitted in 1998 also recommended its repeal. Further on
he referred to the writ petition lying in the Supreme Court, one of which says that the Act was
ultra vires . The opinion of the Solicitor General was also against it which said that different laws
cannot be applied to same classes of persons in different States. He also termed the law to be a
complete failure and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
3.4 It was further mentioned that due to this law, Assam has become a safe haven for a large
number of illegal migrants who threatened the demographic structure of the area and endangered
the security of the nation. Lastly he mentioned that besides the repealing of IMDT Act to check
infiltration measures like completion of border fencing was on war footing and was expected to
be completed by December, 2006 and the Ministry was serious about the implementation of multi-
purpose identity card scheme.
4. The Chairman thanked the officers for their presentation and raised queries such as why
the IMDT Act was applicable to Assam only; what prevented the Government to make it applicable
in the whole of India; what would be the impact if it were to be made applicable to whole of India.
He further enquired as to whether amendment of some sections would make it more effective, and
that whether the handicaps in the tribunals set up under IMDT Act were assessed; whether the
Government had tried to examine the constitutional validity of the Act; and lastly he wanted to
know the authoritative views of the Government of th e day in Assam.
5. Members raised points, inter alia, whether the Foreigners’ Act would be adequate in the
State and if not can serious thought be given to the fact that the Foreigners’ Act itself be
strengthened; the need for an objective assessment of the problem of illegal migrants and effective
measures to check the influx of foreigners.
5.1 A Member raised queries as to whether the Act could have been implemented in other parts
of the country; how the provision was made for the High Court to open cases. He questioned the
rationality of the provision that once  the tribunal had taken a decision it would be final. Another
Member suggested that the contradictory provisions could be amended to make the Act effective
instead of its repeal. He also suggested for deletion of some clauses. He also wondered as to why
the Government failed to detect and deport those foreigners who were living in other States where
IMDT Act was not applicable.
5.2 Some Members wanted to know how the Government was going to assure the genuine
Indian Muslims living in Assam that after the repeal of the Act, they would not be harassed. A
member felt that fencing of borders would not solve the problem and suggested for maintenance
of register of births, deaths and marriages. Another Member wanted the community-wise growth
rate of population in Assam from 1971 to 1991. Another Member suggested an amendment in the
Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 which would help in protecting the Muslims and
Hindus from being victimized.
6. The Chairman requested the Home Secretary to send the replies to the queries within seven
days. He acceded to a request of a Member to extend the time for receiving representations on
the Bill up to 15 July, 2003.
(The Committee adjourned for the lunch and reassembled at 3.00 
P.M.)
7. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the witnesses and made general observations. He gave
a brief outline of the subject matter of the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003 and
then invited the witnesses to give a presentation on the Bill.

12
8. Thereafter, Secretary (Legislative Department) apprised the Committee that the proposed
legislation seeks to amend Articles 75 and 164 of the Constitution in respect of the Prime Minister
and his Council of Ministers as well as the Chief Minister and his Council of Ministers to restrict
the number of Ministers to be not more than 10 per cent of the total number of Members of both
the Houses of Parliament and that of State Legislature where they are in existence. For
accommodating smaller states like Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim
and Tripura, the minimum number of Ministers has been prescribed at seven.
8.1 The Secretary further informed the Committee that, with a view to strengthen the
democracy in the country, the Bill also provides for disqualification for being a Minister if a person
is disqualified on the ground of defection. This qualification has also been proposed to extend to
holding of a remunerative political post. He then invited the Committee to deliberate on the
definition of ‘remunerative political post’ and to decide whether written rule in this matter would
be more appropriate.
8.2 The Committee was also apprised that the Bill further proposes to delete paragraph 3 of the
Tenth Schedule with a view to preventing the abuse of the right of dissent relating to splits.
9. At this point, Chairman and Members raised queries and sought clarifications on points
arising out of the presentation.
9.1 A Member sought to know if it would be possible to increase the size of the Ministry from
seven to 10 or 12 in the North-eastern States so as to accommodate the aspirations of the different
tribes.
10. Most of the Members present expressed their support for the legislation.
11. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
12. The Committee, then, adjourned at 3.52 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 25 June, 2003.

13
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 14 July, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shrimati Ambika Soni
4. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Adhi Sankar
8. Begum Noor Bano
9. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
11. Shri Rajen Gohain
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar
13. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
14. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15. Shri P.H. Pandian
16. Shri Anadi Sahu
17. Shri P. A. Sangma
18. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
19. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
20. Shri Manabendra Shah
21. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
22. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
23. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
24. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
25. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
13

14
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legislative)
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Dr. S.D. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2.0 At the outset Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and made a brief
recapitulation of the background to the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003
and the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003. The Committee, then, took up for
consideration the draft Hundred and Second Report on the Bills. The Chairman also invited
suggestions and comments the Members present on the draft Report.
2.1 A Member raised a query with regard to giving Bodos living in North Cachar districts the
Scheduled Tribe (Plain) status as well as the Scheduled Tribe (Hill) status. The Chairman informed
that the matter had already been clarified by the Home Secretary that it was separately under
consideration and no decision on it had been taken so far.
2.2 After some discussion, the Committee adopted the draft Report without any change.
3. The Committee then took up discussion on the constitution ninety-seventh (Amendment)
Bill, 2003. The Chairman welcomed Joint Secretary (Legislative Department) to the meeting and
made general observations on the subject matter of the Bill, and thereafter, left the floor to other
Members to express their views on the Bill.
3.1 Majority of the Members present, participated in the debate on the Bill. All of them
supported the Bill and some of them even went to the extent of suggesting amendments to make
the law more stringent.
3.2 The Chairman and some other Members opined that the decision of the Presiding Officer
in regard to disqualification of Members cannot be challenged in any Court as enumerated in para
7 of Tenth Schedule to the Constitution. Some Members opined that adjudication of issues within
the House could not be entrusted to an outside authority and appeal against the decision of the
Speaker/Chairman could be made to the President and not to the judiciary.
3.3 A Member was of the view that political parties, with reference to split, should mean both
the political wing as well as the legislative wing of the party. He was of the view that in order
to make the anti-defection law effective, it was imperative to cure the malady. He was of the view
that the political system may be strengthened by having inner party democracy and by maintaining
judicious balance between individual conscience of the legislator and party discipline. The Member
further stated that whip should be issued only on matters of great importance such as — when
there was no-confidence motion, financial business, etc.
3.4 Some Members opined that if the vote of an MP/MLA was against party manifesto and
caused fall of the Government, then he/she should be disqualified and also that the ratio for Upper
House and Lower House for Ministership should be fixed within the 10% limit prescribed in the
proposed legislation. Freedom of action of any Member may be confined to the areas which do
not violate party’s ideology/manifesto/activity/symbol.
3.5 Other Members who felt that the size of the Council of Ministers should be 5-7% and not
10% of the total strength of the Legislature. Also that the Constitution should be amended to
provide that the Member who defects and joins another party, should stand automatically
disqualified from the membership of the House and debarred from holding any post. An
apprehension was also expressed with regard to the provision of the Bill relating to limiting the size

15
of the Council of Ministers to 10% of the membership of the two Houses of the Parliament/
Legislative Assembly, such as a provision was likely to put the unicameral States at disadvantage.
Such States with unicameral legislature may demand for the Upper House—the Legislative Council,
to be at par with the bicameral States w.r.t. the size of the Council of Ministers. On the other hand,
a Member expressed the view, that considering many new subjects and areas of activities which
come up like WTO, etc. limit of 10% should not be fixed for the size of the Council of Ministers.
3.6 Another Member added that Presiding Officers sometimes take long time to arrive at a
decision regarding disqualification of a member and at times take such decisions very expeditiously.
Therefore, the decision of Presiding Officer relating to disqualification should be time-bound.
3.7 One Member, while expressing concern, that of late, defection was causing instability in
bigger States like U.P. and Bihar which was earlier confined to smaller States and the possibility
for defection even after this amendment, as the defectors could be accommodated in the Council
of Ministers through the other route i.e., by offering a seat in Rajya Sabha/Upper House in the
States and suggested that stringent law was which debarred requested defectors who later become
Members of the Rajya Sabha, to get the post of Ministership.
4. The chairman, then thanked Members for the animated discussion. He suggested that
another round of discussion may be held to enable those Members who were not present, to
participate in the discussion.
5. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
6. The meeting then adjourned at 5.44 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 15 July, 2003.

ANNEXURE

19
AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
9 MAY , 2003
Bill No. 39 of 2003
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India in its application to
the State of Assam.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003.
2. The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall, in its
application to the State of Assam, have effect subject to the
following modifications, namely:—
(1) In paragraph 1, after sub-paragraph (2), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall
apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council Areas District
constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) or
paragraph 2 of this Schedule.”;
Short title.
Amendment of
Sixth Schedule
to the
Constitution.

20
(2) In paragraph 2, after sub-paragraph (1), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Bodoland Territorial Council Areas
District shall consist of not more than forty-six members of
whom forty shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage, of
whom thirty shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, five
for non-tribal communities, five for other communities and
the remaining six shall be nominated by the Governor having
same rights and privileges as other members, including
voting rights, from amongst the un-represented communities
of the Bodoland Territorial Council Areas District, of which at
least two shall be women.”;
(3) In paragraph 2, in sub-paragraph (3), after the proviso,
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that the District Council constituted
for the Bodoland areas shall be called as the Bodoland
Territorial Council Areas District.”;
(4) In paragraph 3, for sub-paragraph (3), the following sub-
paragraph shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (2)
of paragraph 3A or sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3B, all
laws made under this paragraph or sub-paragraph (1) of
paragraph 3A or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3B shall be
submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by
him, shall have no effect.”;
(5) After paragraph 3A, the following paragraph shall be
inserted, namely:—
“3B. Additional powers of the Bodoland Territorial
Council Areas District to make laws . (1) Without prejudice to
the provisions of paragraph 3, the Bodoland Territorial Council
Areas District within its Bodoland areas shall have power to
make laws with respect to:— (i) Agriculture, including
agricultural education and research, protection against-pests
and prevention of plant diseases; (ii) Animal husbandry and
veterinary, that is to say, preservation, protection and
improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases,
veterinary training and practice, cattle pounds; (iii) Co-
operation; (iv) Cultural affairs; (v) Education, that is to say
primary education, higher secondary including vocational
training, adult education, college education (general);
(vi) Fisheries; (vii) Flood control for protection of village,
paddy fields, markets and towns (not of technical nature);
(viii) Food and civil supply; (ix) Forests (other than reserved
forests); (x) Handloom and textile; (xi) Health and family
welfare; (xii) Intoxicating liquors, opium and derivatives,
subject to the provisions of entry 84 of List I of the Seventh
Schedule; (xiii) Irrigation; (xiv) Labour and employment;

21
(xv) Land and revenue; (xvi) Library services (financed and
controlled by State Government); (xvii) Lotteries (subject to
the provisions of entry 40 of List I of the Seventh Schedule),
theatres, dramatic performances and cinemas (subject to the
provisions of entry 60 of List I of the Seventh Schedule);
(xviii) Markets and fairs; (xix) Municipal corporation,
improvement trust, district boards and other local authorities;
(xx) Museum and archaeology institutions controlled or
financed by the State, ancient and historical monuments and
records other than those declared by or under any law made
by Parliament to be of national importance; (xxi) Panchayat
and rural development; (xxii) Planning and development;
(xxiii) Printing and stationery; (xxiv) Public health
engineering; (xxv) Public works department; (xxvi) Publicity
and public relations; (xxvii) Registration of births and deaths;
(xxviii) Relief and rehabilitation; (xxix) Sericulture;
(xxx) Small, cottage and rural industry subject to the
provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I of the Seventh
Schedule; (xxxi) Social welfare; (xxxii) Soil conservation;
(xxxiii) Sports and youth welfare; (xxxiv) Statistics; (xxxv)
Tourism; (xxxvi) Transport (roads, bridges, ferries and other
means of communications not specified in List I of the
Seventh Schedule, municipal tramways, ropeways, inland
waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provision of List
I and List III of the Seventh Schedule with regard to such
waterways, vehicles other than mechanically propelled
vehicles); (xxxvii) Tribal research institute controlled and
financed by the State Government; (xxxviii) Urban
development – town and country planning; (xxxix) Weights
and measures subject to the provisions of entry 50 of List I
of the Seventh Schedule; and (xl) Welfare of plain tribes and
backward classes:
Provided that nothing in such laws shall—
(a) extinguish or modify the existing rights and
privileges of any citizen in respect of his land at the
date of commencement of this Act; and
(b) disallow any citizen from acquiring land either
by way of inheritance, allotment, settlement or by any
other way of transfer if such citizen is otherwise
eligible for such acquisition of land within the Bodoland
areas.
(2) All laws made under paragraph 3 or under
this paragraph shall in so far as they relate to matters
specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule, be
submitted forthwith to the Governor who shall reserve
the same for the consideration of the President.
(3) When a law is reserved for the consideration
of the President, the President, shall declare either that

22
he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent
therefrom:
Provided that the President may direct the Governor to
return the law to the Bodoland Territorial Council Areas
District, together with the message requesting that the said
Council will reconsider the law or any specified provisions
thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of
introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in
his message and, when the law is so returned, the said
Council shall consider the law accordingly within a period of
six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if
the law is again passed by the said Council with or without
amendment it shall be presented again to the President for his
consideration.”;
(6) In paragraph 4, after sub-paragraph (5), the following
sub-paragraph shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the
Bodoland Territorial Council Areas District constituted under
the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this
Schedule.”;
(7) In paragraph 10, after sub-paragraph (3), the following
sub-paragraph shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the
Bodoland Territorial Council Areas District constituted under
the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this
Schedule,”;
(8) in paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (1), in clause ( a), for
the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 or
paragraph 3A of this Schedule”, the words, figures and letters
“matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A or paragraph 3B
of this Schedule” shall be substituted;
(9) In paragraph 17, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to
the Bodoland Territorial Council Areas District constituted
under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of
this Schedule.”;
(10) In paragraph 19, after sub-paragraph (3), the following
sub-paragraph shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) As soon as possible after the commencement of
this Act, an Interim Executive Council for Bodoland Areas in
Assam shall be formed by the Governor from amongst leaders
of the Bodo movement, including the signatories to the
Memorandum of Settlement, and shall provide adequate
representation to the non-tribal communities in that area:

23
Provided that the Interim Council shall be for a period
of six months during which endeavour to hold the election to
the Council shall be made.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,
the expression “Memorandum of Settlement” means the
Memorandum signed on the 10th day of February, 2003
between Government of India, Government of Assam and
Bodo Liberation Tigers.”;
(11) In paragraph 20, in Part I of the Table, after entry 2, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“3. The Bodoland Territorial Areas District.”.

24
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The provisions of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution have evolved a
separate scheme for the governance of the tribal areas in the S tates of Assam,
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura through the District Councils or Regional
Councils. There are three parts in the Table appended to the Schedule. They are
so divided in order to distinguish the Areas. The Areas in Part I represent the
Tribal Areas of Assam. Each of these Areas constitutes an “autonomous district”.
The provisions in paragraphs 1 to 17 of the Sixth Schedule relate to the
Administration of these autonomous districts. The Councils are vested with
legislative powers on specified subjects and are allotted sources of taxation.
They have also been given powers to set up and administer their system of
justice and maintain administrative and welfare services in respect of land,
revenue, forests, education, public health, etc.
2. The Bodo Accord was signed on February 20, 1993 with All Bodo
Students Union and Bodo People’s Action Committee, with the objective to
provide maximum autonomy to the Bodos within the framework of the
Constitution for their social, economic, educational and cultural advancement. In
pursuance to the Bodo Accord, an Interim Bodoland Autonomous Council (BAC)
was constituted by the Government of Assam by enacting State Legislation.
Bodo groups were of the view that Bodo Accord had become unworkable due
to non-implementation of the Accord in letter and spirit. Based on the tripartite
talks, a Memorandum of Settlement (MoS) has been signed between the Central
Government, the Government of Assam and Bodo Liberation Tigers (BLT) on
10.2.2003 for a durable solution to the Bodo issues.
3. To meet the aspirations of the Bodos in Assam and in pursuance of the
MoS, it is proposed to—
(i) create an autonomous self-governing body to be known as the
Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) within the State of Assam, which shall
have legislative, administrative and financial powers in respect of specified
subjects;
(ii) provide for adequate safeguards for the non-tribals in the BTC
area to ensure that they are not put to any disadvantage in relation to any
rights and privileges including land rights presently enjoyed by them at the
commencement of BTC.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; L.K. ADVANI.
The 7th May, 2003.
24

25
25
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE C ONSTITUTION  OF I NDIA
** * * *
SIXTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 244(2) and 275(1)]
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in the
States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram
1. Autonomous districts and autonomous regions.— (1)*****
(2)  If there are different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district, the
Governor may, by public notification, divide the area or areas inhabited by them
into autonomous regions.
(3) The Governor may; by public notification,—
(a) include any area in any of the Parts of the said table,
(b) exclude any area from any of the Parts of the said table,
(c) create a new autonomous district,
(d) increase the area of any autonomous district,
(e) diminish the area of any autonomous district,
(f) unite two or more autonomous districts or parts thereof so as
to form one autonomous district,
(ff) alter the name of any autonomous district,
(g) define the boundaries of any autonomous district:
Provided that no order shall be made by the Governor under clauses ( c), ( d),
(e) and ( f) of this sub-paragraph except after consideration of the report of a
Commission appointed under sub-paragraph (I) of paragraph 14 of this Schedule:
Provided further that any order made by the Governor under this sub-
paragraph may contain such incidental and consequential provisions (including
any amendment of paragraph 20 and of any item in any of the Parts of the said
table) as appear to the Governor to be necessary for giving effect to the
provisions of the order.
** * * *
2. Constitution of District Councils and Regional Councils. —(1) There
shall be a District Council for each autonomous district consisting of not more
than thirty members, of whom not more than four persons shall be nominated
by the Governor and the rest shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage,
** * * *

26
(3) Each District Council and each Regional council shall be a body
corporate by the name respectively of “the District Council of ( name of district )”
and “the Regional Council of ( name of regions )”, shall have perpetual succession
and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued:
Provided that the District Council constituted for the North Cachar Hills
District shall be called as the North Cachar the Karbi Anglong District shall be
called as the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Councils.
** * * *
3. Powers of the District Councils and Regional Councils to make
laws. -(1) * * * * *
(3) All laws made under this paragraph shall be submitted forthwith to the
Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.
** * * *
12. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of the State
of Assam to autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State of
Assam—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution—
(a) no Act of the legislature of the State of Assam in respect of any
of the matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A of this Schedule
as matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council
may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the S tate of Assam
prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic
liquor shall apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region in the
State unless in either case the District Council for such district or having
jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs, and the
District Council in giving such direction with respect to any Act may direct
that the Act shall in its application to such district or region or any part
thereof have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as it thinks.
fit;
* * ***
17.  Exclusion of areas from autonomous districts in forming
constituencies in such districts.— For the purposes of elections to the
Legislative Assembly of Assam or Meghalaya or Tripura or Mizoram, the
Governor may by order declare that any area within an autonomous district in
the State of Assam or Megalaya or Tripura or Mizoram, as the case may be,
shall not form part of any constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly
reserved for any such district but shall form part of a constituency to fill a seat
or seats in the Assembly not so reserved to be specified in the order.
** * * *
20. Tribal areas.— (1)* * * * *
TABLE
P
ART I
1. The North Cachar Hills District.
2. The Karbi Anglong District.
** ***

27
27
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India in its application to the State of Assam.
(Shri L.K. Advani, Deputy Prime Minister)

29
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
9 MAY , 2003
Bill No. 38 of 2003
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-NINTH AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2003
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-ninth
Amendment) Act, 2003.
2. In article 332 of the Constitution, in clause (6), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that for elections to the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Assam, the representation of the Scheduled Tribes
and non-Scheduled Tribes in the constituencies included in the
Bodoland Territorial Council Areas District, so notified, and existing
prior to the constitution of the Bodoland Territorial Council Areas
District, shall be maintained.”.
Short title.
Amendment of
article 332.

30
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 332 of the Constitution of India provides for reservation of seats for
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of
the States. Clause (6) of article 332 stipulates that no person who is not a
member of a Scheduled Tribe of any autonomous district of the State of Assam
shall be eligible for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State from any
constituency of that district.
2. In pursuance of the Memorandum of Settlement signed on the 10th day
of February, 2003 between the Government of India, Government of Assam and
Bodo Liberation Tigers, and to protect the rights of the non-tribals, the existing
representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam from the Bodoland Territorial Council
Areas District is proposed to be kept intact. It is, therefore, proposed to insert
a proviso in clause (6) of article 332 of the Constitution.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; L.K. ADVANI.
The 7th May, 2003.
30

31
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE C ONSTITUTION  OF I NDIA
*** * *
332. ( 1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes, except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts
of Assam, in the Legislative Assembly of every State.
(2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomous districts in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam:
(3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause (1)
shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number
of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the
State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the
case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total
population of the State.
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the
taking effect, under article 170, of the readjustment, on the basis of the
first census after the year 2026, of the number of seats in the Legislative
Assemblies of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and
Nagaland, the seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in
the Legislative Assembly of any such State shall be,—
(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly of such
State in existence on the date of coming into force of the
Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1987 (hereafter in this
clause referred to as the existing Assembly) are held by members of
the Scheduled Tribes, all the seats except one;
(b) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the
total number of seats, a proportion not less than the number (as on
the said date) of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the
existing Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the existing
Assembly.
(38) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the re-
adjustment, under article 170, takes effect on the basis of the first census
after the year 2026, of the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of
the State of Tripura, the seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Tribes in the Legislative Assembly shall be, such number of seats as bears
to the total number of seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on
the date or coming into force of the Constitution (Seventy-second
Amendment) Act, 1992, of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in
the Legislative Assembly in existence on the said date bears to the total
number of seats in that Assembly.
31
Reservation
of seats for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in
the
Legislative
Assembles
of the
States.

32
(4) The number of seats reserved for an autonomous district in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam shall bear to the total number
of seats in that Assembly a proportion not less than the population of the
district bears to the total population of the State.
(5) The constituencies for the seats reserved for any autonomous
district of Assam shall not comprise any area outside that district.
(6) No person who is not a member of a Scheduled Tribe of any
autonomous district of the State of Assam shall be eligible for election to
the Legislative Assembly of the State from any constituency of that
district.
*** * *

33
33
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri L.K. Advani, Deputy Prime Minister)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.