Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.
192
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th December, )2015
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th December, )2015
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the One Hundred Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16)
of the Ministry of Home Affairs
ONE HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the One Hundred Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16)
of the Ministry of Home Affairs
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.)-376


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(v)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-38
Chapter I Recommendations/Observations which have been Accepted by
the Government ......................................................................................... 2-4
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s Reply ............... 5-18
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ........................... 19-30
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final reply
of the Government have not been received ............................................... 31-38
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 39-42
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 43-46
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 47- 55

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st September, 2015)
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya   —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Goel
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Dr. V. Maitreyan
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
*16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar
21. Shri Harish Meena
22. Shri P. Nagarajan
23. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
24. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
25. Shri Dilip Patel
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil
(i)
* Shri Prataprao Jadhav, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 9 th September, 2015 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of  Shri Chandrakant
Khaire, MP, Lok Sabha  to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 9 th September, 2015

29. Shri Bishnupada Ray
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Ninety Second Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty-fifth Report on Demands
for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The One Hundred and Eighty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23th April and laid on the Table
of the Lok Sabha on 24th April, 2015. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof were
sent to the Ministry of Development of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished
the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee on 27th August, 2015.
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24th
September 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Ninety Second Report and adopted the
same at its meeting held on 2nd December, 2015.
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
P. BHATTACHARYA
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman
2nd December, 2015 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana 2, 1938 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
ACA – Additional Central Assistance
ACP – Assistant Commissioner of Police
BE – Budget Estimates
BSF – Border Security Force
CAPF – Central Armed Police Forces
CAPFS – Central Armed Police Forces
CCTNS – Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System
CIA T – Counter Insurgency And Anti-Terrorist
CISF – Central Industrial Security Force
CRPF – Central Reserve Police Force
FIR – First Information Report
ITBP – Indo-Tibetan Border Police
LWE – Left Wing Extremist/Extremism
MHA – Ministry of Home Affairs
MOU – Memorandum of Understanding
MTS – Multi Tasking Staff
NATGRID – National Intelligence Grid
NCB – Narcotics Control Bureau
NCC – National Cadet Corps
NCRB – National Crime Record Bureau
NCRMP – National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
NCT – National Capital Territory
NDMTI – National Disaster Management Training Instittute
NDRF – National Disaster Response Force
NIDM – National Institute of Disaster Management
NITI  AAYOG – National Institution For Transforming India Aayog
(iv)

(v)
NPR – National Population Register
ODMP – Other Disaster Management Projects
PPP – Public Private Partnership
RE – Revised Estimates
RGI – Registrar General of India
RITES – Rail India Technical And Economic Service
SDRF – State Disaster Response Force
SHO – Station House Officer
SRE – Security Related Expenditures
SSB – Sashastra  Seema Bal
SSC – Staff Selection Commission
UIDAI – Unique Identification Authority Of India
UTS – Union Territories

1
1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its One Hundred Eighty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Home Affairs for the years (2015-16).   The said Report was presented to the Rajya
Sabha on 23
rd April, 2015 and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 24 th April, 2015.
2. Action Taken Note was received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report on 27 th August 2015. The Minister of Home Affairs has
not yet laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha the statement on the status of
implementation of recommendations contained in that Report. The Action Taken Note received from
the Ministry of Home Affairs has been categorized as follows:
Chapter-I:  The recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 3.3.18, 3.3.19, 4.3.6, 4.3.7, 4.4.32 (of One Hundred and Eighty Fifth Report)
T
OTAL Recommendations-5
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter-II:  The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.17, 2.18, 2.19, 3.1.9, 3.1.12, 3.3.7, 3.3.25, 3.3.27,
4.2.11, 4.4.9, 4.4.19, 4.4.24, 4.4.29, 5.1.12, 5.1.13, 5.2.3, 5.3.2, 5.4.8, 5.4.9, 5.5.2, 5.6.4 (ibid)
T
OTAL Recommendations-21
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter-III:  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not satisfied
with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 2.10, 2.12, 3.1.5, 3.3.17, 3.3.31, 4.1.17, 4.2.12, 4.3.5,
4.3.8, 4.4.16, 4.4.22 (ibid) T
OTAL Recommendations-11
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its recommendations
contained in Chapter - III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing explanations in
respect of those recommendations.
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received: Para Nos. 2.9, 2.25, 4.1.10, 3.3.32, 4.2.10, 4.2.13, 4.4.33, 5.1.14, 5.2.6,
5.2.7, 5.2.8, 5.4.10 (ibid) T
OTAL Recommendations-12
In respect of 12 recommendations in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished interim
reply or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry
should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations
categorized in Chapter - IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendations.
3. The details of the ATRs have been analysed in various Chapters in the succeeding chapters.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
1.1 DEMAND NO. 56
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee strongly recommends that the Government must give emphasis on return of
migrants to the valley. (Para 3.3.18)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The Government is committed to facilitate the return of the Kashmiri migrants to the
Kashmir V alley and their proper rehabilitation there. The Government has earmarked `320 crore for
the rehabilitation of the Kashmiri Migrants in the Union Budget of 2015-16.
1.1.3 An integrated proposal for the return and rehabilitation of the Kashmiri migrants is also
being prepared in consultation with the stakeholders.
Further Recommendation
1.1.4 The committee while acknowledging the efforts of the Government of India
recommends that the initiatives of the Government should reflect on the ground.
Recommendation
1.1.5 The Committee took note of the fact that under Plan Scheme “Special Industry Initiative
for J&K”, the Ministry had projected 
` 130.00 crore in 2014-15, however, it was allocated ` 90.00
crore in BE 2014-15 which was further reduced to ` 52.45 crore at RE stage.  The Committee
observes with dismay that in spite of the 100% utilization of funds under this scheme, the Finance
Ministry has allocated a meager amount of ` 45.00 crore for this scheme against projected demand
of ` 120.00 crore for 2015-16.  The Committee recommends that the Finance Ministry should look
positively into  the projected demand of ` 120 crore of the Ministry while sanctioning additional
amount at RE stage as this scheme is targeted to bring back Kashmiri youths into mainstream so
that they do not fall prey to anti national activities. (Para 3.3.19)
Action Taken
1.1.6 Depending upon the pace of expenditure, proposal for additional amount will be submitted
to Ministry of Finance, at the RE stage.
1.2 DEPRESSION IN CAPFs
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee is sympathetic to the desperate situation of paramilitary forces personnel.
2

3
The Committee feels that the Government should look into their agonies through which they pass
while working in difficult circumstances.  The Committee understands that when the personnel of
paramilitary forces pass thorough stress and feel de-motivated and demoralized it would have far
reaching negative repercussions.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
look into the long pending grievances of the paramilitary personnel and address them in a time
bound manner. (Para 4.3.6)
Action Taken
1.2.2 On receipt of the grievance from the serving/retired personnel or from their spouse or from
NOKs of the deceased personnel regarding maintenance of family, non receipt of pension/family
pension, and other terminal dues etc., the same is forwarded to all concerned offices i.e. Sector,
Range, Group Centre and unit with the instructions to settle their grievances within prescribed time
frame. The applicant is also apprised with the factual position/ status with reference to his/her
grievance within the stipulated time.
1.2.3 Further, the Force Headquarters also take care of the personal grievances of the officials
regarding their promotions/transfers and other related service matters through personal audiences,
representations/ petitions etc.
Recommendation
1.2.4 The Committee understands that years of working in hostile conditions by CAPFs personnel
and staying away from their family, long working hours, sleep deprivation, denial of leave, etc.
take a toll on their lives.  The Committee recommends that the paramilitary forces should introduce
Yoga and other stress management techniques in the CAPFs to de-stress these personnel. The
Committee also recommends that the personnel long posted in difficult areas should be transferred
to relatively normal area after a fixed duration. Special allowances aspect should also be examined.
(Para 4.3.7)
Action Taken
1.2.5 Sufficient periods of Yoga and Stress Management have been included in the Training
Syllabus in order to promote the Yoga and to de-stress the CAPFs personnel working in
uncongenial condition and far flung areas.
1.2.6 As regards posting of the personnel from difficult areas to relatively normal areas after a
fixed duration, it is submitted that each CAPF has a transfer policy for rotational transfer of its
personnel between hard and soft/static locations. The transfer policy is followed uniformly in the
Force. Choice postings given by the Force personnel are considered by the Force to post them at
the desired place of posting as far as practicable and administratively possible.
Further Recommendation
1.2.7 The Committee is of opinion that these techniques should not only become part of
training syllabus but also be added in their everyday routine. Regarding transfer posting in
these forces, the Committee hopes that mechanism to decide over  choice postings remains
transparent and free from nepotism etc.

4
1.3 SENSITISATION TOWARDS ETHICAL AND MORAL VALUES
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee notes the submissions made by the Home Secretary and Delhi Police
Commissioner for making Delhi Police a true reflection of cosmopolitan composition of Delhi
Police.  The Committee recommends that the recruitment to the posts of constabulary should also
be done by Staff Selection Commission (SSC) as has been done in the case of post of Sub-
Inspectors. The recruitment on the basis of All India test conducted by SSC in itself is a practical
solution in this regard where people from the whole country can apply. The Committee hopes that
Delhi Police would soon have all India character and be more representative and broad based.
(Para 4.4.32)
Action Taken
1.3.2 In order to give the Delhi Police a true cosmopolitan character, the Delhi Police is going
to get online exam of Delhi Police Constable (Executive) on All India basis through Staff Selection
Commission as is being done in case of Sub-Inspector (Exe.). Recently the Senior Officers of
Delhi Police had attended a meeting in DOPT on 11.05.2015 for online exam through SSC. In the
meeting it was decided to prepare MOU in this regard.  Further steps are being taken by Delhi
Police on priority basis.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE THE MATTER
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
2.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee notes the courses of actions undertaken by the Government in terms of
maintaining internal security scenario in the country. The Committee also notes the submission that
multi pronged strategies being followed in the short and medium term have led to a declining trend
in the level of Left Wing violence as well as the resultant killings since 2011. The Committee,
however, desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs as per its topmost priority should strive
diligently to improve the capacity infrastructure of Central Para Military Forces and upgrade the
much necessary institutional mechanisms for further enhancing internal security of the country.
(Para 2.17)
Action Taken
2.1.2 The Central Government has adopted an integrated approach to deal with the problem of
Left Wing Extremism (LWE) simultaneously pursuing the issues relating to security, development,
enforcement of rights and entitlements of local communities and public perception management.
The State Governments spearhead all efforts to control the LWE activities in the States. The Central
Government closely monitors the situation and supplements the efforts of the State Governments
over a wide range of security and development related interventions. The underlying philosophy is
to enhance the capacity of the State Governments to tackle the menace of LWE in a concerted
manner.
2.1.3 Apart from providing Central Armed Police Force (CAPF) battalions to assist the State
Police Forces in counter-LWE operations, the Government of India has been providing assistance
for capacity building of the States through the Security Related Expenditure (SRE) Scheme, the
Special Infrastructure Scheme and the Scheme for Construction/ Strengthening of Fortified Police
Stations.
2.1.4 At present, a total of 110 battalions of CAPFs are provided to the States of Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh
and West Bengal in counter-LWE operations.
2.1.5 It is the belief of Government of India that through a combination of security and
development related interventions, the LWE problem can be successfully contained. It is worth
mentioning that due to the measures adopted by the Government, LWE violence has significantly
declined in the last four years i.e. 2011 to 2014.
5

6
Institutional Mechanism: -
2.1.6 State Governments are primarily responsible for Law and Order, countering internal
disturbances, terrorists and naxalite activities. The CAPFs are made available to the State
Governments on the latter’s request to assist them in maintenance of public order.  As per SOP ,
during deployment, infrastructure and other logistics are provided by the State
Government However, before any deployment of CAPFs on long term basis, a joint meeting of all
the stake holders is organized to firm up the infrastructural plan and deployment plan of CAPFs.
CAPFs are deployed once the requisite infrastructure outlined in the SOP is put in place by the
State Government concerned. Further, there is a mechanism of quarterly meeting of Joint Audit of
CAPFs and the State Governments about the review of the operations as well as infrastructure. The
report of the joint audit are further reviewed in MHA and corrective measures are undertaken to
further strengthen the infrastructure required. The periodical review is aimed at ensuring the
optimum utilization of the CAPFs in the overall interest of the internal security of the country. 
2.1.7 To improve the basic infrastructure of CAPFs and upgrade essential institutional
mechanisms for further enhancing internal security of the country, during 12
th Five Year Plan,
(financial years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15), 15306 nos. of dwelling units and 278 nos. of
Barracks were targeted for construction. Out of this 9379 nos. of dwelling units and 245 nos. of
Barracks have been constructed till 31.03.2015. For remaining financial year 2015-16 and 2016-17,
8900 nos. of dwelling units and 160 nos. of Barracks have been targeted for construction.
Recommendation
2.1.8 The Committee notes the national policy and action plan document which adopted an
integrated strategy comprising security related measures, development related measures, ensuring
rights and entitlements related measures and public perception management to contain Left Wing
Extremism in the country.  The Committee understands that only security related measures cannot
check growth of Left Wing Extremism. It should go along with development measures and
strategies. (Para 2.18)
Action Taken
2.1.9 The National Policy and Action Plan to address LWE problem has been documented with
the approval of the Union Home Minister and has been sent to States and other stakeholders for
its implementation. The policy document has adopted an integrated four pronged strategy
comprising Security related measures, Development related measures, ensuring Rights and
Entitlements related measures and Public Perception Management.
2.1.10 Development remains a key prong of National strategy and Ministries of the Central
Government as well as the State Governments are working in synergy towards this end. Some
important development initiatives currently under implementation are:-
(a) Road Requirement Plan;
(b) Improvement of Rail Connectivity;
(c) Installation of Mobile Towers project;
(d) Improvement of education and health infrastructure;

7
(e) Minimum Support Price (MSP) for minor forest produce;
(f) Support for Adivasi festivals/ cultural programmes; and
(g) Increased reach of All India Radio (AIR/FM) and Doordarshan in LWE affected
areas.
Recommendation
2.1.11 The Committee is of the opinion that the development of socio-economic infrastructure and
services such as schools, Primary Health Centres, roads, bridges, etc. should go hand in hand with
security operations in Left Wing Extremism Affected areas. The Committee is of the considered view
that providing basic infrastructure and other facilities can help check growth of influence of left
wing extremism in these areas. (Para 2.19)
Action Taken
2.1.12 The Central Government has adopted an integrated approach to deal with the menace of
Left Wing Extremism (LWE) in the areas of security, development, enforcing rights and
entitlements of local communities and public perception management. The State Governments
specifically deal with various issues related to LWE activities in the States. The Central Government
closely monitors the situation and supplements the efforts of the State Governments over a wide
range of measures both on security and development fronts.
2.1.13 On the development front, the Central Government is implementing special schemes like the
Road Requirement Plan for improvement of roads, projects for installation of mobile towers,
improvement of rail connectivity, education and health infrastructure in the LWE affected areas.
2.1.14 The scheme titled ‘Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for LWE affected districts’ is also
under implementation for accelerated development of the affected areas. The aim of this initiative
is to provide public infrastructure and services such as School Buildings, Anganwadi Centres,
Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Drinking Water Supply, Village Roads, Electric Lights in public
places such as PHCs and schools etc. in the affected/contiguous districts. As on 19.5.2015, a total
amount of ` 9,059.00 crore of central fund has been released under the ACA to the 88 districts
covered under the Scheme and against which an expenditure of ` 8,450.85 crore (93.29 %) has
been reported. The number of Projects completed so far under the ACA is 1,32,708. However, as
a policy decision starting from the year 2015-16, it has been left to the States to continue with
this scheme out of their increased resources in consequence of the recommendation of the 14
th
Finance Commission.
2.2 DEMAND NO. 53 - MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee in this connection also notes that the proposal for issuance of National
Identity Card to the Citizens of India, who are of age 18 years and above, is under consideration.
The Committee feels proposal of  having National Identity Card to the Citizens of India  needs
to be examined  keeping in mind  presence of successful Voter I Card scheme, which is given to

8
the citizens of India of 18 years age and above. The Committee also understands that linking of
Aadhar numbers with the voter I-cards is underway and therefore voter I cards will also have
biometric details. In view of the Committee, this arrangement seems sufficient. The Committee
therefore desires that all possible steps should be taken to avoid the duplication of efforts between
different agencies of the Government as well as avoidable expenditure from public exchequer.
(Para 3.1.9)
Action Taken
2.2.2 The Citizenship Act 1955 was amended in 2004 by inserting Section 14A which inter-alia
provides for the following:
z The Central Government may compulsorily register every citizen of India and issue
National Identity Card to them.
z The Central Government may maintain a National Register of Indian Citizens (NRIC)
and for that purpose establish a National Registration Authority (NRA).
2.2.3 Accordingly, the creation of National Population Register (NPR), the first building block
towards carving out NRIC, has been undertaken as per the provisions of the Citizenship Act, 1955.
The demographic data for NPR has already been collected for the entire country in 2010 and got
digitized, thereby creating an electronic database of approx. 119 crore persons. Biometric enrolment
has been completed for more than 28.42 crore persons.
2.2.4 To minimize the duplication of efforts, in terms of the capture of biometrics, a synergy was
developed between NPR & UIDAI. 12 States/ UTs were given to NPR and 24 States/ UTs to
UIDAI for biometric enrolment. Further, if a person indicates she/ he is already enrolled for
aadhaar, the biometric data was not captured for NPR instead the aadhaar number was recorded
to source the biometric data from UIDAI.
2.2.5 W ith regard to other databases already in place, viz., Ration Card, Passport, Driving License
etc. in general and Election Commission of India’s Electoral Rolls in particular, which are provided
to Citizens of India,  these are based on self verification and not on physical verification at the
ground level.  Accordingly, after due deliberations within the Government, a decision was taken by
the Government to let the NPR complete its mandate by scrupulously following the laid down
approved procedures in the statute book.
2.2.6 The proposal to carve out NRIC from NPR is under consideration of the Government.
This would further address national security concerns and facilitate more effective execution of
social programmes and ensure a robust delivery mechanism.
Recommendation
2.2.7 The Committee recommends that the allocation under NCRMP should be enhanced at RE
stage as to address cyclone risks and mitigation in two States – Odisha and Andhra Pradesh during
phase I of this scheme and  also for Phase - II where States like West Bengal, Kerala and four
other States are to be taken up.  The Committee feels that 
` 416 crores is much lower than what
was projected by  the Ministry which already have liability of over ` 100 crores of the previous
year to be met out of allocation made in this fiscal year . (Para 3.1.12)

9
Action Taken
2.2.8 MHA had requested for Budget allocation of `783 crore for the current financial year.  Only
416 crore has been allocated.
2.2.9 However, the additional demand for funds will be made at RE stage if required for NCRMP
Phase-I & II.
2.3 DEMAND NO. 56
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry but would like to be informed whether the
Government is satisfied with infrastructure facilities in the refugee camps for which no allocation
has been sought or made as claimed by the Ministry. The Committee, while noting that relief camps
in State of Tamil Nadu and Odisha for Sri Lankan refugees have been running successfully with
full Central Assistance, recommends that the Government should also pursue with State
Governments of Tamil Nadu and Odisha to fast pace relief measures for Sri Lankan refugees
staying in camps in their respective States. (Para 3.3.7)
2.3.2 The Committee also desires that visit of inter-ministerial delegation to the camps in both
States may be organized at the earliest. (Para 3.3.7)
Action Taken
2.3.3 The Government of India has already provided funds to the State Government of Tamil
Nadu for infrastructure facilities in the refugee camps as per the demand made by the State
Government. There is no fresh demand for infrastructure facilities in the camps either from the
State Government of Tamil Nadu or Odisha. The relief materials are being given to the Sri Lankan
Tamil Refugees staying in the camps as per the approved rate and quantity.
2.3.4 Regarding the visit of inter-ministerial delegation to the camps, this Ministry had requested
the Ministry of External Affairs and also the Government of Tamil Nadu vide its letters dated
13.05.2013 and dated 21.05.2013 respectively to finalize the programme for visit of the Inter-
Ministerial delegation to the Sri Lankan Tamil refugee camps in Tamil Nadu. The Ministry of
External Affairs vide their letter dated 15.05.2013 had also written to the Government of Tamil
Nadu in this regard. Further, the Home Secretary in his D.O. letter 17.01.2014 had also requested
the Foreign Secretary to fix a suitable date for the proposed visit of the Inter-Ministerial delegation
to the Sri Lankan refugee camps in Tamil Nadu. The Government of Tamil Nadu has reported that
the voluntary repatriation could be considered only after concrete and credible measures taken by
Sri Lankan Government and as such, repatriation at this stage is pre-mature and should be deferred
for the present. The Ministry of External Affairs has again been requested vide this Ministry’s letter
dated 23.07.2015 to organize the Inter-Ministerial Delegation to both the states of Tamil Nadu and
Odisha at the earliest.
2.4 DEMAND NO. 56
Recommendation
2.4.1 The Committee is dismayed to note that discrepancies crept in disbursal of Central Samman
pension by the banks due to confusion about the policy of Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension

10
Scheme as Banks had included certain non-Central Samman pensioners and ineligible dependents
in the list. The Committee recommends that banks should be directed to stop extending such benefits
to non-entitled persons and ensure recoveries. (Para 3.3.25)
Action Taken
2.4.2 During the course of ongoing verification of pensioners receiving Central freedom fighter
pension through various Public Sector Banks, certain irregularities [like disbursement of Pension to
more than 3,000 dead pensioners for many years after their death, payment of wrong amount of
pension to many pensioners, disbursement of dependent family pension to ineligible dependents who
are not covered under the scheme] have come to the notice of the Government. The banks were
directed to recover the excess wrong payment made to the pensioners/dead pensioners and
consequently an amount of `45.00 crore has already been recovered. As a corrective measure,
revised guidelines for the disbursement of Central Samman Pension have been issued. Central
Pension Accounting Office(CPAO) of the Ministry of Finance has been asked to keep
reimbursement to the banks on account of Central Samman Pension within the budgetary provision.
A Pension Disbursement Monitoring Cell has been set up to verify/monitor the disbursement of
Central Freedom Fighter Pension by various Public Sector Banks to the eligible pensioners.
Recommendation
2.4.3 The Committee endorses the views expressed  by the Home Secretary about the inadequacy
of  helicopter services in North East and feels that there is certainly a need to increase the number
of helicopter services in North Eastern Region, which would result in enhanced subsidies in terms
of the outlay. The Committee therefore, strongly recommends that allocation must be enhanced at
the RE stage for the intended purpose and desires that concerted efforts should be made to increase
transport services in the NE region as well as to improve connectivity of the Region with mainland.
(Para 3.3.27)
Action Taken
2.4.4 The Government of Manipur has requested to provide helicopter services in the region
under MHA ’s 75% subsidy scheme. The proposal of Government of Manipur is under examination.
During the current FY 2015-16, allocation of ` 76.45 crore made at BE stage under the scheme
is adequate to meet the present requirement.
2.5 RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES
Recommendation
2.5.1 The Committee observes that present level of housing satisfaction for CAPFs is about
11.63% which is far below than the recommended level of 25% which could further decrease in
view of the proposed additional Battalions to be  raised by the Central Government.  The
Committee, in view of this, recommends that a high level committee may be constituted to look
into the housing needs of the CAPFs personnel and to suggest measures required to attain optimum
satisfaction level. (Para 4.2.11)
Action Taken
2.5.2 To address the issue of housing dis-satisfaction among the force personnel, against
allocation of ` 20,260.01 crore for infrastructure of CAPFs in the 12
th Plan, ` 5,346.43 crore was

11
earmarked for CAPF Housing.  In 2013, CCEA approved the proposals of MHA for construction
of 9,089 Houses and 49 Barracks for BSF, SSB and AR at an estimated cost of `2050.07 crore.
Proposal for construction of 13072 numbers of Houses and 113 numbers of barracks for CISF,
CRPF and ITBP at an estimated cost of ` 3090.98 crore is under active consideration of the
Ministry. The advice of the Committee has been noted for further action.
Further Recommendation
2.5.3 The Committee hopes that the proposal for construction of 13072 numbers of Houses
and 113 numbers of barracks for CISF, CRPF and ITBP will be approved and construction
of the same will be completed in stipulated time period.
2.6 DELHI POLICE
Recommendation
2.6.1 The Committee is constrained to note that there is major shortfall in terms of allocation
to Delhi Police in almost all major schemes, projects, etc.  The Committee understands that Delhi
is the capital city of the country and the law and order of Delhi comes under the jurisdiction of
Delhi Police.  In the recent period, number of crimes in Delhi has risen and threat of terrorism
is looming large over Delhi.  In view of the above, allocation less than required could hamper
modernization process of Delhi Police.  The Committee is of the view that the Government should
look into this and enhance allocation at RE stage as per requirements of Delhi Police in terms
of completing all schemes, projects of Delhi in a time bound and effective manner .
(Para 4.4.9)
Action Taken
2.6.2 Based on the requirements of Delhi Police for completion of schemes and project, additional
amount will be sought from Ministry of Finance at RE stage.
2.6.3 Delhi Police authorities have been instructed to fast track their expenditure so that a sizable
share can be achieved by 30
th September, 2015, which will enable the Ministry to claim additional
allocation at RE stage thereby facilitating Delhi Police to speed up the modernization schemes.
Further Recommendation
2.6.4 The Committee hopes that the Ministry would build a second case for additional
funds at RE stage, by utilizing allocated amount optimally.
Recommendation
2.6.5 The Committee is dismayed to note that only 
` 0.50 crore has been allocated in BE
2015-16 against the projected demand of ` 1.00 crore for Induction of Latest Technology in Delhi
Police.  The Committee recommends that the Delhi Police may be provided adequate fund as
sought by it so that the work on induction of latest technology is not hampered due to want of
fund. (Para 4.4.19)
Action Taken
2.6.7 Based on the requirements of funds under Scheme ‘Latest Technology in Delhi Police’,
additional amount will be sought from Ministry of Finance at RE stage.

12
2.6.8 The Delhi Police has been asked to fast track the pace of expenditure on this scheme so
that additional demand can be projected at RE stage.
2.7 SENSITISATION TOWARDS ETHICAL  AND MORAL VALUES
Recommendation
2.7.1 The Committee empathizes with general perception about police in the country. The
Committee is of the opinion that a person in distress only comes to police station or contacts police
personnel for help.  In such a situation if police personnel at the police station do not behave like
a protector of law & order, it causes further problem to the person in distress. The Committee
recommends that a training programme of long duration on ethical and moral values and people
friendly attitude should be imparted to police personnel especially of lower ranks.  The Committee
is of the opinion that the Government should not only emphasise on the security training of police
personnel but also train them for developing good communication skills, behavior, attitude and
responsibility with the general public.  The Committee is of the considered view that Government
of India should issue guidelines to all the States and Union Territories in this regard.
(Para 4.4.24)
Action Taken
DELHI POLICE
2.7.2 The basic induction training of all ranks of Delhi Police is of sufficiently long duration. The
trainees are imbibed with ethical and moral values throughout their training period.  Emphasis is
laid particularly on citizen friendly behavior and communication skills.  In the present scenario, it
is imperative that attitude and behavior of the police staff especially the lower rung which is usually
the first responders, should be extremely courteous.  To achieve these goals, police training, both
at induction level and specialized training during service is focused on this aspect.  Eminent faculty
from diverse fields are regularly invited to interact with trainees to share their valuable experiences
and professionals are also called to teach soft skills and basic usage of spoken English.
2.7.3 The specialized courses are conducted for in service personnel to inculcate in them people
friendly attitude and right behavior with public:-
(i) Sensitization of staff functioning with women help Desk/DO/DD Writer/Receptionist at
Police Station.
(ii) Course on Soft Skills.
(iii) Course on Human Rights.
(iv) Course on Gender Sensitization.
(v) Course on stress and time management.
(vi) Course on Empathy.
(vii) Course for police personnel towards issues concerning visually impaired and
differently abled persons.
(viii) Course on issues pertaining to persons belonging to NE states, backward sections of
society, women & children.

13
2.7.4 Moreover, Delhi Police is constantly improvising course material keeping in view the
changing needs and dynamic nature of metropolitan policing.
2.7.5 Pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee, the State Governments/ UTs have been
requested to sensitize their Police personnel to be responsible while dealing with the general public
through training on ethical and moral values and people friendly attitude. The State Governments/ UTs
have also been requested that training of sufficient duration  should be imparted to the police personnel
for developing good communication skill, behavior, attitude and responsibility ( Annexure V ).
Recommendation
2.7.6 The Committee takes note of the fact that representation of women in the Delhi Police has
been increasing and the Committee hopes that the Delhi police will soon bring the ratio to 33%.
The Committee is aware that crime against women has risen in the capital city in the recent period.
In view of this, increasing visibility of women in uniform in the Delhi Police will boost up the
morale of women of Delhi.   The Committee while noting the fact that four police stations are
being headed by Women SHOs, recommends that the Delhi Police should post more and more
women as head of police stations as  women victims will find  police stations headed by women
officers as friendly to visit any time and report crimes against them. (Para 4.4.29)
Action Taken
2.7.7 On 20
th March, 2015, Government of India has approved reservation of 33% for women
horizontally and in each category (SC, ST, OBC & others) in direct recruitment in Non-Gazetted
posts from Constable to sub-Inspector in the police force of all the Union Territories including
Delhi Police. This reservation will be available for women against all such vacancies existing on
the date of the issue of this letter and vacancies arising thereafter. In pursuance of the above
approval, all the Union Territories including GNCTD have been requested on 26 th March, 2015 to
make enabling provisions in the relevant Recruitment Rules to ensure implementation of the above
decision of Government of India.
2.7.8 For  selection  of SHOs, the Commissioner of Police may nominate, from time to time, a
Committee that  shall go through the service records of all the Inspectors of Delhi Police and,
where necessary, interview the officers concerned and prepare a panel of Inspectors who are
found suitable to be considered for being posted as SHOs.  The recommendations of Parliamentary
Standing Committee will be brought to the notice of the Committee, constituted for selection of
SHOs in Delhi Police for implementation.
UNION TERRITORIES
2.8 DEMAND NO. 57- TRANSFERS TO UNION TERRITORY GOVERNMENTS WITH
LEGISLATURE
Recommendation
2.8.1 The Committee understands that the budget provision under the Head ‘Plan’ under Demand
No. 57 is decided by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee was apprised that the Plan
component under this demand has decreased during the last two-three years.  Keeping in view that
NCT of Delhi being capital city of country its requirement is very big in terms of infrastructure

14
and basic facilities, allocation under the Head Plan in this demand should be enhanced at RE
stage.  The Committee hopes that with enhanced allocation the Delhi Government will be able to
complete its ongoing construction of hospitals, school buildings, college, signal free corridor ,
Signature Bridge and flyovers. (Para 5.1.12)
Action Taken
2.8.2 Under the Demand No. 57, the Government of NCT of Delhi is provided Normal Central
Assistance (PLAN) for financing the Plan Schemes.
2.8.3 Additional Central Assistance for specific Programmes like National Social Assistance
Programme (NSAP), Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), National
E-Governance Action Plan (NEGAP) and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana were reflected in Demand
No. 57 upto the financial year 2013-14.
2.8.4 Additional Central Assistance on the above-mentioned object heads are being reflected under
the respective Demands of the concerned/subject matter Ministries from the Financial Year 2014-15
onwards. This fact has apparently led to reflection of less allocation made under Plan Component
of Grant No. 57 since financial year 2014-15 onwards. As stated, the apparent decrease in Plan
amount was due to transfer of Funds earmarked for the central schemes to the respective
Ministries.
Recommendation
2.8.5 The Committee also recommends that the Union Home Ministry should take stock of
financial needs for creation of social and physical infrastructure of the UT of Puducherry.  The
Committee takes serious note of the fact that due to non utilization, the Plan component of
allocation to UT of Puducherry was reduced at RE stage in 2014-15.   The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should impress upon UT of Puducherry and other UT
Administrations   to utilize timely the allocations made under various Heads to overcome drastic
cut at RE stage. (Para 5.1.13)
Action Taken
2.8.6 Under the Demand No. 57, the Government of Puducherry is provided Normal Central
Assistance (PLAN) for financing the Plan Schemes along-with Non-Plan grant/loan to meet Non-
Plan gap in resources.
2.8.7 Additional Central Assistance for specific Programmes like National Social Assistance
Programme (NSAP), Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), National E-
Governance Action Plan (NEGAP) and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana were reflected in Demand No.
57 upto the financial year 2013-14.
2.8.8 Additional Central Assistance on the above-mentioned object heads are being reflected under
the respective Demands of the concerned/subject matter Ministries from the Financial Year 2014-15
onwards. This fact has apparently led to reflection of less allocation made under Plan Component
of Grant No. 57 since financial year 2014-15 onwards.
2.8.9 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance and strict monitoring
to ensure timely utilization of the allocation made under various Heads with a view to avoid any
reduction of budget at RE Stage.

15
2.9 DEMAND NO. 99 TO 103 (UTS WITHOUT LEGISLATURE)
Recommendation
2.9.1 The Committee notes that during the financial year 2014-15, allocation on all the Demands
pertaining to UTs without legislature (99 to 103) was reduced at RE stage.  The Committee also
noted that in the case of UT of Lakshadweep, drastic reduction was made at RE stage and even
then the UT could spend 84.08% of what was allocated in RE. The Committee recommends that
all the UT Governments particularly UT of Lakshadweep, should fast pace the project
implementation to avoid cut at RE stage. (Para 5.2.3)
Action Taken
2.9.2 The Recommendations of Committee have been taken note of and all project implementing
agencies have been advised to fast pace implementation of projects and also to ensure maximum
expenditure by September, 2015.
2.10 MONITORING MECHANISM
Recommendation
2.10.1 The Committee while deliberating upon budgetary allocations of UTs without legislature,
came to the conclusion that even after 68 years of independence, these UTs are still underdeveloped
in terms of roads, education, basic infrastructure, etc. The Committee feels that despite pouring of
large sums of money during these years, nothing concrete has been realized on ground.  The
Committee was also apprised of under utilization of funds and projects or schemes lagging behind
and not completed years after projected time frame.   The Committee recommends that a high level
committee in the Ministry of Home Affairs consisting of public representatives should be constituted
to monitor the projects/schemes under implementation in particular and development in general of
Union Territories. (Para 5.3.2)
Action Taken
2.10.2 Home Minister’s Advisory Committee (HMAC) is already in place wherein Hon’ble Member
of Parliament, President-cum-Chief Counsellor (PCC) and elected members of the District
Panchayats are members to oversee the developmental activities of the UT.  However, instructions
are being issued to all UTs to involve the local representatives in monitoring of schemes.
2.11 CONNECTIVITY
Recommendation
2.11.1 The Committee recognizes that there is severe problem of connectivity in UTs of
Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The Committee recommends that in the UT of
Lakshadweep, frequency of ships should be increased. Besides, high capacity three-four more ships
should be procured on priority basis. The Committee also recommends that the Government should
take up the issue of extending the length of the runway at Agatti Airport to make it operational
for modern bigger aircrafts as it would increase tourist flow and help develop Lakshadweep.
(Para 5.4.8)

16
Action Taken
LAKSHADWEEP
2.11.2 During 2000 the UTL Administration was operating a total of 12 ships, inter-island high
speed vessel and barges, whose total passenger capacity and Cargo capacity was 1,694 and 2,695
Metric Tons respectively.
2.11.3 The capacity of shipping fleet has increased in 2015. At present they are operating a total
of 25 ships, vessels and carriers whose total passenger capacity is 3,521 and Cargo capacity is
3,580 Metric Tons.
2.11.4 In addition to the above, two 800 MT cargo vessels are under construction.
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR
2.11.5 The Ship Acquisition Committee has recommended acquisition of 25 ships for augmenting
shipping fleet and improving connectivity viz.
a. Mainland – Island sector 4 x 1200 pax vessels with Cargo capacity
b. Inter-Island sector 4 x 500 pax vessels with Cargo capacity
c. Foreshore sector 3 x 300 pax vessels
d. Harbour sector 4 x 250 pax-cum-vehicle ferry
6 x 250 pax Harbour Craft
4 x150 pax Harbour Craft
2.11.6 Tendering process for construction of 18 out of 25 vessels is at an advanced stage. Once
these vessels are constructed and delivered, frequency of ships will be increased and simultaneously
connectivity between Mainland –Island and Inter-Islands will be improved.
Recommendation
2.11.7 The Committee takes note of the submission made by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the
fares for the Airlines operating between the mainland and Islands in the UT of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands are on higher side which is a hindrance for tourism and also causes  hardships
to the Islanders who often have to go to mainland on emergencies including medical emergency.
The Committee recommends that the Government should look into this and come out with some
concrete measures to lessen fares which will help grow tourism sector in the UT of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands and will also prove helpful for residents of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The
Committee also notes  that the A&N Administration has recently introduced chartered flight services
between Port Blair and Chennai through Air India which operates two flights in a month on every
1
st and 3 rd Saturdays and islanders are being offered subsidized airfare at ` 5,000/- for one way
between Port Blair and Chennai.  The Committee hopes that the Union Civil Aviation Ministry will
consider positively the proposal of UT Administration to increase the frequency of flights to
Chennai and also to start chartered flight services to Kolkata by Air India and also other proposals
which will go a long way in terms of development of UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
          (Para 5.4.9)

17
Action Taken
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR
2.11.8 In order to address the issue of prevailing high airfare on mainland island sector and with
a view to provide affordable air travel to residents of A & N Islands arrangement has been made
by operating fortnightly charter flight between Port Blair and Chennai through Air India w.e.f.
03.01.2015. Initially the chartered flight was operated on alternate Saturday on every first and third
Saturday till 31.03.2014. The frequency of the service has been enhanced and it is now available
weekly once every Wednesday.
2.11.9 Further, Air India has started bi-weekly flight services on Delhi – Vizag – Port Blair Sector
and vice versa  from 09th April, 2015. Islanders are provided with 50 seats at subsidised fare of
` 5000.00, for which the Administration is providing viability gap funding on the Vizag-Port Blair
Sector. Arrangements are also being made for introducing the service for Kolkata-Port Blair sector.
2.12 COMPENSATORY PAY TO FIRE SERVICE PERSONNEL IN UT OF A&N ISLANDS
Recommendation
2.12.1 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that an early decision on the re-instatement
of compensatory pay to the fire service personnel should be taken. (Para 5.5.2)
Action Taken
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR
2.12.2 The matter has been reconsidered in consultation with Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) who did not agree to the proposal stating that it would have repercussions among fire
personnel in other UTs.
2.13 INDIA RESERVE BATTALION, LAKSHADWEEP, DAMAN AND DIU AND DADRA
AND NAGAR HA VELI
Recommendation
2.13.1 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the local recruits should be posted within
their Territory which will help improve their operational efficiency.  The Committee is of the view
that the recruits from Daman & Diu could be posted in Dadra & Nagar Haveli and vice-versa.
The Committee understands that posting away from the family can cause unnecessary stress among
personnel and reduce their mental and physical strength which will ultimately go against the interest
of the battalion which they are supposed to serve.  The Committee recommends that the Government
of India should look into this and make necessary changes in the rules regarding posting of
personnel of this battalion. (Para 5.6.4)
Action Taken
2.13.2 The IRBn was raised with a specific objective and character in mind and therefore, it has
been decided, that the conversion into State Armed Police which would facilitate the
recommendations of the Committee, will not be possible, However, in order to alleviate the
hardships, it has been decided that the duration of deployment of IRBn personnel will be of two

18
years each within the Islands of the UT and outside.  The Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
will be taken as a single entity for the purpose of deployment of IRBn personnel in these UTs.
{p-196/c- UT Div.}
2.13.3 Constabulary forms the major components (more than 75%) of the CAPFs. The recruitment
in CT/GD rank is made by distributing the total vacancies among all States and UTs as per the
formula approved by Cabinet. As per the quota approved by the Cabinet, the vacancies in the rank
of CT/GD are distributed among the States/Union Territories and also among the Border Districts
and militancy affected areas as follows :-
(1) 60% of vacancies are allotted amongst States/UTs on the basis of population ratio.
(2) 20% of vacancies in the Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) (BSF, ITBP, SSB & Assam
Rifles) are allotted to border districts, which fall within the responsibility of the Force.
(3) 20% of vacancies in BGFs are allotted to areas affected by militancy i.e. J&K, North
Eastern States and naxal affected areas. The districts/ areas affected by militancy are
notified by the Government from time to time.
(4) In Forces, other than BGFs, 40% vacancies are allotted to militancy affected areas i.e.
J&K, North Eastern States and naxal affected areas. The district/areas affected by
militancy are notified by the Government from time to time.
2.13.4 Thus, in each Force candidates are selected from each State/UT as per the prescribed
quota. However, a CAPF does not have sufficient number of locations/ offices in each State/Region
of the Country on uniform basis. Presence of a Force depend upon its area of responsibility
(AOR). For example the ITBP , SSB, BSF and AR (Border Guarding Forces) has relatively low
presence in South and South-west part of the Country. Therefore, it is practically not possible to
always post the Force person in or near his Home State. However, all the CAPFs make the best
effort to give posting in or near the Home State on rotation basis post as far as possible.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
Recommendation
3.1.1 In principle, the Committee is in favour of the financial autonomy of the States as
recommended by the 14
th Finance Commission. However, the Committee is of the considered view
that the matter of national pursuits ranging from national security to territorial integrity cannot
be left at the dispensation of the State Governments alone with no monitoring and accountability
of Union Government in spite of clear constitutional mandate to the Union Government to the
effect. As also highlighted by the Home Secretary that the issue of transferring the national security
related Scheme to the States should be reviewed and the Central Government must have a say in
the matter of national importance, particularly pertaining to internal security. The Committee is of
the considered view that the Government must be cautious while transferring such schemes/ projects/
plans having grave national ramifications, to the States so that national security is not
compromised in the name of the financial autonomy to the States. Moreover, the Committee strongly
recommends that even if any centrally Sponsored Scheme is transferred to the States, the Central
Government must have resilient monitoring mechanism over the progress of implementation of those
schemes. The Committee recommends that the Finance Ministry should positively look into the
matter and reconsider its decision of transferring eight Centrally Sponsored Schemes of MHA
merged into an Umbrella Centrally Sponsored Scheme called ‘National Scheme for Modernization
of Police and other Forces’. (Para 2.10)
Action Taken
3.1.2 As per the recommendation of 14
th Finance Commission, budget allocation of eight major
Centrally sponsored schemes of the Ministry of Home Affairs, which were instrumental in
managing internal security situations have been transferred to the State Governments. The matter
has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance for revival of the schemes in the Grants of MHA,
vide DO letters in February/ March, 2015 ( Annexure I to IV ).
Further recommendation
3.1.3 The Committee is of the considered view that the issue of transferring the national
security related Scheme to the States should be reviewed and the Central Government must
have a say in the matter of national importance, particularly pertaining to internal security. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates, its recommendations made in para 2.10 of 185
th report that
the Finance Ministry should positively look into the matter and reconsider its decision of
transferring eight Centrally Sponsored Schemes of MHA merged into an Umbrella Centrally
Sponsored Scheme called ‘National Scheme for Modernization of Police and other Forces’.
19

20
Recommendation
3.1.4 The Committee takes a serious view of under expenditure in respect of the Plan Schemes
of Ministry of Home Affairs during financial year 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 (as on
28.2.2015). The Committee is not happy to note that during the last three financial years, in many
schemes, the Ministry has not been able to spend even reduced allocated amount at RE stage. In
view of the  Committee this not only leads to mis-apprehension amongst economy planners about
the lesser absorption capacity of the implementing agencies of the schemes/projects/plans so
undertaken but also presents reasonable ground to further decrease allocation to the Ministry  either
at the RE stage or at the BE stage   in the next financial year . The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministry should impress upon concerned implementing agencies to fast track
the completion of the projects within the given time frame and avoid under utilisation of funds.
(Para 2.12)
Action taken
3.1.5 Ministry of Home Affairs issues instructions from time to time to all Budget Controlling
Authorities to precisely anticipate, assess requirement of funds under schemes/ project with a view
to effectively manage the resources of the Government. In light of the observations of the
Committee, instructions have been reiterated to avoid under utilisation of funds and a system of
regular monitoring of Budget utilization has been established. While strict internal monitoring is being
done, some of the external bottlenecks which have constrained expenditure are listed below : -
(i) Scheme of National Identity Card (Smart Card) under National Population Register
(NPR) with estimated cost of ` 5,552.55 crore has not been approved by the
competent authority.
(ii) 4 major NPR states i.e. UP, Bihar, Uttarakhand and Chhattisgarh having a total
population of 33 Crore have been allotted to UIDAI.
(iii) During the last three financial years the targets set for various schemes of the Border
Management Division such as the construction of border roads, border fencing, border
floodlighting, construction of Border Out Posts (BOPs) etc. could not be fully realised
due to stoppage of work due to public protests, delay in land acquisition by the
concerned State Governments, pending environmental / forest and wildlife clearances,
difficult terrain, coupled prolonged monsoon and limited working season in high
altitude areas etc.
(iv) The release of funds as allocated in the budget for a particular financial year under
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Assistance to State Governments for setting up of
Counter Insurgency and Anti-Terrorist (CIAT) Schools in LWE affected States is
subject to receipt of Utilization Certificates, Trainers’ Certificate, copy of MoU.
Utilization of funds /release of funds to States got delayed due to non receipt of
Utilization Certificate and other relevant documents from the concerned States
resulting in subsequent reduction in allocated funds at RE stage. The State
Governments failed to provide the requisite documents till completion of financial year
2012-13 as well as 2013-14 and 2014-15. The MHA has been regularly pursuing

21
matters with concerned States to provide the requisite documents at the earliest to
avoid delay in release of allocated funds.
(v) Expenditure in respect of the Plan Schemes of CAPFs i.e. Office Building (Plan),
Residential Building (Plan) and Border Out Post (Plan) during 2012-13, 2013-14 and
2014-15 are indicated below:
Object 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Head RE Exp. RE Exp. RE Exp.
OB(Plan) 2148.50 2226.43 1590.04 1619.40 1300.61 1340.25
RB(Plan) 917.80 901.94 592.43 577.90 628.72 619.81
BOP (Plan) 284.00 287.49 191.00 194.64 225.29 225.62
T
OTAL 3350.30 3415.86 2395.03 2418.52 2162.24 2192.61
(vi) The infrastructure related works of CAPFs i.e. construction and maintenance of
residential building, office building and Border Out Posts are mostly executed by
CPWD. There is substantial delay on the part of CPWD in executing the works.
Regular review meetings are being held with the senior officials of CPWD to address
the issue. CAPFs and CPWD have been advised to work in close coordination and
hold regular meetings at field level so as to ensure that the construction works are
completed without any cost and time overrun.
(vii) The schemes of Disaster Knowledge Network (DKN), National Disaster Management
Training Institute (NDMTI), National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) Infrastructure
and schemes under Other Disaster Management Programme (ODMP) were not
approved during the period, hence fund could not be utilized.
(viii) NA TGRID is a new institution and hence, there are teething problems in
operationalizing the project.  However, necessary steps have been taken within
NATGRID to ensure that expenditure projections are made after detailed assessment of
project status and requirements.
(ix) No fund could be released under the Special Infrastructure Scheme in LWE affected State
during 2012-13, as the approval of the CCEA for continuation of the Scheme during XII
Plan was received on 2.4.2013 i.e. after expiry of the financial year. However during
2013-14 & 2014-15 the entire amount allocated at RE stage has been spent.
3.1.6 Department of Official Language has informed that under the software development and
training (Plan Head 53.03.01.20-OAE) the payment was not made to the implementing agency i.e.
c-DAC, Pune because the quality of the product developed by them was not found to be up to
the mark. The matter was reviewed by the department at RE Stage itself and surplus funds
surrendered.  Sufficient efforts were made by the department to get the quality of the product
improved by also involving DIT. The quality of the product has improved to certain extent and the
product has been made available through the department’s official website. However, a decision
was taken not to make any further payment to c-DAC and hence savings.

22
Further Recommendation
3.1.7 The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry feels that mere issuing
instructions to all Budget Controlling Authorities to anticipate, assess requirement of funds
under schemes/ project with a view to effectively manage the resources of the Government
will not be sufficient. The Committee recommends that strict compliance should be ensured
by putting onus on authorities and officials concerned to plug loopholes which lead to under
utilization of funds. The committee understands that external bottlenecks sometimes create
obstacles in terms of projects completion. The committee in view of this recommends that
the Ministry should pursue vigorously with the State Governments and Ministries
concerned to remove the bottlenecks.
3.2 DEMAND NO. 53 - MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee while analyzing the allocations observes that in real terms the Ministry of
Home Affairs has been allocated less in BE 2015-16 than the amount which was available to it
at RE 2014-15 stage, if allocation of 
` 416 crore for NCRMP is left aside this year. The drastic
reduction has been made in respect of allocations to Census Survey and Statistics activities from
` 1000.56  crore in BE 2014-15 to ` 566.48 crore  in BE this year due to non finalization of
schemes of RGI. The Committee is displeased to note that out of ` 61.58 crore allocated under
Head “Civil Defence & Home Guards” in BE 2014-15, which further reduced to ` 41.73 crore at
RE stage, the Ministry could only spend ` 34.80 crore as on 21 st March, 2015.  The Committee
also takes note of the fact that no enhancement but decrease has been made under the Head “Civil
Defence & Home Guards”. In view of the Committee,  the allocation of this important scheme is
not getting due recognition in view of  role played by civil defence volunteers and Home Guards
in emergent situations. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Government should
take measures to make best use of this vast force in a big way and for this purpose enhanced
allocations are necessary. The Ministry should therefore impress upon the Finance Ministry to
increase allocation under this Head at RE stage. (Para 3.1.5)
Action Taken
3.2.2 Projections to the tune of `72.54 crores were made under ‘Civil Defence & Home Guard’
Schemes to the Ministry of Finance. Due to less overall allocation made by Ministry of Finance
under Grant No.53- Ministry of Home Affairs, a reduced allocation was made under the said
scheme in the current year at BE level.  Based on the scheme evaluations and new initiations, the
matter of providing additional funds will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at the RE stage.
3.2.3 The principal reason for reduction of total BE 2015-16 for the Office of the Registrar
General, India (ORGI) resulting from reduced allocation under Plan Scheme of National Population
Register (NPR) are as follows:
(i) Scheme of National Identity Card (Smart Card) under NPR with estimated cost of
` 5552.55 crore is still under consideration of competent authority.
(ii) The 4 major NPR states i.e. UP, Bihar, Uttarakhand and Chhattisgarh having a total
population of 33 crore has been allotted to UIDAI.

23
3.2.4 The figure for ` 61.58 crore includes budgetary provision in respect of Director General
of Civil Defence (both Revenue & Capital); Reimbursement to State for Civil Defence; Deployment
of Home Guards for election; Reimbursement to State for Home Guards and NCDC, Nagpur
(Revenue, Office Building and Machinery & Equipment).
3.2.5 The reason for less expenditure are that the proposals from various States towards
reimbursements of expenditures for Civil Defence and Home Guards were not received by the
Central Government. Similarly, no claims for reimbursements of expenditure for deployment of
Home Guards for election duty were received from the State Government. In addition, a large
number of posts in DGCD could not be filled and this also resulted in lesser expenditure.
3.2.6 However, all efforts have been made to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate
more fund with the result, BE 2015-16 is ` 39 crore and ` 11 crore for Home Guards and Civil
Defence respectively totaling to ` 50 crore. A total of ` 60.15 crore has been provided in the year
2015-16 in respect of Director General of Civil Defence (both Revenue & Capital); Reimbursement
to State for Civil Defence; Deployment of Home Guards for election; Reimbursement to State for
Home Guards and NCDC, Nagpur (Revenue, Office Building and Machinery & Equipment)
including the 50 crore mentioned above.
Further Recommendation
3.2.7 The Committee is of the view that the reasons cited for less expenditure under
different heads could have been anticipated and all out steps could have been taken to
effectively coordinate with the States for timely receipt of reimbursement claims.
3.3 DEMAND NO. 56
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee is displeased to note that non-finalization of projects or other procedural
wrangles under rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants scheme led to under expenditure and decrease
in allocation during last financial year. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue
with Cabinet Secretariat for early approval of proposed rehabilitation plan. The Committee hopes
that the Ministry would utilize allocated amount during this fiscal in time. The Committee feels
that the Government should look positively into the proposal of the State Government of J&K in
the existing PM’ s package for Relief and Rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants as view of the State
Government alongwith representatives of migrants should be given priority while finalizing or
reformulating any package or rehabilitation plan for the migrants. The Committee notes that the
Ministry has accorded approval for enhancement of cash relief to the Kashmiri migrants from
the present level of 
` 1650/- per person per month to ` 2500/- per person per month and
recommends that the matter should be pursued vigorously with the Ministry of Finance for their
concurrence. (Para 3.3.17)
Action Taken
3.3.2 A variety of measures have been taken over the years by the Government by way of
financial assistance/relief and other initiatives to provide succour and support to the affected
families, within a broad policy framework that those who have migrated will eventually return to
the V alley.

24
3.3.3 A proposal has been received from the Government of J&K for revision in the existing
PM’s Package-2008. The proposal envisages upward revision of the scale of most of the items of
existing package. It seeks enhancement of financial assistance for construction/reconstruction of
houses up to `20 lakh, financial assistance for providing 3000 State Government jobs to the
migrant youths, self employment/business ventures, construction of more transit accommodations
in the Valley, financial assistance for acquiring land for establishing cluster accommodations etc.
3.3.4 In view of the past experience, it has been felt that the new Package for the return and
rehabilitation of the Kashmiri migrants should be finalized carefully in consultation with the State
Government and the representatives of the migrants and other stakeholders. A series of
consultations have taken place in this regard. The Union Home Minister has accorded in-principle
approval for providing additional 3000 State Government jobs to the Kashmiri migrants with
financial assistance from the Government of India and to construct transit accommodations in the
Kashmir Valley for the Kashmiri migrants to whom State Government jobs have been provided/will
be provided. The approval of the Cabinet is now being sought for the same.
3.3.5 The rate of cash relief being paid to the Kashmiri migrants in Jammu and Delhi/NCR has
been enhanced w.e.f. 1 May 2015 from the rate of ` 1650/- per head per month (maximum ` 6600/-
per family per month) to the rate of ` 2500/- per head per month (maximum ` 10000/- per family
per month).
Further Recommendation
3.3.6 The Committee, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take
up the matter with the Cabinet for early approval for jobs to be given and transit
accommodation to be constructed to Kashmiri migrants.
Recommendation
3.3.7 The Committee is of the view that there should be at least four state-of-the-art Disaster
Management training institutes in each side/corner of the country, which is prone to many natural
disasters, for Training and Research. The Committee is hopeful that proposal to establish a separate
training academy for NDRF will be approved soon and suitable course of action would be put on
track for ensuring timely implementation of undertaken projects under the scheme.
(Para 3.3.31)
Action Taken
3.3.8 The Government of India has approved creation of National Disaster Response Force
(NDRF) Academy at Nagpur by merging National Civil Defence College (NCDC) and National Fire
Service College (NFSC) for providing training to NDRF personnel. The NDRF Academy will be
headed by an officer of the rank of IG and called IG(Training), who shall report to the DG , NDRF.
The NDRF Academy has been made functional on 18.06.2015.
Further Recommendation
3.3.9 The Committee is of the view that one National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)
Academy for providing training to NDRF personnel will not be sufficient for such a large
country with the second largest population in the world which is prone to man-made as well

25
as natural disasters. To create an army of trained professionals who specialize in different
kind of disasters, it is necessary to have at least two more such institutes.
3.4 DEMAND NO. 55 - POLICE
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee understands the importance of the scheme of Modernization of Police Forces
which is vital for modernizing police forces of the States.  The Committee is of the considered
opinion that the availability of funds with States has been inadequate and such an important
scheme cannot be left alone at the availability of funds of the State Governments as this scheme
involves security and strategy ramifications. The Committee views that the States alone may not
be able to deal with such vital scheme which aims at modernization of weapons, equipments and
creation of infrastructure required for ensuring  internal security of the country.  The Committee
also notes that the budget allocation for the scheme of Modernization of State Police Forces during
the 12
th Five Year Plan was to be ` 3750.87 crore and out of that, ` 1951.39 crore has been spent
so far and for this fiscal, the Ministry had proposed 1980.00 crore. Since, this scheme has now
been transferred to the States,  the Committee finds itself in agreement with the contention of the
Home Secretary that the so devolved funds are untied funds and there is no guarantee that the State
Governments would channelise these funds into the requirements of policing or public order or
security. The Committee strongly recommends that the Finance Ministry should revisit the matter
carefully and judiciously in consultation with various stakeholders keeping in mind the prevailing
security scenario in the country. (Para 4.1.17)
Action Taken
3.4.2 The matter of revival of Plan schemes under ‘National Scheme for Modernization of Police
and other Forces’ has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance and PMO and this will also be
taken up in the pre-budget discussion with the Ministry of Finance at RE stage.
3.4.3 MHA is in agreement with the views expressed by the Committee. MHA has already
conveyed on 17.02.2015 ( Annexure I ) to the Ministry of Finance that the transfer of the Scheme
to the States will be counterproductive and is not at all desirable on security and strategic
considerations.
Further Recommendation
3.4.4 The Committee understands the constraints faced by the Ministry of Home Affairs
due to shifting of this scheme to States. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation that the Government of India should reconsider its decision and revive
Plan schemes under ‘National Scheme for Modernization of Police and other Forces’ in view
of growing internal security threats.
3.5 RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES
Recommendation
3.5.1 The Committee expresses its displeasure that the Ministry has not been able to complete its
target in terms of construction of residential houses for CAPFs in the year 2014-15. The

26
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that concrete steps must be taken to meet the target
without further delay. (Para 4.2.12)
Action Taken
3.5.2 As per the report available from CAPFs against the target of 4109 houses, 3531 houses
have been constructed during 2014-15.
3.5.3 MHA has initiated following steps to meet the target:-
 Regular review meetings are being held in MHA at senior officers level to review the
progress of the works assigned to CPWD, where the representatives of the CPWD
from all the Zonal Offices as well as from Hqr remain present.
 It has been directed that all the CAPFs will hold meeting with CPWD and discuss the
delayed proposals at regular intervals, at least once in a month.
 CAPFs have been directed that instructions may be issued to the field officers to
regularly review the progress of works and discuss the outstanding issues with their
counterparts in CPWD. In case there are difficulties in sorting out obstacles at field
level, the same may be brought to the notice of Force Headquarters.
 CPWD has been requested to update the status on their web-site with the current
progress so that the status of works could be obtained from the web-site.
3.5.4 However, it is also mentioned that reduction in capital plan budget has adversely affected
the pace of construction of housing.
Further Recommendation
3.5.5 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the remaining residential houses as
targeted are completed at the earliest. The Committee is constrained to note that the
reduction in capital plan allocation has adversely affected the pace of construction of
housing. The Committee, therefore, strongly  recommends that the Ministry of Finance
should be impressed upon in this regard to enhance higher  allocation.
3.6 DEPRESSION IN CAPFs
Recommendation
3.6.1 The Committee is shocked to note that the number of deaths i.e. 978 due to suicide caused
by depression, heart attack and malaria is almost triple than the number of deaths i.e. 323 caused
by Left Wing Extremist violence.  The Committee   apprehends that the figure of death due to
above mentioned reasons may run into thousands, if all CAPFs and Border Guarding Forces are
taken into consideration.  In view of the Committee, this is an alarming bell for the Government
and the Government should immediately take measures for attending to the grave situation on a
war footing level. (Para 4.3.5)
Action Taken
3.6.2 The number of CAPFs personnel who committed suicide during each of the last 3 years
is as follows :

27
Y ear Officers/GOs JCOs/SOs ORs T otal
2012 0 8 113 121
2013 0 10 105 115
2014 0 16 104 120
3.6.3 The causes of suicides in most of the cases were found to be personal and domestic
problems like marital discords, personal enmity, mental illness, depression etc. In few cases the
same could be owing to the work related stress arising out of prolonged deployment in hard areas.
Further Recommendation
3.6.4 The committee feels that it is the responsibility of the force concerned to identify
personnel in distress and counsel them even if it is due to their personal and familial
problems. The Committee strongly recommends that the Government should make proper
arrangements for institutional counseling facility in each CAPF.
Recommendation
3.6.5 The Committee takes a serious note of the exhaustion of reserve battalions among forces.
Reserve Components are necessary to enable the personnel to have soft posting for some time, may
be nearer to their home town area. The Government should consider this aspect seriously.
(Para 4.3.8)
Action Taken
3.6.6 At the time of additional raising of CAPFs, some components/Bns. have been raised as
Reserve Bns. for rest and recuperation of the force through rotation of the Reserve Bns.  These
Reserve Bns. of CAPFs have been strategically kept in various States i.e. peaceful States of the
country, for training, rest and recuperation to keep the troops motivated, fresh and operationally
fit. However, some time due to lack of forces, these Reserve Bns. have been utilized/deployed for
law and order duties as well as Assembly/Parliamentary election duties for short periods.
3.6.7 As regards posting of the personnel from difficult areas to relatively normal areas after a
fixed duration, it is submitted that each CAPF has a transfer policy for rotational transfer of its
personnel between hard and soft/static locations. The transfer policy is followed uniformly in the
Force. Choice postings given by the Force personnel are considered by the Force to post them at
the desired place of posting as far as practicable and administratively possible.
Further Observation
3.6.8 The Committee is not satisfied with the action taken by the Ministry.  The
Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to raise additional
battalions where needed instead of deploying reserve Battalions in conflict zones of the
country as it dilutes the very objective of raising of such battalions.
3.7 DELHI POLICE
Recommendation
3.7.1 The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that the allocation of funds for Delhi
Police in BE 2015-16 is not sufficient to meet the requirement of growing housing needs of Delhi

28
Police personnel and for construction of residential buildings.  The Committee recommends that the
Financial Ministry should reconsider the allocation at RE stage.  The Committee is constrained to
note that housing projects of Delhi Police are moving at snail’ s pace and except one no project
has been completed as yet.  The Committee, therefor e, recommends that all housing projects should
be completed without time and cost overrun.  The Committee also recommends that all procedural
bottlenecks should be cleared at the earliest for residential projects and office building projects and
necessary funds should be provided for the purpose as per requirement. (Para 4.4.16)
Action Taken
3.7.2 Based on the requirements of Delhi Police for additionality of funds, the matter will be taken
up with Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimate stage.
z In the BE 2015-16, Delhi Police had projected for grant of funds amounting to ` 575
Crore under Plan Head (Delhi Police Building programme).
z However, actual allocation was to the tune of ` 301.50 Crore under Plan Head (Delhi
Police Building Programme.
z As on 11.06.2015, ` 81.33 Cr. (27%) has been utilized.
z Further, demand for funds will be projected in RE 2015-16.
z At the beginning of 12 th plan period, the satisfaction level of residential accommodation
for Delhi Police personnel was 18.73%.
z 2236 Staff Qtrs. are under construction.
z The Ministry has already constituted a Project  Monitoring Committee (PMC) under
the Chairmanship of JS(UT) to monitor the progress of Delhi Police Building Projects.
z 205 Staff Qtrs. are at planning stage.
z In addition, process to construct, 4856 Staff Qtrs. at Police Housing Dheerpur has
also been initiated through Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. North MCD has
approved the Building Plan on 19.03.2015. The Project is likely to start shortly.
z By constructing the above staff Qtrs, the housing satisfaction level will be increased
by 28% by the end of 12
th Five Year Plan Scheme (2012-17).
z To increase the satisfaction level of residential accommodation, Delhi Police have taken
possession of the following land from the land owning agencies:-
(i) DDA-Kanjhawala (West)=38,900 Sqm.
(ii) Block FC-15, Sec-30 Rohini (Outer)=20,610 Sqm.
(iii) Maidan Garhi (South) =20,000 Sqm.
(iv) Police Training School, Wazirabad= 28322 Sqm.
(v) Police Training Centre, Jharoda Kalan=63495 Sqm.
(vi) Fatehpur Beri (South)=5056 Sqm.

29
Delhi Police is reportedly making all efforts to get the following housing land allotted by
land owning agencies:-
1. Sultanpur Dabas (Outer)= 10 Acres
2. Kheda Khurd (Outer)= 60 Acres
3. Dilkhush Bagh (Outers)= 52 Bighas & 03 Biswa
4. Ghitorni (South)= 5 Acres
5. Bajitpur Thakran (Outer)= 10 Acres
3.7.3 Besides this, Delhi Police is reportedly making all efforts by holding meetings with the
Sr. Officers of land owning agencies for allotment of more land so that housing satisfaction
for Police personnel could be increased.
Further recommendation
3.7.4 The Committee is presenting its 189
th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the 176 th Report on Function of Delhi Police.
The aspect is being dealt in details in that report.
Recommendation
3.7.5 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given in the context of action taken against
erring officials not registering FIRs. The Committee believes that the number of instances when
police officials refuse or discourage to register FIR may be bigger than what has been claimed
officially. The victims out of fear do not complain against police officials. The Committee is
displeased to note that during the last two years (2013 & 2014) out of 30 and 20 complaints, only
two complaints were found to be genuine. The Committee smells a rat here and finds that this is
a clear case of conflict of interest where police officials themselves are investigating such cases.
It would be better if complaints of non-registration of FIRs are inquired by an independent body.
The Committee is of the considered view that there is an urgent need to have an independent body
consisting of civil society groups, judiciary, etc. to look into such cases and stringent action must
be taken against the officials  for not registering or discouraging people who come for registering
FIRs as just seeking of explanation is not going to serve any purpose. The Committee in this
connection is also of the view that a police station is a vital organ of the society and its
responsibility and duties to the society are of very much significance for maintaining law & order .
In the absence of police system, the society may turn into anarchy. The Committee, therefore, feels
that social audit of police system is the need of the hour and the Government may think consider
social audit of policing in the country to improve its functioning in a transparent manner.
(Para 4.4.22)
Action Taken
3.7.6 In all the 50 cases, where FIRs are not lodged by the concerned police stations, the
complainant made a call to Vigilance Unit for registration of FIR.  All these calls were thereafter
referred to the concerned districts and, in turn, their replies were received mentioning therein that
in all the 50 cases wherever a cognizable case was made out, FIRs have already been registered

30
in the concerned police stations.  It was also intimated that the allegations of non-registration
leveled in these 50 complainants were duly enquired into independently by an ACP-rank officer, and
in 48 cases the allegations were not substantiated since there was no willful or negligent delay in
the concerned police stations.  In 2 cases, however, allegations have been substantiated and action
against the erring police officials has already been taken.
3.7.7 As and when information is received in the Vigilance Unit regarding inaction in registering
FIR, an Action Taken Report is immediately taken from the District concerned. The Vigilance Unit
is an independent Unit which monitors complaints against police personnel. This is in addition to
the option available to the complainant to directly approach local police authorities at senior level
and have necessary action taken on their complaint.
3.7.8 At present, Delhi Police has an inbuilt mechanism to address complaints of non-registration
of FIR.  Apart from the Vigilance Unit of Delhi Police, all supervisory officers of the Districts and
Ranges promptly look into any complaint of non-registration of cases. Complaints of non-
registration are also scrutinized in the Police Headquarters and the defaulting staff are identified for
suitable corrective action.  Calling of explanation is mandatory as the officer needs to be given an
opportunity to explain the reasons for not registering the FIR. If the reasons are not found
convincing, based on the seriousness of the situation, further necessary departmental action is
taken.
3.7.9 As for constitution of independent body to look into such complaints, at present Delhi
Police is accountable to several Commissions such as National Human Rights Commission, Public
Grievances Commission, Central Vigilance Commission, etc. and complaints of non-registration are
also monitored by the Courts of Law.
Further Recommendation
3.7.10 The committee is dismayed to note that out of 50 complaints for not lodging of FIRs,
only 2 complaints were found to be genuine. The committee is not convinced with the
information provided and  surprised to find that complainants made complains for non-
registration of their FIRs and it was found by vigilance unit that FIRs were already lodged
in respective police stations which indicates that even though a FIR was lodged the
complainant made complaint that FIR was not lodged which apparently seems unacceptable.
The Committee would like to be apprised of time and date of such complaints and FIRs
lodged in such cases. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that there should
be non-official Members of vigilance unit drawn from other government agencies, human
rights organizations, civil society organizations etc. to look into such complaint. It is then
only, impartiality and proper check and balance can be ensured and conflict of interest can
be avoided.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
Recommendation
4.1.1 The main concern of the Committee is that overall responsibility for these schemes which
are of vital importance for country’ s internal security would now lie with the State Governments.
The Committee is of the view that the role of the Central Government in these schemes which are
largely meant for creating long term infrastructure and assets for a robust internal security
architecture in the country, should not be undermined.  The Committee agrees with the Home
Secretary that these schemes give effective leverage and instrument to the Ministry to seek
engagement of States to manage internal security related issues, problems etc.
(Para 2.9)
Action Taken
4.1.2 During the year 2014-15, the eight centrally sponsored schemes were clubbed under one
umbrella scheme ‘National Scheme for Modernization of Police and other Forces’. The scheme
provides an effective leverage/instrument to the Ministry to engage with and seek synergistic co-
operation from the State Governments in managing various internal security related challenges and
problems. The matter for revival of Plan schemes under ‘National Scheme for Modernization of
Police and other Forces’ in the current financial year 2015-16, has been taken up with Ministry
of Finance and PMO by Home Secretary vide DO letters in February/March, 2015 ( Annexure I
to IV ). Reminder to the Ministry of Finance is being sent.
Recommendation
4.1.3 The Committee takes note of the increase of 11.52% over RE 2014-15 and 4.78% over BE
2014-15 in allocation to the Ministry of Home Affairs for current fiscal year.  The Committee is
constrained to express its displeasure over the fact that out of 
` 1,07,790.18 crore projected demand
of the Ministry, only ` 78,470.35 crore has been allocated. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance for enhanced
allocation at RE stage.  The Committee is of the view that the reduced allocation against projected
demand may affect ongoing schemes/projects. The Committee also takes note of the major shortfall
in Demand No. 55 concerning Central Police Forces where against projected demand of
` 86,231.47 crore, only ` 62,124.52 crore has been allocated. The Committee is of the considered
view that reduced allocation for Police Forces under Demand No. 55 must be enhanced at RE
stage as per the requirement of the police forces. Otherwise it might affect schemes such as housing
schemes for CAPFs and other infrastructure needs of Police Forces.
(Para 2.25)
31

32
Action Taken
4.1.4 Ministry of Finance has allocated budget which is less than the demand projected by the
Ministry in the budget for the current financial year. Accordingly, reduced allocation are being made
in schemes such as housing schemes of CAPFs and other infrastructure needs of the Police
Forces. Based on the project evaluations and physical targets achievements, the matter of providing
additional funds will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at the time of Revised Estimate Stage.
4.1.5 The concerns of the Committee on drastic cut over CAPFs budget allocation will be
projected to the Ministry of Finance at Supplementary Stage/Revised Estimate stage so that the
urgent requirement of funds for meeting the expenditure on  ongoing schemes/projects are not
affected.
Further observation
4.1.6 The committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and while expressing concern
over lower allocation,   recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should impress upon
the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation (at RE stage) in sync with demand projected
by the MHA to meet the shortfall so that the schemes such as housing schemes of CAPFs
and other infrastructure needs of the Police Forces should not be curtailed for want of fund.
4.1.7 The Ministry may simultaneously work out a mechanism for judicious and optimum
utilization of available funds so that any under utilization may negate the demand for
additional funds at RE stage.
POLICE FORCES
4.2 DEMAND NO. 55 - POLICE
Recommendation
4.2.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that there is an increase of 10.2% in BE 2015-16
in comparison to RE 2014-15. The Committee is shocked to note that out of total allocation under
Demand No. 55, 89.13% of total allocation is utilized for salaries and ration and only 10.87%
is meant for important schemes/projects viz. modernization of police forces, SRE, CCTNS, Research,
etc. The Committee is accordingly of the considered view that the percentage share of important
components/heads under this Demand should be progressively increased in the coming years for
maintaining operational efficiency. As requested by the Ministry representative, the plan allocation
of the first component may be increased. (Para 4.1.10)
Action Taken
4.2.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the matter of providing
additional funds will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the time of Supplementary
Demands for Grants and Revised Estimate Stages.
Further observation
4.2.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of the final allocation made at RE.
32

33
4.3 DEMANDS NO. 56
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee is not happy to note the explanation given for under utilization of funds
under plan scheme called “Infrastructure for NDRF” where, in BE 2014-15, the allocation was
`200 crores which was reduced to `50 crores at RE stage and the Ministry could spend only ` 7.11
crores. Since this scheme has been cleared by concerned authorities, the Committee recommends that
the Ministry should move forward at fast pace on the works under this scheme.
(Para 3.3.32)
Action Taken
4.3.2 After approval of the scheme for creation of Infrastructure of NDRF battalions and teams,
a sanction order has been issued on 27
th March 2015. The scheme was expected to be approved
early in the financial year of 2014-15, but has been approved at the end of the year. Hence the
budget allocated during the year could not be utilized. Now the process of creation of
infrastructure has been initiated and the budget allocated in the current year i.e. 2015-16 will be
utilized timely.
Further observation
4.3.3 This reflects faulty planning of the Ministry which ultimately led to surrendering of
allocated funds. The Committee only hopes that the Ministry would learn from its
experiences and would take timely decision.
4.4 RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES
Recommendation
4.4.1 The Committee is constrained to note that the Finance Ministry has drastically reduced the
allocation almost by half for Residential Building Plan in BE 2015-16 in comparison to BE 2014-15,
which could adversely affect housing needs of Central Police Forces. The Committee, in view of
the above, recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter with Finance Ministry to
enhance allocation as per requirements of CAPFs, otherwise, it would be impossible to achieve the
target set for 2015-16. The Committee also recommends that the Government should positively look
into the demand of 
`12243.25 crore for the last two years of Five Year Plan for construction of
8900 residential quarters for CAPFs along with the office and security infrastructure.
(Para 4.2.10)
Action Taken
4.4.2 Against the Budgetary Projection of `1312 crores for residential projects of Central Armed
Police Forces an allocation of ` 430.19 crores were made on the basis of reduced Plan Budget
allocated by the Ministry of Finance under the Grant No.55- Police. Based upon the allocation
made to CAPFs, the expenditure trend, committed liabilities in CAPFs, the additional requirement
for 2015-16 will be projected at Supplementary Stage/Revised Estimate stage to the  Ministry
of Finance  so as to ensure that the requirement of CAPFs do not suffer due to lack of
funds.

34
Further Observation
4.4.3 The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance would grant enhanced allocation
at RE to ensure that the requirement of CAPFs in terms of providing residential
accommodations does not suffer due to under allocation.
Recommendation
4.4.4 The Committee notes the submission made by the Home Secretary regarding the need of
having more executing agencies for construction/maintenance of houses for CAPFs. The Committee
also feels that more agencies can help expedite construction of houses for CAPFs and recommends
that the Government should come out with concrete decision regarding this at the earliest.
(Para 4.2.13)
Action Taken
4.4.5 A proposal has been formulated and is under consideration in the Ministry.
Further Observation
4.4.6 The Committee hopes that the proposal will be given due consideration in view of the
dire need of early completion of construction/maintenance of houses for CAPFs. The
Committee would like to be apprised of final decision in this regard.
4.5 SENSITISATION TOWARDS ETHICAL AND MORAL VALUES
Recommendation
4.5.1 The Committee raised the issue of duty hours of Delhi police personnel and allowances paid
for extra working hours. The Commissioner of Police, Delhi replied that officially there is fixed
duty hour, however, it is not possible to follow. He added that there is no provision of
compensatory leave and extra working hours allowances to Delhi Police personnel. The Committee
understands that in view of the nature of work, it is not practically possible to follow fixed duty
hours in Delhi Police. However, the Committee feels that the police personnel working extra hours
should be given allowance/compensation, etc. to keep them motivated. Subject to the exigency of
work, there should also be provision for compensatory leave for personnel deployed during
holidays. (Para 4.4.33)
Action Taken
4.5.2 In 1979, the Government of India sanctioned one month’s extra pay as compensatory pay
to the non-gazetted police personnel of Delhi Police in lieu of performing long hours of duty and
their inability to avail themselves of the holidays and weekly off days as they are not only required
to be on duty on most of the public holidays like Republic Day, Independence Day, Dussehra,
Diwali and Moharram etc. but also have to put in extra hours of work so as to maintain public
peace and order. Further, the police personnel, on a number of occasions, are not able to avail
holidays even on Sundays. Restrictions are also imposed on grant of casual leave/earned leave
depending upon the prevailing law and order.  Thus, the number of days of extra work put in by
Delhi Police personnel is much more than the compensatory pay of 30 days payable to the rank
of Constable to Inspector.

35
4.5.3 Besides this, the pay scales of police personnel in the UT of Chandigarh and in the State
of Punjab are higher than what are being paid in Delhi. Pay scales of police personnel in U.P . are
more or equivalent to that of Delhi Police. All these three UT/States are giving one month’s pay
as compensatory pay to their police personnel in addition to other benefits which are not available
to Delhi Police.
4.5.4 Commitments of Delhi Police have also increased manifold. The terrorists activities and
threats to VVIPs and other persons, to be provided with security of Delhi Police under various
categories, have been increasing day by day. Similarly, the number of agitations, demonstrations/
processions and other law & order situations have been on the increase all through and more so
during recent times.
4.5.5 In view of above, a proposal to enhance the compensatory pay upto 60 days in a calendar
year for all the ranks of Delhi Police has been submitted by Delhi Police to 7
th Central Pay
Commission for their recommendation.
4.6 DEMAND NO. 57 - TRANSFER TO UNION TERRITORY GOVERNMENTS WITH
LEGISLATURE
Recommendation
4.6.1 The Committee notes that the Budget Estimates allocation under Grant 57 has taken a
downward turn from the financial year 2013-14.  The Committee also takes note of the fact that
during the last five years, there is 17% decrease in Budget Estimates allocation.  The Committee,
in view of the inflationary pressures recommends that the Government should enhance allocation
under this demand at RE stage. (Para 5.1.14)
Action Taken
4.6.2 Keeping in view the recommendation of the Committee, the issue for enhancement of
allocation under Grant No. 57 at RE Stage after taking into account the inflationary pressure will
be taken up with the Ministry of Finance. However, a request for granting special dispensation for
Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the level
of Home Secretary vide letter dated 15.05.2015 ( Annexure VI ).
Further Observation
4.6.3 The committee desires that the matter should be pursued vigorously as there is a
pressing need for development of these two UTs which are lagging behind on various
parameters.
4.7 DEMAND NO. 99 TO 103 (UTs WITHOUT LEGISLATURE)
Recommendation
4.7.1 The Committee notes the allocation details regarding Demand No. 99 to 103 pertaining to
UTs without legislature.  The Committee was briefed that the allocation is not as per requirement
of the UTs.  The Committee in view of this, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should
take up the matter with Finance Ministry for enhancing the allocation at RE stage so that ongoing
projects/schemes may not be affected. Keeping in view, lower connectivity facility from mainland,

36
poor infrastructure facilities in some of the Union Territories particularly Andaman & Nicobar
Islands and Lakshadweep, a separate long term planning should be made and the Government
should consider higher allocation for lagging Union Territories. (Para 5.2.6)
Action Taken
4.7.2 The Ministry of Finance has been requested to take note of the recommendation made by
the committee while preparing the budget estimates of the UTs vide letter no. 15041/8/2015-Bgt-
II dated 15/5/2015.
4.7.3 No reply has been received from the Ministry of Finance so far.
Further observation
4.7.4 The Committee desires that the matter should be pursued with Ministry of Finance
vigorously for allocation of funds as per requirement of the UTs as there is a pressing need
for development of these two UTs which are lagging behind on various parameters.
Recommendation
4.7.5 The Committee is of the view that the Plan expenditure pertaining to the Union Territories
without legislature should be more and there should not be any cut in the Plan expenditure in the
proposals as there is no institutional grievance redressal mechanism as is available with UTs with
legislature.  Besides, the Committee recommends that budget Grants for UTs without legislature
should be made non-lapsable as in the case of North Eastern States where unspent balances are
carried forward for the next year. The Committee desires that similar provisions should be applied
to the Union Territories in view of their pressing needs. (Para 5.2.7)
Action Taken
4.7.6 The Ministry of Finance has been requested to take note of the recommendation made by
the committee while preparing the budget estimates of the UTs vide letter no. 15041/8/2015-Bgt-
II dated 15/5/2015.
4.7.7 No reply has been received from the Ministry of Finance so far.
Further observation
4.7.8 The Committee desires that the matter should be pursued with the Ministry of
Finance vigorously for ensuring that plan expenditure pertaining to the Union Territories
without legislature should not be curtailed  as there is a pressing need for development of
these two UTs which are lagging behind on various parameters.
Recommendation
4.7.9 The Committee is also of the view that the Finance Ministry should relax its norms/rules
of 30
th September cutoff date for one half of the expenditure to be made from what was allocated
in Budget Estimates for revising its estimates. The Committee recommends that the Ministry in
tandem with other Ministries should take up the matter with the Finance Ministry for changing its
unscientific cutoff date i.e. 30
th September for one half of the expenditure which is allocated in
Budget Estimate. (Para 5.2.8)

37
Action Taken
4.7.10 The Ministry of Finance has been requested to take note of the recommendation made by
the committee while preparing the budget estimates of the UTs vide letter no. 15041/8/2015-Bgt-
II dated 15/5/2015
4.7.11 No reply has been received from the Ministry of Finance so far.
Further observation
4.7.12 The Committee desires that the matter should be pursued with the Ministry of
Finance vigorously as there is a pressing need for development of these two UTs which are
lagging behind on various parameters.
4.8 CONNECTIVITY
Recommendation
4.8.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that due to ageing fleet in the inter-island sector in
UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands and feels that there is a need to augment the operational
availability of vessels to improve the frequency. The Committee also takes note of the fact that the
proposed passenger ships to be included in the fleet are still at planning stage. The Committee
recommends that these ships should be ordered for supply with a deadline. The Committee also
recommends that interim arrangement of chartering ships from the open market until own ships are
supplied by the manufacturer should be done at the earliest. There should not be any delay in
chartering the ships from open market. This may be done for both Andaman & Nicobar Islands
and Lakshadweep. (Para 5.4.10)
Action Taken
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR
4.8.2 At present 05 vessels of various capacities are being operated in inter-island sector for
providing connectivity between A&N Islands. Out of the five, three vessels have already outlived
their economic life span and taking into account the facts mentioned above the Ship Acquisition
Committee of MoS recommended acquisition of 4x500 pax vessels for improving connectivity in
Inter-Island Sector and acquisition process is in progress.
4.8.3 In line with the “Make in India” policy of the Government of India, it has been decided to
award the construction work of 4 Nos. 500 pax capacity inter-island ships to Cochin Shipyard
Limited (CSL) on nomination basis. A committee has been constituted for the price discovery of
these vessels the process of which is likely to be concluded soon and thereafter the work of
construction will be awarded to CSL. It is pertinent to mention here that two 500 P AX vessels earlier
ordered with M/s Bharti Shipyard Ltd. could not be completed due to financial crunch in the shipyard
and the action for rescinding that contract is parallelly being progressed by the A & N Administration.
4.8.4 Since the ship acquisition is a long drawn process and is likely to take time, as an interim
measure, to meet the immediate requirement to augment shipping services in Inter-Island Sector,
the A & N Administration is actively progressing wet lease/chartering of two ships initially for a
period of five years. The tender-documents have been finalised and the tenders are likely to be
floated shortly by Shipping Corporation of India Ltd.

38
LAKSHADWEEP
4.8.5 The islands of Union Territory of Lakshadweep are connected to mainland by ships owned
by the Union Territory Lakshadweep Administration and operated by M/s Lakshadweep
Development Corporation Limited, a Government of India undertaking under the Lakshadweep
Administration. All major and bigger ships are operated from Kochi Port and smaller capacity
passenger ships and cargo barges are operated from Beypore and Mangalore. There are 26 ships
of various sizes and capacities owned by UTL Administration as per details given below:-
      1. All weather Mainland-Island : 5 Nos
      2. Fair-weather Mainland-Island Ships : 2 Nos
      3. Fair-weather High Speed Crafts : 10 Nos
      4. All-weather Cargo Barge : 4 Nos
      5. Fair-weather Oil Barge : 2 Nos
      6. 10 T Bollard Pull Tugs : 2 Nos
      7. LPG carrier (2000 cylinder capacity) : 1 No.
2.    Details of all-weather passenger ships are indicated as under:-
Sl. Name of Ship Type of ship Cargo Passenger
No. Capacity Capacity
(MT)
1. M.V . Kavaratti Passenger cum cargo 160 700
2. M.V. Arabian Sea Passenger cum cargo 100 250
3. M.V . Lakshadweep Sea Passenger cum Cargo 100 250
4. M.V . Corals Passenger cum Cargo 250 400
5. M.V . Lagoons Passenger cum Cargo 250 400
T
OTAL 860 2000
Further Observation
4.8.6 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that chartering of two ships to meet
immediate requirements of UT of Andaman and nicobar Islands should be done at the
earliest without procedural delays. Also all other processes for construction of 4x500 pax
vehicles should be completed in a dedicated time frame.

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A GLANCE
DEMAND NO. 56
The committee while acknowledging the efforts of the Government of India
recommends that the initiatives of the Government should reflect on the ground.
(Para 1.1.4)
DEPRESSION IN CAPFs
The Committee is of opinion that these techniques should not only become part of
training syllabus but also be added in their everyday routine. Regarding transfer posting in
these forces, the Committee hopes that mechanism to decide over  choice postings remains
transparent and free from nepotism etc. (Para 1.2.7)
RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES
The Committee hopes that the proposal for construction of 13072 numbers of Houses
and 113 numbers of barracks for CISF, CRPF and ITBP will be approved and construction
of the same will be completed in stipulated time period. (Para 2.5.3)
DELHI POLICE
The Committee hopes that the Ministry would build a second case for additional
funds at RE stage, by utilizing allocated amount optimally. (Para 2.6.4)
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
The Committee is of the considered view that the issue of transferring the national
security related Scheme to the States should be reviewed and the Central Government must
have a say in the matter of national importance, particularly pertaining to internal security.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates, its recommendations made in para 2.10 of 185
th report
that  the Finance Ministry should positively look into the matter and reconsider its decision
of transferring eight Centrally Sponsored Schemes of MHA merged into an Umbrella
Centrally Sponsored Scheme called ‘National Scheme for Modernization of Police and other
Forces’. (Para 3.1.3)
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry feels that mere issuing
instructions to all Budget Controlling Authorities to anticipate, assess requirement of funds
under schemes/ project with a view to effectively manage the resources of the Government
will not be sufficient. The Committee recommends that strict compliance should be ensured
by putting on us on authorities and officials concerned to plug loopholes which lead to under
utilization of funds. The committee understands that external bottlenecks sometimes create
obstacles in terms of projects completion. The committee in view of this recommends that
the Ministry should pursue vigorously with the State Governments and Ministries
concerned to remove the bottlenecks. (Para 3.1.7)
39

40
DEMAND NO. 53 - MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
The Committee is of the view that the reasons cited for less expenditure under
different heads could have been anticipated and all out steps could have been taken to
effectively coordinate with the states for timely receipt of reimbursement claims.
(Para 3.2.7)
DEMAND NO. 56
The Committee, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take
up the matter with the Cabinet for early approval for jobs to be given and transit
accommodation to be constructed to Kashmiri migrants. (Para 3.3.6)
The Committee is of the view that one National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)
Academy for providing training to NDRF personnel will not be sufficient for such a large
country with the second largest population in the world which is prone to man-made as well
as natural disasters. To create an army of trained professionals who specialize in different
kind of disasters, it is necessary to have at least two more such institutes.
(Para 3.3.9)
DEMAND NO. 55 - POLICE
The Committee understands the constraints faced by the ministry of Home Affairs
due to shifting of this scheme to states. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation that the Government of India should reconsider its decision and revive
Plan schemes under ‘National Scheme for Modernization of Police and other Forces’ in view
of growing internal security threats. (Para 3.4.4)
RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the remaining residential houses
as targeted are completed at the earliest. The Committee is constrained to note that
the reduction in capital plan allocation has adversely affected the pace of construction
of housing. The Committee, therefore, strongly  recommends that the Ministry of
Finance should be impressed upon in this regard to enhance higher  allocation.
(Para 3.5.5)
DEPRESSION IN CAPFS
The committee feels that it is the responsibility of the force concerned to identify
personnel in distress and counsel them even if it is due to their personal and familial
problems. The Committee strongly recommends that the Government should make proper
arrangements for institutional counseling facility in each CAPF. (Para 3.6.4)
The Committee is not satisfied with the action taken by the Ministry.  The
Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to raise additional
battalions where needed instead of deploying reserve Battalions in conflict zones of the
country as it dilutes the very objective of raising of such battalions. (Para 3.6.8)

41
DELHI POLICE
The Committee is presenting its 189 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the 176 th Report on Function of Delhi Police.
The aspect is being dealt in details in that report. (Para 3.7.3)
The committee is dismayed to note that out of 50 complaints for not lodging of FIRs,
only 2 complaints were found to be genuine. The committee is not convinced with the
information provided and  surprised to find that complainants made complains for non-
registration of their FIRs and it was found by vigilance unit that FIRs were already lodged
in respective police stations which indicates that even though a FIR was lodged the
complainant made complaint that FIR was not lodged which apparently seems unacceptable.
The Committee would like to be apprised of time and date of such complaints and FIRs
lodged in such cases. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that there should
be non-official Members of vigilance unit drawn from other Government agencies, human
rights organizations, civil society organizations etc. to look into such complaint. It is then
only, impartiality and proper check and balance can be ensured and conflict of interest can
be avoided. (Para 3.7.9)
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
The committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and while expressing concern
over lower allocation,   recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should impress upon
the ministry of Finance for higher allocation (at RE stage)  in sync with demand projected by
the MHA to meet the shortfall so that the schemes such as housing schemes of CAPFs and
other infrastructure needs of the Police Forces should not be curtailed for want of fund.
(Para 4.1.6)
The Ministry may simultaneously work out a mechanism for judicious and optimum
utilization of available funds so that any under utilization may negate the demand for
additional funds at RE stage. (Para 4.1.7)
POLICE FORCES
DEMAND NO. 55 - POLICE
The Committee would like to be apprised of the final allocation made at RE.
(Para 4.2.3)
DEMAND NO. 56
This reflects faulty planning of the Ministry which ultimately led to surrendering of
allocated funds.   The Committee only hopes that the Ministry would learn from its
experiences and would take timely decision. (Para 4.3.3)
RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION FOR CENTRAL POLICE FORCES
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance would grant enhanced allocation
at RE to ensure that the requirement of CAPFs in terms of providing residential
accommodations does not suffer due to under allocation. (Para 4.4.3)

42
The Committee hopes that the proposal will be given due consideration in view of the
dire need of early completion of construction/maintenance of houses for CAPFs. The
Committee would like to be apprised of final decision in this regard. (Para 4.4.6)
DEMAND NO. 57 - TRANSFER TO UNION TERRITORY GOVERNMENTS WITH
LEGISLATURE
The committee desires that the matter should be pursued vigorously as there is a
pressing need for development of these two UTs which are lagging behind on various
parameters. (Para 4.6.3)
DEMAND NO. 99 TO 103 (UTS WITHOUT LEGISLATURE)
The Committee desires that the matter should be pursued Ministry of Finance
vigorously for allocation of funds as per requirement of the UTs as there is a pressing need
for development of these two UTs which are lagging behind on various parameters.
(Para 4.7.4)
The Committee desires that the matter should be pursued with the Ministry of
Finance vigorously for ensuring that plan expenditure pertaining to the Union Territories
without legislature should not be curtailed  as there is a pressing need for development of
these two UTs which are lagging behind on various parameters. (Para 4.7.8)
The Committee desires that the matter should be pursued with the Ministry of
Finance vigorously as there is a pressing need for development of these two UTs which are
lagging behind on various parameters. (Para 4.7.12)
CONNECTIVITY
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that chartering of two ships to meet
immediate requirements of UT of Andaman and nicobar Islands should be done at the
earliest without procedural delays. Also all other processes for construction of 4x500 pax
vehicles should be completed in a dedicated time frame. (Para 4.8.6)

MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 2nd December, 2015 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya   —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Derek O’ Brien
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
7. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
8. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
9. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
10. Shrimati Kirron Kher
11. Shri P. Nagarajan
12. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
13. Shri Baijayant “jay” Panda
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
15. Shri B. Sreeramulu
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
3. Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
5. Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and apprised
them of the agenda of the meeting which was to  consider and adopt the following four draft Reports of the
Committee:-
( i ) *                                 * *
45
*** Relate to other matters.

46
(ii) *                                * *
(iii) *                                * *
(iv) Draft 192nd Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 185th Report on Demand for Grants (2015-16) Ministry of Home Affairs
3. The Committee then took up the above draft Reports one by one for consideration and adoption.
After a brief discussion, the four reports were adopted.
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors and if
necessary further vetting in the Reports.
5. The Chairman and Committee Members then appreciated the work done by Committee Secretariat in
terms of drafting comprehensive and quality reports within stipulated timeframe.
6. The Committee then nominated its Chairman and in his absence Shri Avinash Rai Khanna M.P. Rajya
Sabha and Shri D. Raja, M.P. Rajya Sabha to present the 189
th, 190th, 191st and 192nd Reports to the Rajya
Sabha and Shrimati Kirron Kher, MP, Lok Sabha and in her absence Shri Adhir Ranjan Chaudhury, MP, Lok
Sabha to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha the same day.
7. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 3.20 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
L.C. Goyal  ÝÖéÆü ÃÖ×“Ö¾Ö
HOME SECRETARY
³ÖÖ¸üŸÖ ÃÖ¸üÛúÖ¸ü
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
North Block,
New Delhi.
D.O. No. C-453735/HS/2015 17 February 2015
Dear Rajiv,
This is regarding continuation of the Modernization of Police Forces Scheme (with seven components)
and that of Integrated Action Plan (IAP)/Additional Central Assistance (ACA) applicable in LWE areas.
2. 1 bring to your notice in continuation of the discussions we had yesterday that the scheme of the
Modernization of Police Forces has significant non monetary value and enables the Ministry to leverage
effectively with the State Governments to manage internal security situations. The transfer of the Scheme to
the States will be counter productive and is not at all desirable on security and strategic considerations.
Therefore, 1 request you to retain this Scheme in its present form. If at all, the pattern of funding could be
50:50 (as against 60:40) in general category States and 90:10 in North East and Jammu & Kashmir for being
retained.
3. IAP/ACA is not a regular Scheme, It is only a one off special dispensation for LWE areas during the
12th Plan Period. Without this dispensation, it will be almost impossible to effectively combat the menace of
Left Wing Extremism which is perhaps the most serious threat to internal security as has been acknowledged
at the highest level in the Government. Therefore, I request that this IAP/ACA with 100 per cent funding
may be retained again on security considerations. If at all, this dispensation can be reviewed at the beginning
of the 13th Plan Period.
4. I shall be grateful if you could kindly have the proposals considered favourably.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Shri Rajiv Mehrishi
Secretary (Finance),
Ministry of Finance,
North Block,
New Delhi.
49
Annexure to reply of para No. 3.1.2

ANNEXURE-II
L.C. Goyal  ÝÖéÆü ÃÖ×“Ö¾Ö
HOME SECRETARY
³ÖÖ¸üŸÖ ÃÖ¸üÛúÖ¸ü
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
North Block,
New Delhi.
D.O. No. C-453736/HS/2015 17 February 2015
Dear Sir
I enclose herewith a copy of letter no. C-453735/HS/2015 dated 17.02.2015 sent to Shri Rajiv
Mehrishi, Finance Secretary regarding continuation of the Scheme of Modernization of Police Forces and
Integrated Action Plan (IAP)/Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for Left Wing Extremist Areas.
2. I shall be grateful if you could kindly have the proposals made in the aforesaid letter considered for
favourable decision.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Shri Nripendra Misra,
Principal Secretary to PM,
South Block,
New Delhi.
50
Annexure to reply of para No. 3.1.2

ANNEXURE-III
L.C. Goyal  ÝÖéÆü ÃÖ×“Ö¾Ö
HOME SECRETARY
³ÖÖ¸üŸÖ ÃÖ¸üÛúÖ¸ü
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
North Block,
New Delhi.
D.O. No. 4/2/2015-Bgt-I 24 March 2015
Dear Rajiv
Please refer to my D.O. No. C-453735, dated 17th February, 2015 regarding continuation
of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) - National Scheme for Modernization of Police and Other
Forces’ and that of Integrated Action Plan (IAP)/ Additional Central Assistance (ACA) applicable in
LWE areas.
2. It is seen that the demand projected by the Ministry of Home Affairs for the year 2015-16
for its different Plan schemes / activities was Rs. 16820 crore and the amount allocated by the
Ministry of Finance is Rs. 8403.98 crore. During 2014-15, all the eight Centrally Sponsored
Schemes of MHA (namely Civil Defence, Fire & Emergency, National Cyclone Risk Management
Project (NCRMP), Other Disaster Management Projects (ODMP), Crime and Criminal Tracking
Network and Systems (CCTNS), Special infrastructure Scheme for Left Wing Extremism, Counter
Insurgency and Anti-terrorists Schools (CIA) and Modernization of State Police Forces (MoPF),
were merged by the Planning Commission into an Umbrella Centrally Sponsored Scheme in MHA
i.e. ‘National Scheme for Modernization of Police and other Forces’.
3. In the Budget for 2015-16, the aforesaid components except NCRMP of the Umbrella
Scheme have been transferred to the State Governments. Out of these components, Modernization
of State Police Forces, Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) to ensure
centralized database for crimes and criminals, and special infrastructure scheme for LWE are
extremely vital from the security point of view. These components/schemes provide an effective
leverage/ instrument to the Ministry of Home Affairs to engage with and seek synergistic co-
operation from the State Governments in managing various internal security related challenges and
problems. In other words, these components have tremendous non monetary value than financial
outlays involved therein. If these schemes/ components are not continued with the Ministry of
Home Affairs even though with reduced outlays, it will be almost impossible for MHA to ensure
involvement of the States in managing internal security situation and also to persuade them to
provide adequate resources from the State Budget for policing and public order. In such a situation,
MHA may fall short of discharging its core function of maintenance of internal security across the
country. It is pertinent to say that total Budget allocated for these three schemes for the Financial
51
Annexure to reply of para No. 3.1.2

52
year 2014-15 is Rs. 1280 crores and Projected Budgetary estimates for these schemes is Rs. 2910
crores for the year 2015-16.
4. IAP/ACA for LWE affected districts has also been discontinued. This was not a regular
scheme but only a special dispensation for LWE areas during the 12th Plan Period. Here again, it
is difficult to visualize that the State, Governments would channelize enough funds for such a
purpose on their own.
5. It is true that increased funds - have been provided to the State Governments through the
14th Finance Commission. But such funds are untied funds, The question therefore arises as to
how one ensures that the States channelize the desired level of funds into the area of security,
policing and public order. The experience historically has been that all States put together have been
spending only about 3 per cent of their total Budget for policing.
6. Maintenance of secure, peaceful and stable environment is imperative for socio-economic
development of the Country. Therefore, the requisite funds need to be channelized into the area of
security and policing at the State Level.
7. In this background, I request you to kindly reconsider and have at least three aforesaid
components of the Umbrella Scheme restored in the Budget from 2015-16 onwards.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Shri Rajiv Mehrishi,
Finance Secretary,
Ministry of Finance,
North Block,
New Delhi

ANNEXURE-IV
L.C. Goyal  ÝÖéÆü ÃÖ×“Ö¾Ö
HOME SECRETARY
³ÖÖ¸üŸÖ ÃÖ¸üÛúÖ¸ü
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
North Block,
New Delhi.
D.O. No. 4/2/2015-Bgt-I 25 March 2015
Dear Sir,
I enclose herewith a Copy of the letter sent. to Shri Rajiv Mehrishi, Finance Secretary, regarding
continuation of three components of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) - ‘National Scheme for
Modernization of Police and Other Forces ‘ viz., Modernization of State Police Force (MoPF); Crime and
Criminal Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) and Special Infrastructure Scheme (SIS) for LWE
areas, and also for continuation of Integrated Action Plan (IAP)/ Additional Central Assistance (ACA) applicable
in LWE areas.
2. I shall be grateful if you could kindly consider and have these schemes revived from the financial
year 2015-16 onwards because continuation of these schemes/ components is imperative on security and
strategic considerations.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Shri Nripendra Misra,
Principal Secretary to PM,
PMO, South Block,
New Delhi.
53
Annexure to reply of para No. 3.1.2

ANNEXURE-V
No. 23011/101/2015/PT
Government of India/Bharat Sarkar
Ministry of Home Affairs/Grih Mantralaya
(Police-I Division)
Police Training Section
North Block, New Delhi-01
Dated, the 25th June, 2015
To
All Chief secretaries of States,
All Chief Administrators of Union Territories.
Subject : Recommendation of 185th Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Home Affairs on Demand for Grants (2015-16) - regarding.
Sir,
I am directed to refer to the subject and say that the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs on demand for grants (2015-16) in its 185th report has made recommendations
at Para No, 4.4.24 titled “sensitlsation towards ethical and moral values” regarding police personnel in the
country. The extracts of the said paragraph are enclosed
2. The Parliamentary Committee in its report has stated that a person in distress only comes to the
Police Station for help and if the police personnel at Police Station do not behave like a protector of Law &
Order, it creates further problems to the person in distress, In order to change the attitude and approach of
the police personnel towards general public, the Committee has recommended that a training programme of
sufficient longer duration on ethical and moral values and people friendly attitude should be imparted to
police personnel especially of lower ranks.
3. The Committee has also recommended that the Government should not only emphasise on the
security training of the police personnel but also train them for developing good communication skills,
behaviour, attitude and responsibility towards the general public.
4. In view of the above, State Governments are requested to sensitize their police personnel to be
responsible while dealing with the general public’ through training on ethical and moral values and people
friendly attitude. Training of sufficient duration may also be organised for the police personnel for developing
good communication skill, behaviour, attitude and responslbilitv, An action taken report In the matter may be
furnished to this Ministry at the earliest.
Yours faithfully,
( G .C. Vadav)
Deputy Secretary (Police-l)
TEL: 011-23093256
Copy to:-
(i) Director, NPA
(ii) Director, NEPA With the request to implement the recommendations of the
(iii) DG, BPR&D Standing Committee through their training programmes.
54
Annexure to reply of para No. 4.4.24

ANNEXURE-VI
L.C. Goyal  ÝÖéÆü ÃÖ×“Ö¾Ö
HOME SECRETARY
³ÖÖ¸üŸÖ ÃÖ¸üÛúÖ¸ü
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
North Block,
New Delhi.
D.O. No. 15020/06/2015-Plg. Cell 25th May, 2015
Dear Ahvi Watal,
I am writing this in connection with allocation of funds to the Union Territories particularly Andaman
and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep. In past, it has been a practice that based on the trend of expenditure
in first two quarters of the financial year, the RE is reduced. For the year 2014-15, in case of Andaman &
Nicobar Islands BE was Rs.2100 Crores (plan) which was reduced to Rs.1733 Crores at RE stage. Similarly,
the BE for Lakshadweep was Rs.464 crores (plan) which was reduced to Rs.395.46 Crores at RE stage.
2. We are aware that weather conditions in Union Territories like Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
Lekshadweep are not conducive for undertaking developmental works in the prolonged local monsoon
season due to heavy rains, It results in low expenditure in first two quarters of the financial year. Further,
due to strategic locations of both the Union Territories there is a need to allocate more funds to them and any
cut in their allocations at RE stage, particularly for reasons beyond their control, further hinders the
developmental works in these UTs.
3. Thus, may I request you to kindly consider a special dispensation for these Union Territories by
relaxing the two conditions i.e. mandatory requirements of spending 50% of the original budget estimates by
the end of the second quarter of the financial year and the maximum ceiling of 33% of budget prescribed for
incurring expenditure during the last quarter of the financial year. .
4  Let me assure that it would always be our endeavour to regularly monitor the Monthly Monetary
Expenditure plan of these territories with a view to pace the flow of expenditure in such a manner that no
surrender of funds/rush of expenditure takes place during the plan period.
With regards,
Yours sincerely
Shri Ratan P. Watal,
Secretary (Expenditure)
Ministry of Finance,
North Block,
New Delhi.
55
Annexure to reply of para No. 5.1.14