·. . . , ' 
,......._ 
TMENT -JlliLATED PARLIAMENT~~c ... 
G COMMITTEE ·oN HOME 
• I . " ·.!,.;. ... 
• • J,"' .. ~.. • I.. ,.S.. ... ., ~'I. I# • ., 
·..If~ ., •• 
• :. ~ ~· , .}I ' • -~,, .. --e' ~ . _. _, 
., ;.:. . .., ........ 
~~";- . -r ~ •• 

C.S. (H.A. )-61 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
INSURGENCY SITUATION IN THE NORTH-EASTERN REGION 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 1997) 
(Laid in the Lok Sabha on 26th February, 1997) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 1997~agha, 1918 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
I 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITI ON OF THE COMMITTEE . .. .. .. .. .. .. • .. .. .. .. .. . .. • .. . .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. (iHviii) 
2. INTR ODUCTION . .. . .. . .. ... .. .. • .. .. • . .. .. .. .. . .. .. • .. . • . . . .. .. . .. .. .. . .. .. .. . .. .. .. . . .. .. . .. (ix)-(x) 
3. REPORT ............... . .... .. . .... ... .. ............... .. .. .. ....... . ............ .. ............ 1-31 
4. ANNEXURES 
I. Study Group of the Committee on Home Affairs which visited 
Imp hal , Kohima and Guwahati ... ... ......... ......... ..... .... ............ . 
II. List of persons etc. with whom the Study Group interacted during 
its visit to Imphal , Kohima and Guwahati ...... ... .. .. .. .. ....... .. .... .. 
III. Study Group of the Committee on Home Affairs which visited 
Shillong, Itanagar , Aizawl and Agartala ....... .. ...... .. ................ .. 
IV. List of persons etc., with whom the Study Group interacted 
during its visit to Shillong, ltanagar, Aizawl and Agartala .......... . 
33 
34-36 
37 
38-42 
5. R ELEVANT MINUTE S OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
43--5 9 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(1996-27) 
1. Shri Som. Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
11. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
12. Shri N. Rajendran 
13. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
14. Shri Raj Babbar 
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
17. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
18. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
21. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
22. Shri Vijay Goel 
23. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
24. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
25. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
26. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
27. Shri M;mgat Ram Sharma 
28. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
29. Prof. M. Kamson 
30. Shri ldris Ali 
31. Shri Gopalbhai Kalan Tandel 
32. Shri Khelsai Singh 
*33. Shri Rajesh Pilot 
34. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
35. Shri Sharad Yadav 
.36. Shri Taslimuddin 
37. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
*Nominated w.~.f 8th October. 1996 vice Shri Tara Chand Baghora , M.P. 
(i) 

38. Shri Sudhir Giri 
39. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
40. Shri N. Dennis 
41. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
42. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
43. Shri Kanshi Ram 
44. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
45. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri ·s. Jason, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

COMPOSffiON OF TIIE COMMI'lTEE 
{1995-96) 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu--chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave • 4 .. Vacant 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ram Nafu Ko~nd 
•• 7. Shri N. Rajendran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
13. Shri Raj Babbar 
14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
•••1s. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
WK SABRA 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
®19. Vacant 
20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukbe 
22. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Afuifuan 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh . Malik 
29. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduii 
30. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
•vacan cy caused w.e.f. the 13th September, 1995 due to induction of Slm Jt.K. Dhawan in the Union Council of Ministers. 
••Nominated on 17th August, 1995 in the vacancy caused by the rctirerncnt of Shri Murasoli Maran from the membership of Rajya Sabha. 
•••Nominated on 20th September, 1995 in the vacancy caused by indu ction of Dr. Jagannath Mishra in the Union Council of Ministers. 
@Vacancy caused w.e.f. the 13th September, 1995 due lo lnduciiort of f•rof M. Kamson in the Union Council of Ministers. 
. . {iii) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
{1994-95) 
*1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
**13. Shri Raj Babbar 
•••14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
.... 15. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
19. Prof. M. Kamson 
20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athith an 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
30. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
32. Shri Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
• Appointed on July 5, 1994 in the vacancy caused by the· Tctin:mcut uf Shrl M.M. Jacob from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha from the 1st July, 1994. 
•• Nominated on May 2, 1994. 
••• Nominated on June 15, 1994. 
•••• Nominated on July 25, 1994. 
-- • ""01/RS (v) 

(iv) 
32. Shri Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Abedya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
40. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
42. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Verma 
44. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 

COMPOSITION OF THE COM~UTTEE 
(1994-95) 
*1. Shri Madhavsinh Solank.i-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
.. 13. Shri Raj Babbar 
***14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
••••1s. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
19. Prof. M. Kamson 
20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj Gen . (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
30. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
32. Shri Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
• Appointed on July 5, 1994 in the vacancy caused by the · l'l;tin:mcut of Shrl M.M. Jacob from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha from the 1st July, 1994. 
•• Nominated on May 2, 1994. 
••• Nominated on June 15, 1994. 
•••• Nominated on July 25, 1994. 
-- • ""01/RS (v) 

(vi) 
35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Abedya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
40. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
42. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
44. Shri B. Raja Ravi Venna 
•45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai PateJ 
*Nominated on August 22, 1994. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMrn~EE 
{1993-94) 
1. Shri M.M. Jacotr--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Gaya Singh 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
'8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri Rafique Alam 
10. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
11. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
12. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
14. Shri Subramanian Swamy 
15. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
''16 . Vacant 
17. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
18. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
19. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
20. Prof. M. Kamson 
21. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
22. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
23. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
24. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
25. Kum . Mamata Banerjee 
26. Shrimati Bibhu Kurnari Devi 
27. Shri Dhanuskodi Athithan 
28. Dr. Girija Vyas 
29. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
30. Maj . Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
31. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
32. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
33 Shri Ram Singh 
3-. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
35. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
• Nominated on 30th August, 1993 in the vacancy cau&ed hy the rcliremcut of Shri Samar Mukherjee from th( 
membership of Rajya Sabha on the 9th July, 1993. 
•• Vacancy caused by induction of Dr. C. Silvera in t11c CltlUH.:II <•f Minhtcrs on 17th February, 1994. 
(vii) 

INTRODUCfiON 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the 
Committee, to present this Thirty-sixth Report of the Committee . The Report is on the 
'Insurgency situation in the North-Eastern Region'. 
2. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 25th November , 1993, briefly discussed 
insurgency situation in the North -Eastern region, as a part of consideration of the Annual 
Report of the Ministry of Home Affairs for' the Year 1992-93 and decided to take up the 
subject for detailed examination. 
3. The Committee heard the Home Secretary on the subject in its meetings held on the 
7th, 27th and 28th June , 1994. 
4. The Committee further considered the matter in its meetings held on the 20th 
September and 18th October, 1995. In its meeting held on the 20th September, 1995, the 
Committee decided that a Study-Group of the Committee may visit Assam, Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Nagaland for an on-the-spot assessment of the insurgency situation in those 
States. In pursuance of this decision, a Study Group of the Committee (Annexure- !) was 
constituted to undertake the visit. Accordingly, the Study Group visited lmphal, Kohima 
and' Guwahati from the 28th October to 3rd November, 1995 and had an interaction with 
representatives cJf various political parties, persons from cross section of society and, the 
concerned State Government's officials to obtain the ground realities. A list of persons with 
whom the Study-Group interacted is placed at Annexure-H. 
5. In its meeting held on the 19th February, 1996, the Committee further discussed the 
subject. It was of the view that its study only partially reflected the insurgency situation in 
the North-Eastern region as its Study-Group had visited only three States, out of the seven 
States of the region. The Committee also felt that besides the insurgency problem, the States 
like Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura were facing the pere·nnial. problem of influx of Chakma 
refugees from Bangladesh and of their rehabilitation. It was of the opinion that another 
Study-Group of the Committee may visit the Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and 
Tripura. Accordingly, a Study-Group of the Committee (Annexure-III) visited Shillong, 
ltanagar, Aizwal and Agartala from 16th to 21st March, 1996 and held discussions with 
representatives of various political parties, State Government's officials and persons from 
cross section of society to. find out the ground realities. A list of persons with whom the 
Study-Group interacted is placed at Annexure-IY. 
6. The term of the Committee came to an end on April 8, 1996 and the Committee 
which was reconstituted on 1st August , 1996, took up the ~atter afresh. In its meeting held 
on the 23rd September, 1996, the Committee considered the draft Report and felt that in 
view of the long time elapsed since the visits of the Study Groups on the basis of which the 
draft Report has been prepared and its consideration the points covered in the Report need 
to be updated in the context of latest developments in the North-Eastern region. The 
Committee elicited the suggestions/views of the Members on various aspects of the 
insurgency problem for making necessary changes/modifications in the draft Report. 
F7A-6391/RS (ix) 

(x) 
7. The Committee considered and adopted this Report in its meeting held on the 
6th February, 1997. 
NEw DELHI; 
February 6, 1997 
'rlS 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

"' 
REPORT 
BACKGROUND 
Some parts in the North-Eastern region, comprising the States of Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura, have been afflicted with 
insurgency due to different factors which include ethnic, linguistic, historical, economic and 
geographical factors. Aid and support to the insurgent groups from across the borders have 
also contributed considerably to the insurgency in the region. Of these States, Nagaland, 
Manipur and Assam, and to some extent Tripura, are the most seriously affected. 
2. The North-Eastern region has 1126 Km. long international border with China, 
489 Km. with Bhutan, 1643 Km. with Myanmar and 1187 Km. with Bangladesh. The hills 
and basins of the region are a mixture of high mountain ranges, plateaus and low hills, 
covering an area of 90,160 sq. kms. i.e. roughly 60% of the whole region. 
3. There are wide ethnic, religious and cultural diversities in the region, which is 
reflected in the fact that over 200 tribes inhabit this region and speak as many as 192 
languages/dialects. Numerous tribes and sub-tribes living in the region perceive their status 
to be in danger in remaining with the major groups/tribes in a district or state. 
4. The States of Nagaland, Manipur, Assam and Tripura have long and porous 
international borders with Bangladesh, Bhutan and Myanmar. The population on either side 
of the borders with Bangladesh and Myanmar is ethnically similar. The populated areas 
along the Indo-Bangladesh borders, in particular, extend upto the zero line in many sectors. 
This has resulted in infiltration on the one hand and cross-border movements of negative 
elements on the other. 
5. The region abounds in natural resources. However, there are locational disadvantages 
and absence of proper and adequate infrastructure. There has been substantial inflow of plan 
and non-plan assistance from the Centre. But its benefits have not fully reached the people 
due to various reasons. The growth in employment opportunities has not kept pace with the 
number of entrants to the job market. 
6. The problem of threat to life and extortions have assumed considerable proportions, 
particularly in the States of Nagaland and Manipur. The State of Assam, besides extortions, 
is also witnessing the problem of kidnappings, etc. 
7. The phenomenon of insurgency, which was earlier rural-based , has, over the years, 
got transformed into an urbanised one. 
MANIPUR 
8. The State, with its Capital at lmphal has an area of 22,326, sq. Kms., and a 
population of 18,26,714 (1991 census). The major communities are the Meiteis, inhabiting 
the Valley areas and the Nagas and Kukis, inhabiting the hill areas. The rate of literacy is 
60.96%. Manipuri (Meiteilon) is the State's official language and is spoken by a majority of 
the population. The State has witnessed violent Kuki-Naga ethnic conflicts, which sparked 
off in mid 1992 and took a violent form in 1993, during which year there were as many as 
192 violent incidents. In 1994 and 1995 (upto 18.10.95) the number of such incidents was 74 
1 

2 
and 90, respectively. Apart from destruction of a large number of houses by the rival 
communities , nearly 600 persons were reported killed in such clashe s during 1993-95. 
9. The State 's hill areas are afflicted with violent activities of the National Socialist Council 
of Nagaland (I) and the Kuki extremist groups . The Meitei extremist organisations, viz., 
People's Liberation Army (PLA), People 's Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK), 
United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) are 
active in the Valley areas. 
10. The main concentration of major insurgent gro1:1ps active in the .State and the area of 
their known operations are set out below:-
A. Insurgent groups active in hill areas: 
(J) National Socialist Councn of Nags/and (NSCN): 
It was formed in the year 1980, with the following main objectives:-
(a) to liberate the State of Nagaland from the Indian Union; 
(b) to declare Nagaland as an independent sovereign State of the Nagas; 
(c) to maintain a separate identity of the Nagas . 
To fulfil these objectives , the NSCN activists have been continuously indulging in violent 
and subversive activities since inception of the NSCN. In the year 1988, the Council got divided 
into two factions, namely, NSCN (Khaplang) and NSCN (Muivah) . 
(Ji) Kuki National Army (KNA): 
It was formed in May, 1988 in Myanmar. Its main objective is to form an independent 
sovereign Kuki State, by carving out the Kuki populated areas of Myanmar and incorporating in 
them some parts of Thoubal, Ukhrul and Chandel districts of Manipur. 
The Organisation has two wings (i) Kuki National Organisation (KNO)-the political wing 
of KNA; and (ii) the Kuki Defence Force-the defence .wing of KNA , to protect the Kuki 
people against attacks by the Nagas. The KNA is mainly a Myanmar based organisation, but it is 
also active in Manipur, especially in· Chan del and Tamenglong district~. 
B. Main Insurgent groups active in the Valley: 
(J) People's Liberation Army (PLA): 
It was formed in 1978. Its main objectives are:-
(a) to secede from India and form a sovereign State; 
(b) to regain the lost territories of Manipur, viz. Kabow Valley , which is now in 
Myanmar. 
(ii) People's Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK): 
It was formed in the year 1977. Its objectives are :-
(a) to free Manipur from India and establish an independent common State; 
(b) to abolish capitalism; 
(c) to intro9uce land ceiling, Panchayati Raj System and Jo"'-"'"'""'t"" 
education. 
The organisation has since got divided into two factions, namely-(i) PREP AK (Khomba); 
and (ii) PREPAK (Selungba). 

3 
(iii) The United National Liberation Front (UNLF): 
It was' formed in the year 1964. Its object ives are:-
( a) to libetate Manipur and some of its neighbouring areas from India ; 
(b) to restore the lost political sovereignty of Manipur and its neighbouring 
areas; 
(c) to establish and independent Sovereign Republi c compris ing Manipur and its 
neighbourin g areas; and 
(d) to regain the lost territories of Manipur from Myanmar. The Organisation 
has since been split into two factions: (i) UNLF (Meghen); and (ii) UNLF 
(Oken). 
(iv) Kangleipak Comm unist Party (KCP): 
The organisation was formed in the year 1980, with the· following objectives: 
(a) to win freedom for Kangleipak (Manipur); 
(b) to preserve the ethn ic identity of the peop le of Kangleipak; 
(c) to liquidate the political parties which are against them; 
(d) to defertd the liberty of the: proletariat class and farmers. 
The organisation has also got divided into two factions, namely - (i) KCP (Ibohanbi); 
and (ii) KCP (Ibopishak). 
11. At lmphal, the members Qf the Study Group held wide ranging discussions with 
officers of the State Government , Chief Minister Shri Rishang Keishing and representatives 
of various political groups in the State. 
12. The Director-General of Police , Manipur, in his presentation , gave an overv iew of 
the law and order situation in the State. He stated that although the State was heavily 
infested with the armed extre mists, their activities had been checked to a considerable 
extent. Joint combing operations had been carried out by the Army, CRPF and Manipur 
Police, due to which the extremists were now on the run. He was of the view that a sense of 
security could be gradually infused in the minds of genera l pub lic by conti nuing such heavy 
deployments and joint operations. He stressed the need for strengthening and revamping of 
the State Police by providing more manpower and vehicles to make the police stat ions in the 
hills and the Valley areas as viable functional units. To effectively counter the activities of 
armed extremists, he desired one full battalion of well-trained commandos in lmphal and 
one company for all the remaining seven districts, with adequate number of vehicles and 
communication system. He felt that the State Police should be reorganised by providing 
adequate number of armed battalions for residential guard s, escort, security of vital 
installations and other static duties, crowd/ mob • dispersal duties , counter-insurgency 
operations and assisting the civil police in maintenance of law and order. To help the 
District Superintendent of Police in admin istering his district properl y and more efficiently, 
he emphasised the need for posting of officers with legal background in each district , to co­
ordinate with the Public Prosecutors and the investigating officers. He expressed his anxiety 
over the failure of the State Police in the investigat ion of important crimes , as a result of 
which, appropri ate proceedings/action could not be taken against the accused persons. In 
order to take effective steps in this regard, he felt the necessity of spec ialised teams of 
investigating officers to investigate into extremist-related and other cases, like 
misappropriation of Government money, embezzlement, forgery , etc. For a better 
F9A·6391/AS 

4 
coordination between the prosecuting and investigating agencies, the Director-General 
favoured the idea of the Directorate of Prosecution to be shifted from the administrative 
control of Law Department and placed under the administrative control of Police 
Department. Further, drug trafficking in the State is quite a serious menace and has caused 
severe damage to the society. The police have geared themselves up in their fight against 
illegal drug trafficking, by using the Preventive Detention Laws i.e. Prevention of Illicit 
Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988, and have achieved 
encouraging results. The Naga-Kuki ethnic problem has also compounded the strife-torn law 
and order scenario in the State. Housing for the police is quite inadequate and is affecting 
their- morale. The arms and ammunition with the State Police do not match with those of the 
extremists. He informed the Study-Group that the State Police had submitted a proposal to 
the Government for revamping of police mobility, weaponry, communications, 
accommodation, etc. The State Government has sanctioned about Rs. 11 crores to meet 
some of the emergent requirements of the State Police. 
13. The Chief Secretary, in his presentation, stated that insurgency in the State was 
qualitatively different as compared to other North-Eastern States. The entire State is 
afflicted with two or three-layer insurgency. Mizoram and Nagaland have only one tribe/ 
group but in Manipur they have three tribes/groups- the Meiteis, the Nagas and the Kukis. 
Insurgency in Manipur also differs from 'the other States because of the ethnic clashes. The 
Nagas inhabit most of the parts of the northern hill districts, Kukis are inhabiting in the 
southern parts of the State, but are dominant in Churacharedpur District. The most 
unfortunate part . is that they kill each other mercilessly and try to drive each other out. 
Burning of houses is also very common. The N~CN (IM), which is the most organised 
group, has a strength of about 3000. This group is organised on army lines and has its own 
battalion command~rs. The other group is NSCN (K). Both these factions try to dominate 
each other and are fighting for control in Manipur and in some parts of Nagaland. They 
have their sources of arms supply from outside. Their arms are brought from Thailand, 
Singapore and Bangladesh as the route is very safe and convenient. They can enter from 
Moreh on the Myanmar border and from th~re go into Thailand or Bangladesh. They can 
move freely all along the Myanmar border. The insurgent groups purchase arms with the 
money they extort from the shop-owners business communities, small industrialists and local 
Government Officers working in various departments. 
14. The valley of Manipur is very fertile. The consumption of fertilizers here is more 
than that in other developed States. The State is self-sufficient in food. If the situation 
improves, the State can export many items to Myanmar. He· mentioned that there is a 
large unemployment problem. A target of 1600 under the Prime Minister's Rozgar 
was fixed last year, which has been increased to 2200 this year. He was of the view that 
the State could have railway line. The trade and commerce would improve, as the 
agricultural products can be marketed to other parts of the country. The sma 
industries can also thrive well. Manipuris are very fond of sports. They are well-talented 
sports and have been champions at junior level and have participated in many national 
international competitions. They bring lot of laurels for the country. If we can make 
develop, 'it will really help, in bringing the youths in the mainstream of national life. 
can also be developed as an industry. The Chief Secretary mentioned that · 
problem in the State has thwarted its economic progress. He opined that military 
does not promise much and a political solution to the problem has to be found. 
15. The Chief Minister, Shri Rishang Keishing apprised the Study Group 
insurgency in the States of Manipur and Nagaland was the oldest in the North-
::: 

5 
region. He felt that political instability in the State had also helped in the deterioration of 
the situation. To fight insurgency, he sought full cooperation of the Centre. He mentioned 
that with the deployment of Para-Military forces, the situation has improved and these forces 
should not be withdrawn from the State at this juncture as this would jeopardize all the 
success achieved by these forces so far. He stressed that lack of development and 
unemployment are the root causes of insurgency in the State. Hence, developmental 
activities should go on unabated. He also emphasized the need for laying of railway lines in 
the State and informed that the matter had been taken up with the Ministry of Railways but 
nothing has been done , on the plea that it was not economically viable. 
16. In the meeting of the Study Group with representatives of various political groups in 
the State, the Deputy Chief Minister expressed his concern over the problem of extprtions 
prevailing in the State. He stated that a number of insurgent groups had come up and are 
indulging in violent and subversive activities. They are getting training and. other facilities in 
Bangladesh and Myanmar. He drew attention of the Study Group towards violent Naga­
Kuki ethnic clashes and the poor condition of National Highway Nos. 39 and 53, connecting 
lmphal to Dimapur and Silchar, respectively. The development of these highways is wanting 
and they require proper patrolling to check incidents of lootings, killings, etc. The Deputy 
Chief Minister called upon the Centre to make all-out efforts to solve the insurgency and 
other problems faced by the people of Manipur. He opined that a concerted action to 
eliminate insurgency from whole of the North-Eastern region only will help and there should 
be complete transparency in dealing with various insurgent groups. 
17. The Associated Manipur Chamber of Commerce, Imphal, in their representation 
submitted to the Study ·Group stated that a grave Jaw and order situation had been 
prevailing in Manipur for the last so many years. Large scale extortions and ransom had 
become a routine affair. The business community is in the grip of constant fear and they are 
afraid to move out of their houses after sunset and are also reluctant to go beyond the town 
limits during the day time. The local police is demoralised and is unable to meet the serious 
challenge posed by the insurgents. They are ill-paid and ill-equipped. Their mobility is 
restricted due to insufficient number of vehicles. The ..yeapons supplied to them are out­
dated and inferior in comparison to the sophisticated arms and ammunition possessed by the 
insurgent outfits. There is no intelligence network worth its name. Without full cooperation 
and sincere efforts of the local police, Jaw and order situation in the State cannot improve. 
Hence, it is of utmost importance to raise the morale of the police force by making available 
sufficient funds to them. Manipur is a land-locked State. It is linked with the rest of the 
country by National Highways 39 and 53. Both these roads are · poorly maintained and pass 
through insurgent-infested tortuous routes. It has become extremely risky and hazardous to 
travel through these roads as the hill-based insurgent groups are regularly extorting 'tax' 
from the vehicles carrying goods to this State. Instances are not lacking where bus 
passengers were looted. The on-going ethnic clashes have even resulted in inhuman and 
barbarous acts like pushing the bus with all its passengers, into gorge and killing all of them. 
The seriousness of the problem can be well imagined from the fact that even a number of 
Ministers, living under tight security, are facing threat to life. The business community, in 
these circumstances, feels that unless drastic measures are tuken by Government, there will 
be a large exodus of their community from Manipur. Ma~y of them have already shifted 
their families and have curtailed their business activities. They are even afraid to send their 
children to schools since there had been instances of kidnappings , ransom and, even murder. 
18. The Study Group also had an opportunity to visit Moreh on the Myanmar border. 

6 
The Study Group found that there was free movement of people and goods from both sides 
of the border. There was no check and vigil. The unguarded border has facilitated the free 
movement of insurgent outfits, will all types of illegal sophisticated arms, thus contributing 
to insurgency in the State. 
19. On the basis of submissions made before it, the Committee feels that the National 
.Highway Nos. 39 and 53, which connect Manipur with the rest of the country, are not 
properly maintained and are in a very bad shape. It is extremely hazardous to travel through 
these highways as the hill-based insurgent groups are regularly extorting money in the form 
of 'tax' from the vehicles carrying merchandise to Manipur. Both the.se National Highways 
need to be maintained properly and cases of extoctions must be checked urgently to instil a 
sense of security in the business community for proper Commercial activities in the region. 
20. Tile Committee notes that presently, Autonomous District Councils in the five hill 
districts of Manipur under Manipur (Hill Areas) Autonomous District Council Act, 1971 are 
in existence. There is a proposal for inclusion of hill areas of Manipur under the Sixth 
Schedule of the Constitution. The Committee trusts that the proposal would be examined in 
all seriousness and cleared expeditiously. 
NAG ALAND 
21. The State of Nagaland which was created in the year 1963 has its head quarter at 
Kohima. It has an area of 16,579 sq. K~s. and a population of 12,15,573 (1991 census). The 
major Naga tribes include Semas, Angamis, Aos, Changa and Konyaka. The Kukis are also 
present, mainly in the Peren sub-division of Kohima district. The literacy rate is 61.30%. 
English is the official language of the State. The State is afflicted with insurgency and has an 
inter-State boundary dispute with Assam. 
22. The background of insurgency in the State is that some of the leaders did not accept 
the inclusion of Naga Hills District in the Indian Union and revolted under the leadership of 
the Naga National Council, led by late Shri A.Z. Phizo. A Peace Accord, namely, the 
Shi1long Accord, was signed in 1975' by various Naga underground leaders and they 
surrendered and laid down arms. However, despite signing of the Shillong Accord, a section 
of the Nagas continued to agitate. The National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN) has 
been indulging in violent activities and targetting the Security Forces. It has also established 
trans-border linkages. 
23. At Kohima, the Study Group had an interaction with the Counc.il of Ministers and 
Senior Government officers, Leader of the Opposition, Members of the Nagaland P.C.C. (I) 
and Naga Mothers Association, a Non-Governmental Organisation. 
24. The Minister of Po\\(er and Higher Technical Education Shri S. Serna informed the 
Study-Group that the security scenario in Nagaland maked a turning point in the year 1992. 
The law and order situation in the State started deteriorating from a state of comparative lull 
after the signing of the Shillong Accord in 1975. The insurgent activities in the State got 
intensified and the insurgency-related crimes like killing and violent attacks on civilians, 
police, para-military forces, etc., looting of Government and private cash , looting 
weapons- from the police, para-military forces, Home Guards, etc. forcible tax collection and 
cases of eJttortions increased alarmingly. However, with the concerted efforts of the 
and Central Goyernments, the situation has been brought under control. The 
lauded the role oi the CRPF in containing the menace of insurgency. He demanded that 
CRPF should not be withdrawn from the State because it will again enable the i 
groups to have an upper hand. 

7 
25. The Chief Secretary, too, in his presentation made a reference to the sudden 
dete{ioration in the insurgency situation since 1992. The situation deteriorated not only due 
to the increase in the violent activities of insurgents against Government, the police and the 
security forces, but also due to infighting among themselves . The violence resulted in the 
killings of many high ranking lAS, IPS and army officers, engineers, doctors and politicians. 
This compelled Government to declare the. whole of Nagaland as disturbed area under the 
Armed Forces (Special Powers) (Amendment) Act 1972, with effect from 4th April, 1995. 
This has improved the situation perceptibly. He stated that during the last 3-4 months, 
incidents of looting of Government and private money, looting of arms, ambushes on the 
security forces, killings of civilians, etc. have decreased. Further, the Centre had promised 
the State a one time grant of Rs. 17.65 crores for modernisation of the Police force. Out of 
that amount, the State Government has received Rs. 7.40 crores and the balance amount of 
Rs. 10.25 crores is yet to b~ released. He requested to make available the balance amount of 
the grant at the earliest. He further stated that the State Government was willing to act as a 
bridge between the insurgents and the Government of India and has •informed the insurgents 
through people, the Press, etc. that Government is ready to negotiate with them without any 
pre-conditions, to find a peaceful solution to the Naga problem. But till today, the 
insurgents have not responded. 
26. The Minister of Industry, Shri K. Hollohon expressed concern over continuance of 
the Naga poliHcal problem for over forty years, with no ray of hope for its solution being in 
sight. After six rounds of talks, no fresh initiative has been taken by the Government of 
India and the State Government. The Minister narrated his endeavours with the successive 
Prime Ministers to revive the process of peace talks. According to him, all the Prime 
Ministers had advised him to keep in touch with the underground insurgents and try to bring 
together all the factions to facilitate the talks. The Minister, however, felt it very difficult to 
bring together all the factions at one table for peace talks and opined that if any of the 
factions expresses its willingness to negotiate, it should be accepted. 
27. The Minister of PHE Shri Terhie informed the Study Group that in 1951 a plebiscite 
was held whereby 99% Nagas voted in favour of independence from the Indian Union. The 
State of Nagaland was created in the year 1963, and the elections were held in 1964, but a 
few sections did not accept the Statehood. In the year 1968, talks were held between the 
Naga National Council (NNC) and the Government of India but there was a deadlock. The 
law and order situation started deteriorating and finally an accord, namely, the Shillong 
Accord, was signed in the year 1975. The main clauses of the Shillong Accord were (i) The 
underground members should accept the Constitution of India (ii) Arms were to be 
deposited in the camp and (iii) Political issue will be discussed within a reasonable time. 
Some underground members of the NNC, who were in China at that time, expressed their 
reservations against. the Accord. In the year 1980, this group broke away from NNC and 
formed the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN). He further stated that since 
NSCN is an outlawed organisation, it is heiitating to come to the negotiating table, for fear 
of arrest. The State Government has, therefore, requested the Centre to lift ban on the 
organisation to bring the underground insurgents to the negotiating table. However, no 
response has been received till date. He stated that developmental activities in the State 
have been severely affected due to financial constraints. Educated unemployed youths are 
being lured by the insurgents as informers and for extortion and intimidation purposes. The 
police force is facing the insurgents' sophisticated weapons, with outdated 303 rifles. The 
modernisation and mobility of the force are, therefore, urgently required. 
28. The Minister of Rural Development Shri l. lmlug requested that an economic 

8 
package for the State was required, as most of the problems were due to economic 
hardships. 
29. Shri Vamuzo, Leader of the Opposition briefed the members of the Study Group 
about the genesis of the Naga movement, the plebiscite held by the Nagas on the 16th May, 
1951, to separate from lndi~ and the oaths taken by the village chiefs to fight for a separate 
sovereign State. He charged the successive Central Governments that instead of holding 
negotiations and handling the matter carefully, they sent in the army and suppressed the 
people, with all kinds of black laws and martial laws. Many villages were burnt, people fled 
to ~he jungles and many died of starvation, sickness and inhuman treatment. He stated that 
in 1975, during emergency, some freedom fighters were forced to sign the Shillong Accord, 
which many others refused to accept and formed a separate organisation, namely, the 
National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN). He warned that these insurgent groups are 
in touch with foreign countries, which might like to see India broken into pieces, like the 
former USSR. Since all the Naga leaders are Christians, on Christian principles with the 
help of the Church, they can be brought together for talks. He charged the State 
Government for supporting and providing arms and money to one faction of the 
underground insurgents and voiced against the imposition of Armed Forces (Special Powers) 
Act in the State. 
30. Shri Khekiho, MLA, expressed his distress over the fact that the entire State is 
represented by a lone M.P. and, therefore, the State has virtually no say in the Parliament. 
He demanded that representation of the State in Parliament be increased. He stated that 
Nagas were divided between India and Burma in 1953, without their consent and, that the 
Naga political problem developed since that time. He blamed the Government of India for 
not finding a solution, even after six rounds of talks with the Nagas. The problem could be 
solved only by bringing together all the underground Naga factions to one platform and 
holding negotiations with them. Further, that no North-Eastern State Government is 
implementing the transport subsidy scheme of tbe Centre, which is meant for the industrially 
backward States, an~ it is a major reason for the setback to industries in the State. 
31. Shri N. Theyo, President of the Nagaland Pradesh Congress Committee, demanded 
lifting of the bah on the insurgent organisations, to enable them to come to the negotiating 
table for talks. Shri Gotoshe Serna, Vice President, stated that they were working for a 
solution to the Naga political problem even ·in the face of threat to their lives. He too 
demanded lifting of the ban on the insurgent groups. 
32. The representatives of the Naga Mothers' Association, a non-governmental 
organisation, met Members of the Study Group and apprised them of the sphere of their 
activities, which included fight against the evil of drugs, rehabilitation of the drug addicts, 
upliftment of women, children, youths, etc. The Association tried to maintain peace and 
tranquillity during strikes and student unrest. They stated that people were fed up with 
killings and other crimes. They opposed the extension of Disturbed Areas Act to the whole 
of Nagaland and felt that the problem could be resolved through dialogue only. 
ASSAM 
33. Assam is the dominant State among the seven North -Eastern States, with an area of 
78,528 sq. Kms. and a population of 2,22,94,562 (1991 census). The Capital of the State is 
located at Dispur near Guwahati. The population comprises the major communities like the 
Asoms, Bengalis and tribal people, viz. Bodos, Karbis, Cacharis, Rabhas, Dimasas, Misings 
etc. The percentage of literacy is 53.42% (1991 census). The State is afflicted with violent 

9 
activities of extremist groups, viz. the ULFA demanding secession and the Bodo Security 
Force demanding greater autonomy and secession from India. In the recent past, the NSCN 
(I) has also made in-roads into the North Cachar Hills and somewhat into the Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous District Council areas. Due to historical reasons, the State has border 
disputes with Arunachal Pradesh. Mizoram, Nagaland and Meghalaya. 
34. At Guwahati, Members of the Study-Group deliberated with the Council of 
Ministers and senior officers of the State Government and persons from cross sections of the 
society. 
35. Dr. Bhumidhar Barman, a Member of the Council of Minister-s stated that 
insurgency in Assam had started after 1985 and, particularly after 1988-89. The Government 
however, has taken several measures to contain insurgency. According to him, about 4,600 
ULFA extremists, many with arms and ammunition, had surrendered before the authorities 
I 
and they had been rehabilitated by Government and were now leading a normal life. This 
process of surrender is still continuing. He felt that the resource crunch had affected 
modernisation of the police force. Assam police is fighting extremists' AK-47, AK-56 and 
other modern weapons witoh old rifles of the British days. Insurgents are getting training and 
other assistance from Bangladesh, Burma, Pakistan and Bhutan. ULFA and Bodo Security 
Force have camps in Bhutan. They come from Bhutan, commit crimes like killings, 
kidnappings and extracting money etc., in Assam and return through the gaps in the long 
hilly and forest boundary. He mentioned that a request has been made to the Government 
of India to allow Assam Police and Para-Military Forces to enter Bhutan, apprehend the 
extremists and destroy their camps/shelter there. As infiltration of insurgents is also taking 
place through Bangladesh .border~. he felt that strengthening of the Border Security Force 
along Bangladesh borders is necessary. 
36. The Chief Secretary stated that insurgency in Assam under the banner of ULF A had 
started in the year 1985. The insurgency aggravated since 1988. There were 146 cases of 
kidnappings and 156 cases' of killings in 1990 and 1991, respectively. The number of such 
incidents and killings declined in 1992, after the general elections to the State Assembly. 
This downtrend still exists on the ULF A front but, the Bqdo Security Force has stepped up 
its insurgent activities, particularly against the minorities. There is also an infighting among 
different factions of the Bodo Security Force. All these major insurgent groups operating in 
the State, viz. ULF A, Bodo Security Force and NSCN, have joined hands recently and have 
a safe sanctuary in Bhutan for training and for their operation in the bordering areas of 
Assam in the Bodo Autonomous Council area, in particular. When the State Government 
asked for Centre's permission to allow the Assam Police and Para-military forces to enter 
Bhutan, apprehend the extremists and destroy their camps there, it was told not to enter 
Bhutan as their border being an international border, it was the problem of the Centre to 
take care. The State Government is, therefore, helpless on this count. Assam has a border 
of over 260 Kms. along Bangladesh and over 250 Kms. along Bhutan. The insurgents. can 
enter freely into the State in their vehicles, unless checked by the Army or the Border 
Security Force on the border. Assam Police can not check the Bhutanese Vehicles unless 
they happen to be involved in an accident or commission of a breach of law. The Chief 
Secretary submitted that financial assistance from the Centre is immensely required for 
procuring appropriate arms and ammunition, and developing the infrastructure. 
37. The Home Commissioner stated that the State Government is committed to fight 
insurgency. But in view of the extensive support provided by the neighbouring countries, 
help of the Army and Para-Military Forces is greatly required. Well-coordinated army and 
civil operation against insurgents are necessary. 

9 
activities of extremist groups, viz. the ULF A demanding secession and the Bodo Security 
Force demanding greater autonomy and secession from India. In the recent past, the NSCN 
(I) has also made in-roads into the North Cachar Hills and somewhat into the Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous District Council areas. Due to historical reasons, the State has border 
disputes with Arunachal Pradesh. Mizoram, Nagaland and Meghalaya. 
34. At Guwahati, Members of the Study-Group deliberated with the Council of 
Ministers and senior officers of the State Government and persons from cross sections of the 
society. 
35. Dr. Bhumidhar Barman, a Member of the Council of Minister-s stated that 
insurgency in Assam had started after 1985 and, particularly after 1988-89. The Government 
however, has taken several measures to contain insurgency. According to him, about 4,600 
ULFA extremists, many with arms and ammunition, had surrendered before the authorities 
and they had been rehabilitated by Government and ' were now leading a normal life. This 
process of surrender is still continuing . He felt that the resource crunch had affected 
modernisation of the police force. Assam police is fighting extremists' AK-47, AK-56 and 
other modern weapons wit'fl old rifles of the British days. Insurgents are getting training and 
other assistance from Bangladesh, Burma, Pakistan and Bhutan. ULFA and Bodo Security 
Force have camps in Bhutan. They come from Bhutan, commit crimes like killings, 
kidnappings and extracting money etc., in Assam and return through the gaps in the long 
hilly and forest boundary. He mentioned that a request has been made to the Government 
of India to allow Assam Police and Para-Military Forces to enter Bhutan, apprehend the 
extremists and destroy their camps/shelter there. As infiltration of insurgents is also taking 
place through Bangladesh .border~. he felt that strengthening of the Border Security Force 
along Bangladesh borders is necessary. 
36. The Chief Secretary stated that insurgency in Assam under the banner of ULF A had 
started in the year 1985. The insurgency aggravated since 1988. There were 146 cases of 
kidnappings and 156 cases of killings in 1990 and 1991, respectively. The number of such 
incidents and killings declined in 1992, after the general elections to the State Assembly. 
This downtrend still exists on the ULF A front but, the Bqdo Security Force has s~epped up 
its insurgent activities, particularly against the minorities. There is also an infighting among 
different factions of the Bodo Security Force. All these major insurgent groups operating in 
the State, viz. ULF A, Bodo Security Force and NSCN, have joined hands recently and have 
a safe sanctuary in Bhutan for training and for their operation in the bordering areas of 
Assam in the Bodo Autonomous Council area, in particular. When the State Government 
asked for Centre's permission to allow the Assam Police and Para-military forces to enter 
Bhutan, apprehend the extremists and destroy their camps there, it was told not to enter 
Bhutan as their border being an international border, it was the problem of the Cent re to 
take care. The State Government is, therefore, helpless on this count. Assam has a border 
of over 260 Kms. along Bangladesh and over 250 Kms. along Bhutan. The insurgents. can 
enter freely into the State in their vehicles, unless checked by the Army or the Border 
Security Force on the border. Assam Police can not check the Bhutanese Vehicles unless 
they happen to be involved in an accident or commission of a breach of law. The Chief 
Secretary submitted that financial assistance from the Centre is immensely required for 
procuring appropriate arms and ammunition, and developing the infrastructure. 
37. The Home Commissioner stated that the State Government is committed to fight 
insurgency. But in view of the extensive support provided by the neighbouring countr ies, 
help of the Army and Para-Military Forces is greatly required. Well-coordinated army and 
civil operation against insurgents are necessary. 

10 
MEGBALAYA 
38. The State of Meghalaya, which was created as a full-fledged State in 1972, has an 
area of 22,429 ·sq. kms. and a population of 760,626 (1991 Census). The State is 
predominantly inhabited by Khasi, Jaintiya and Garo tribes. The State has not witnessed any 
insurgency. However, there have been ethnic conflicts between the tribals and non-tribals. 
the presence of non-tribal traders and businessmen is resented to by the tribal people who 
fear that they will be swamped by the non tribal people. 
3~. The Khasi Students' Union (KSU), Garo Students' Union (GSU), the ' Federation of 
Khasi, Jaintiya and Garo people (FKGP) and Ka Seng Ki and Nongkhaii etc. have been 
agitating against the so called exploitation by outsiders, for eviction of illegal non-tribal 
traders, bifurcation of the joint cadre of All India Services between Assam and Meghalaya 
and checking the influx of foreigners into the State. There have also been incidents of 
assault and intimidation, the non-tribal traders/businessmen being main targets. Recently, 
the Hynniewtrep Achik Liberation Council (HALC) is reported to be indulging in 
extortions, kidnappings and jail-breaks. Some other North-Eastern insurgent groups like 
NSCN(I), ULFA and BSF are reported to be using Meghalaya as a transit route to 
Bangladesh. Shillong is also reportedly being used by these insurgent groups as a meeting 
place. To contain ethnic violence in the State, the State Government undertook thorough 
introspection into functioning of the police department at various levels. A number of 
welfare measures like Meghalaya Police Special Security Scheme (MPSSS), expediting the 
payment of pension and other benefits to the retiring Police Personnel , holding of retirement 
parade on the day of retirement or immediately after retirement of the ~olice personnel have 
been undertaken, to boost the morale of the police force. The wives of the senior police 
officers have also formed an Association, called the Police Officers Wives Association for 
Care (PSWAC). There has been a remarkable improvement in the disposal of cases at the 
investigation stage. The introduction of the City Patrol Scheme in Shillong has widely 
improved the response time of the poiice to .attend to any situation. One India Reserve 
Battalion has been sanctioned to Meghalaya in February 1986 by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to cope up with the incidence of robbery/dacoity on the national highway. To 
effectively deal with infiltration of foreign nationals , some proposals, like creation of posts of 
riverine police, creation of 10 additional check post, creation of Moblile Task Force , 
creation of additional posts of special Anti-Infiltration squad for Ri-Bhoi and South .. Garo 
Hills districts; creation of infiltration Heaquarters staff; have been pending with the Central 
Government. Besides extortion, there have been cases of reported seizure of yellow cake 
(suspected uranium) ; influx of narcotics like heroine , ganja, hashis, SPM, RPM capsules, 
ephairon syrup, morphine sulphate, etc. The withdrawal of five companies of CRPF from 
Shillong city has led to lesser availability of police force in the city. To control and prevent 
crime in the State, the State Government has taken some additional measures like setting up 
mobile patrol , highway patrol in vulnerable crime affected areas, especially of check posts on 
the national highways and esc.orting night buses with armed guards etc. 
40. At Shillong, Members of the Study-Group interacted with the representatives of the 
Central Police Organisations , Ri-War Area Development Council, Khasi Students Union, 
Synjuk Ki Seng Samla Shillong (Youth of Shillong) and the Home Minister , Home 
Commissioner and Director-General of Police, Meghalaya. 
41. The representatives of Ri-War Area Development Council stated that the denial of 
social justice at the hands of Government was the root cause of insurgency in the North-

11 
Eastern Region. The people are deprived of their rights and of the benefits of development. 
Lots of Central Government funds are coming in the State but nobody knows where they 
are going. Government should explore the causes of insurgency. The international border 
line between India and Bangladesh is not accurate. A large number of Khasi villages have 
gone into Bangladesh. Government have recently undertaken fencing along the Indo­
Bangladesh border. They are not opposed to the fencing as such but they are certainly 
opposed to the manner in which the fencing work is being implemented. People in the 
border areas have to cover long distances from their houses to reach their agriculture fields. 
They also complained of harassment of people by BSF personn el in the border areas . They 
requested for undertaking developmental activities in the State. 
42. The Director-General, Assam Rifles, told Members that the Assam Rifles, which is 
the oldest para-military force in the country, has 31 battalions in the North-Eastern Region . 
It is under the operational command of the Army . Besides coping up with the insurgency 
problem , it has been assigned the task of border management along-Indo-China and Indo­
Myanmar borders. Since 1986, no additional recruitment has been made in the Force . The 
Assam Rifles has only a limited intelligence system of its own. The people in the State are 
not happ y with the things going on in the State . The problem in the State is essentially a 
political problem , to be solved at the political level. The security forces cannot eliminate 
militancy. They can only contain it. Government should direct their efforts towards winning 
the hearts and minds of the people. Developmental activity will crea te more employment 
opportunities , However , it is reported that more than 12 per cent of insurgents are already 
in Government employment in the State. 
43. The IG, CRPF, _ informed that there was only one CRPF batt alion in the Sta te to 
assist the State Government and they have proper coordination with State Police. But their 
main problem is the lack of proper facilities. They don't have their own intelligence set up 
for which they depend on the State Police. Their major constraint is that they have to move 
too much in various parts of the country. There is hardly any coordination between CRPF 
and BSF to check inflow of intruders. The State Police has to be involved in the task as they 
are well acquainted with the local population and to the local conditions . The CRPF can 
play only a limited role of containing insurgency and putting the insurgents at a 
disadvantage. A political solution only can be the ultimate solution for the State . 
44. The DIG, BSF informed that the BSF has frontier headquarters at Shillong which 
comprises four State s. Assam , Meghalaya, Manipur and Nagaland . It has seven battalions 
for Meghalaya , out of which 2 battalion s were withdrawn and deployed in J & K which has 
affected its efficiency. The State has 443 Kms. of borders and, therefore, five battalions are 
inadequate. 74 Kms. of border fencing was sanctioned but people of two villages of Assam 
namely Goraganj and Pathanghat, comprising a stretch of 13 Kms., have been objecting to 
the border fencing. According to him imposition of night curfew along th.e international 
border and issuing of identity cards to the people residings within five Kms. of international 
borders could help the BSF. We also agreed with the view of D.G. , Assam Rifles that 
insurgency problem cannot be solved by the Forces. The local population is the main factor 
for solution of the problem. 
45. The representatives of Khasi Students' Union stated that Central teams comes to 
the State with pre-conceived notions about the State' s problems . Due to large-scale influx of 
people , particularly from Bangladesh and Nepal there has been an abnormal increase in the 
population structure of the State. In the border areas , the Bangladeshis have managed to 
enroll themselves as ele~.:trorates, who constitute a vote bank. The Nepalis are concentrated 
in the coal belt of the State, with the result that the Khasis now constitute less than one 

12 
third of the total population of the State. They cannot withstand competition from the non­
tribals. The identity of local people is threatened and they are becoming non-entity in their 
own State. Even the Meghalaya Police is dominated by the non locals who cannot 
comunicate effectively with the locals as they do not speak and understand their language. 
With a view to allow entry of tourists, the REP has recently been lifted. It should continue 
to be in force in respect of Bangladeshis and Nepalis because they come to the State with an 
intention of settling down. The Central Government should take immediate steps to protect 
their identity. 
46. The Minister of Home Affairs, Government of Meghalaya, stated that insurgency 
was a burning problem in the North-Eastern Region. Meghalaya is comparatively a peaceful 
State, free from insurgency. But, it had a spill over of Assam trouble, being a ne~ghbouring 
State. One group of insurgents active in the State is getting assistance from a neighbouring 
State. The State has only two police battalions. Only last month, one battalion of IRP has 
been sent. The State has long borders with Bangladesh, Assam, and other Indian States. 
Besides, it has a border dispute with Assam. It is facing the problem of infiltration of 
Bangladeshis who come to the State via Assam. The Nepalis also come through Assam. He 
suggested form amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure to check influx of Nepalis, 
on the pattern of amendments made by the State of Himachal Pradesh. 
47. The Home Commissioner informed that there had been communal riots in the State 
during the past five years but for the last three years there had not been any major problem 
in this regard. The State has been provided only five BSF battalions and has only two 
battalions of the State Police. They can make the State peaceful with some additional forces. 
The REP, which was earlier in force, has now been lifted. Any citizen from other parts of 
the country requires some sort of documentation, which is not required for the Nepalis. As a 
result, the number of Nepalis in the State has increased. He, therefore, requested for 
enforcement of some form of documentation atleast in respect of people coming from 
outside the country. 
48. The DGP of Meghalaya, stated ·that the major problem facing the State was that of 
infiltration from across the borders which had to be contained. They have submitted some 
proposals containing anti-infiltration measures including posting additional staff, which 
should be approved. The only insurgent group reported to be active in the State is the 
Hyniewtrep Achik Liberation Council (HALC), but there has never been any demand even 
from the underground outfits, for separation and independence of the State. There have 
been some incidents of the local youths demanding money from the tribals and the non­
tribals, but even small crimes make a big news. Even ·this can be contained by a little 
strengthening of their hands. There is a demand of labour in the State, for which the 
outsiders come and return when not needed. The businessmen and the contractors should be 
prevailed upon to employ the maximum number of local youths. The fear psychosis among 
the local youths of being swamped by the outsiders has to be remove. The State has become 
used to a certain level of force. Therefore, additional forces and a highway patrolling scheme 
should be approved. The anti-infiltration work in the State is being done by the thanas. 
They have been able to push back 10,000 infiltrators during the last three years. The state 
has a task force for dealing centrally with insurgency. The thanas are helping with 
intelligence and providing information. The Central Government has been requested to up­
grade their arms. To contain highway robberies they have introduced a system of convoys 
and escorts~~ He al~o complained Of very low credit deposit ratio in the State. The banks 
should contribute for development of the State. 
49. Later in the evening Members of the Study-Group had discussions with the Chief 
Minister of the State, Shri S.C. Marak. He informed Members that the State was being used 
F3B-6391/RS 

I 
13 
as a corridor by the insurgent outfits of other States. But they want to keep it calm and 
peaceful. Basically, the State has been free from ethnic trouble since 1993, except a few cases 
of small crime like extortion from the business community. The State has perfect 
communication system and network of road links. The North Eastern Council does not have 
funds for maintenance of roads, which is done by the State Government. The Bangladeshis 
come at night and harvest the crops of Indian farmers. People in the border areas have been 
objecting to the border fencing, since they want the same to be erected at the zero point as 
they have to enter their fields after covering a distance of about 3 Kms. from their villages. 
50. Two national highways-numbers 40 and 44, pass through the State. They are unable 
to control extortions on these highways for which they have asked for financial assistance of 
two crores for modernisation of police force. The State need s and has also requested the 
Central Government to construct a bypass road around Shillong so that heavy truck loads do 
not have to enter the city. The proposal is now pending with the Union Ministry of 
Environment and Forests. It may be cleared at the earliest. He also referred to recent cases of 
seizure of yellow cake (raw uranium) in the State. Bangladesh is being used as conduit for 
smuggling uranium. Since no mining activities for yellow cake are being undertaken and no 
facilities for conversion of yellow cake into uranium exist in the State much security is not 
needed at the moment. The State has no industries except two cement units in the private 
sector. Fish and Coal are being smuggled into Bangladesh from the State. 
51. Shillong has become a safe heaven for various insurgent outfits which go to 
Bangladesh and come back. Since the city has the best educational institutions in the entire 
North-Eastern Region, the insurgents come in the garb of students . It becomes difficult to 
identify them. There is no deployment of Assam Rifles in Meghalaya . There is good 
coordination between the Central and State forces. They have adequate intelligence network . 
Since they have sometimes to coordinate with foreign agencies, he requested that Central 
Government should upgrade the intelligence gathering system. The Dawki border trade route 
with l}lngladesh has been closed, through which four hundred truck loads of coal used to go 
to J}ingladesh. The Bangladeshis have their customs house but they are not allowing India to 
construct a custom house. Steps should be taken to open this trade route. 
52. During the visit, members of the Study Group also came to know that the Muviah 
NSCN (1), based at Dhaka, is espousing the idea of self determination by the indigenous 
people of Himalayan Region and that there are emerging contacts between weak and strong 
insurgent groups. There is no proper road link between Garo and Shillong. There was also a 
demand for coordina 1ion mechanism for intelligence gathering and sharing. 
53. The Committee impresses upon the Government to consider the demand of the State 
regarding construction of Shillong by-pass on priority basis. Government may also exmine the 
feasibility of opening Dawki border trade route with Bangladesh on mutual understanding with 
that country. 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 
54. Arunachal Pradesh is the largest State in the North Eastern Region, with an area of 
83,743 sq. kms. and a population of 8,58,392 (1991 Census). It is primarily a tribal State, the 
major tribes being Adi, Nishing and Apatani. The "State has international borders with 
Bhutan, China and Myanmar and inter-state borders with Assam and Nagaland. The entire 
terrain in the State is mountainous and is divided by various small and large rivers. The road 
communication in the State is difficult in normal times, which becomes almost impossible 
during the monsoons. The overall law and order situation is satisfactory and the State has 
remained an island of peace in the otherwise disturbed North -Eastern Region. 

14 
55. On the 18th March, 1996, Members of the Study Group held discussions with Chief 
Secretary, I.G. Police and other Officers of the State Government at ltanagar, the Capital of 
the State. 
56. The Chief Secretary informed that Arunachal Pradesh was the . most strategic State 
of the region , having boundaries with three countries -namel y, China, Bhutan and 
Myanmar. 
57. There is no direct flight to Delhi and it takes eight hours .to travel by road to 
Guwahati. It is also the most difficult State in the region , which, till date, enjoys the 
reputation of 'island of peace'. There are certain aspects about the State which deserve 
special attention: 
(i) There has been a persisting and severe discrimination with the $tate for the reason 
that this is a predominantly tribal society which should have enjoyed the status of 
Scheduled Tribes , but the same has been denied to it in a number of ways; 
(ii) The boundary question-the boundary of the State was arbitrarily decided in 1951, 
by the then Governor of Assam when the State's areas in the plains were 
transferred to Assam; and 
(iii) Then there is the Chakma problem-the single most longest problem. The Ministry 
of Horne Affairs is bent upon granting citizenship rights to Chakmas, instead of 
deporting them back. Their stay in the State is a violation of all the protections 
given to the State under different laws. The State has not been involved in any 
insurgency issue so far. However, NSCN activities have been noticed in its eastern 
borders, with Nagaland and Myanmar. Similarly, due to Assam problem the Bodo 
activists have been entering into the State, leading to incidents of firing. 
58. The. IGP, Arunachal Pradesh informed members that the Bodo and ULFA 
insurgents enter Arunachal Pradesh when there is a pressure from Assam. They are setting 
up their transit camps in the State and resorting to extortions. The State does not have 
enough manpower to deal with their activities. With only two Bns. of local police and three 
Bns. of CRPF, they cannot even take care of State's borders with Assam. They have 
demanded one Bn. of IRP for which sanction is not forthcoming. The Central and the State 
Governments share expenditure on IRP on 50:50 basis. The State's share should be 25%. 
59. The IGP further stated that the number of Chakmas was around 16,000 when they 
came first in 1964. Now they number around 65000. Being foreigners, they should not be 
given Indian citizenship. He also referred to large scale illegal felling of forest s in the State . 
The State has to face a law and order problem due to the money flowing by deforestation. 
60% of timber from North-Eastern Region goes from Arunachal Pradesh. The State has 
6000 forest guards and only a few mobile guards at a distance of 300 kms., who cannot 
check deforestation. The State is also facing serious problem of jails as there is no Jail. The 
State has no money to construct one. The Central Government gives money for 
modernisation of jails only while the State needs the same for construction of new jails. 
60. Members of the Study Group had interaction with the representative s of various 
voluntary organisations, students' bodies and persons from cross section s of society also. 
They were informed that the geople of the State are good and peace loving . They speak and 
understand Hindi which is compulsory upto the higher secondary level. They are very much 
in the national mainstream and sing nationalistic song. But of late, the Chakma problem is 
emerging and their population js increasing as their relations are also coming into the State. 

l 
1 
1 
15 
The people want them to be deported. When they had come first, the local people thought 
they will go back and so did not care much. Now that they are educated, they have started 
thinking that if the Chakmas go back, the locals can get the State's land, which is occupied 
by the Chakmas. 
61. The President of the Pradesh Congress Committee (I) informed that the State has 
never come across law and order· problem, nor there has ever been any incident of 
insurgency. He told that majority of the business community and 80% of servicemen have 
come from the rest of the country. The businessmen come after taking inner-line passes. The 
locals have lesser business prospects. The refugees not having even inner-line passes, can 
create law and order problems. There are 26 tribes in the State. All of them need to be 
protected. 
62. Mrs. Yam Natung, Chairman, Social Welfare Advisory Board stated that the 
Chakma issue is yet to find a soultion from the Central Government. So far the State has 
been peaceful among all the North-Eastern States. Granting Citizenship to Chakmas is likely 
to set very bad precedents. Migrations from Bangladesh are very common now. Government 
should not conduct elections before solving the Chakma problem. 
63. Late in the evening, Members held discussions with the Chief Minister, Arunachal 
Pradesh, and some of his cabinet colleagues. They drew the Members' attention to the 
following issues:- ' 
(i) The refugees who were given temporary rehabilitation in the State, are now applying 
for citizenship. It will spoil the local culture, traditions and the system. The 
sentiments, the likes and dislikes of the locals were never consulted. The local 
youths are prepared to go to any extreme. The local people have blood relations on 
the other side of borders with China and Burma. But they have committed 
themselves with the Indian union. It is a mockery of the law that foreigners are 
being settled here. They should be taken away somewhere else in India, in some 
other big States. The locals being in minority, can't accommodate them. Even the 
drugs are coming through refugees in this peaceful State. People are sore over the 
issue. Peace in the Island of Peace, may, therefore not be disturbed. 
(ii) The other problem is the Assam-Arunachal Pradesh boundary dispute. In the year 
1951, 4000 sq. kms of land was transferred to Assam, which is still called transferred 
areas. Those areas should be given back to the State. 
(iii) Then, there are 15 major tribes in the State. A list has been given to the Central 
Government. But they have not been included in the list of Scheduled Tribes. The 
names of tribes which are included therein had never existed in the ·State. The 
people in the State do not have equal status with those in Nagaland and Mizoram, 
in as much as land ownership rights have not been given to them. 
(iv) In other insurgency infested ' States, Governors have not been given any special 
powers, while the Arunachal Pradesh Governor has been given such powers. These 
should be taken away. 
(v) They do not have all India Cadre service. The UT cadre officers come here, whose 
minds are not here and they are not concerned with development of the State. 
Therefore, a State Cadre of All India Service should be created. 
(vi) The people of the State want all-round development. There is no industry and the 
power supply through generators is not adequate. Villages .are without electrictiy. 

t~. ~ l 
16 
Therefore, · an adequate power infrastructure should be created and central projects 
should be undertaken. 
64. The State has to face problems due to its borders with Nagaland and Burma. The 
entire North-Eastern Region is lagging behind in infrastructure and development. Transport 
system is the worst affected. There is no airport. Insurgency has gone on for half a century. 
It is going from strength to strength. If Government want the North-Eastern region to 
develop, alongwith the national mainstream, its tributaries i.e. the seven States, should be 
developed. 
65. There are extremists all around in the State, though it has been an Island of peace. 
The State does not have adequate forces. A lot of forests are there. The people have to pass 
through Assam areas where there is no Assamese population and, therefore, that State is 
not bothered about law and order. They don't allow Arunachal Pradesh vehicles and people 
to pass through Assam without escort, which they don't have. Even the roads coming from 
Assam to Arunachal Pradesh are completely dilapidated. Therefore, more Bns., with 
sophisticated weapons, should be given to the State. Arounds 300 trucks of Assam carry 
timber daily from Arunachal Pradesh illegally. In this way, all their plantations are being 
destroyed. The Arunachal Pradesh Forest Offices have been closed because extremists loot 
their money . ULFA also has its training camps in Arunachal Pradesh. The Army should be 
joined in the combined effort, so that Arunachal Pradesh does not become a sanctuary of 
extremists. 
66. The Chief Minister of Arunachal Pradesh stated that there are different ethnic 
groups in the North-Eastern Region. Some special safeguards and commitments have been 
given to improve the quality of life of the people and for development of the Region. But 
these have not been taken seriously and honestly. There has been long isolation of the 
people from the national mainstream. This, combined with a host of other reasons like 
illiteracy, lack of proper communications, etc., has led to a general impression that North ­
East is far away like a foreign country. This feeling has to be eliminated. The people here 
are part of the national mainstream and are Indian nationals. The only thing is that 
problems of the region, particularly of Arunachal Pradesh, have not been properly 
addressed. They get false assurances only. It creates more confusion instead of helping to 
find solutions. People in the border areas. are deprived of communication facilities, just in 
the name of defence. Even then they are totally committed to India and are staunch 
nationalists. No assessment of the ground realities, of the demands of the people of different 
ethnic communities has ever been made. Even the NDC had not been convened twice in a 
year, which is mandatory. The people of the State have not been given an opportunity to 
express. their sentiments. More services and jobs are being given to the people in J & K, but 
not in Arunachal Pradesh. The Centre must behave equally with all the States. They have 
submitted a number of memoranda/representations but nobody is serious to listen. Then , 
vast areas of NEFA were illegally transferred to Assam, without consulting their owners. 
This mistake could have been corrected at the time of reorganisation of the North-Ea stern 
States. 
67. Another major problem facing the State is that of Chakma, Hajong and other 
refugees. The tribals of the State had been protected by various enactments. Today , despite 
stiff opposition from the people, refugees have been settled here. These refugees , numbering 
around 36,000, should be settled outside the State. lnfact, they should have gone back to 
Bangladesh. Instead of sending them back, they are going to be settled here. The Supreme 
Court has given a decision that these refugees are foreigners. 
68. The Chief Minister complained that there was no National Highway in the State. 

17 
They want alternate highway in the foothills. RITES had conducted a survey but no funds 
were provided. The Central Government is ready to give funds in extremists affected States, 
but it is constrained to give the same for economic development. No funds have been 
provided for housing, communications, schools, etc. One-fourth of India's power 
requirement can be generated from Arunachal Pradesh, if the potentials are properly 
tapped. The main priority today is Chakma Hajong refugees. This is a highly emotive and 
sensitive issue which has the potential to create bigger problems. He also resented the role 
of NHRC which had gone to litigation, without asking for comments of Arunachal I'radesh 
Government. He urged the Centre to be impartial and take care of the Arunachal People. 
69. The Members of the Study-Group also received some written representations 
requesting for immediate action by the Central Government for solution of the problems 
facing the State. Shri Yan Tikhak, Chairman, Arunachal Pradesh Indigenous Tribals' Rights, 
(Protection) Organisation (APITRO), ltanagar, complained of the negligence and indifferent 
attitude of the Central Government towards the State. He was critical of the role of the 
National Human Rights Commission for fighting for the Chakmas and Hajongs in the 
Supreme Court. He stated that the State is inhabited by indigenous tribals. with their age 
old traditions and customs. This island of 'peace and calm is remorsefully disturbed by the 
burden of refugees. The continued presence of such refugees makes the constitutional 
protection and the' inner line system a hypocracy. The Central Government should take 
immediate appropriate action in the matter. The Central Government should also take 
action to get back approximately 4,000 sq. Kms. of State's land transferred to Assam by the 
State Reorganisation Notification of 1951. Further, the eleven Scheduled Tribes mentioned 
in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution had never existed in the State and the names of 
many indigenous tribes in the same list are not correct. 
70. The State has never been given the same status like Nagaland and Mizoram in 
respect of land ownership and Central aid. The Central Government may, therefore, take 
appropriate action in this regard also. Practically all the States of the country have their own 
State cadres of All India Services viz. lAS, and IPS. But in the Arunachal Pradesh, the 
officers from the Union Territory cadre are posted who behave like officers of the Central 
Services and are indifferent to the hopes and aspirations of the local people. The State 
should, therefore, be provided with its own State cadre of All India Services. There is 
neither any infrastructure for industrialisation in the State nor any Central project. The 
educated and school drop-out youths have no avenues for livelihood. As a result, many 
youths are going as mercenaries , in the underground, anti-national militancy organisations. 
The Central Government should, therefore, give more assistance towards infrastructure 
building for industrialisation of the State. More Central projects should be launched to boost 
the State's economy and enhance employment prospects for the youths so that they are not 
left behind their neighbouring States. 
71. Shri Talar Doye, President , Arunachal Pradesh Congress Committee (1), ltanagar, 
referred to the decision taken in people's referendum rally for removal of Chakma and 
Hajong refugees from the State on 20th September, 1995 and requested for peaceful 
settlement of the issue. According to him, the continued presence of these refugees would 
affect the demographic pattern of the local tribal society. This problem should be settled 
before declaration of date for Parliamentary elections, failing which all they would boycott 
the elections. He also resented that Central Government had filed an affidavit against the 
State Government, on the basis of which the Supreme Court has restrained the State 
Government from deporting Chakma, Hajong and other refugees and migrants from 
Bangladesh, temporarily residing in the State . He , therefore , requested to convey their 

18 
sentiments to the Central Government and solve the problems of the indigenous people of 
the State, immediately. 
72. The Committee in view of the State being primarily a tribal State is of the view that 
the traditions, culture ' and identity of the inhabitants need to be protected. It is, therefore, of 
the opinion that the social and religious practices followed b.v the local tribes since time 
immemorial need to be safeguarded and for that purpose, if necessary, Government should 
examine the necessity of making requisite amendment to the Constitution. 
MIZORAM 
73. The State of Mizoram was constituted out of the Lushai Hills Dtstrict of Assam in 
1987 after negotiations with the Mizo National Front (MNF). The State has its headquarters 
at Aizawl with a population of 6,86,217 (1991 census). It is almost entirely inhabited by the 
tribal people which include the Mizo/Lushai, Chakma, Hmar, Lakher, Parvi and the Paite 
Tribes. The major issues currently include the agitation by the Mizo Zirlai Pawl (MZP), a 
Mizo Students' Organisation, demanding deportation of a majority of the Chakmas who, 
they claim, are foreigners and has entered Mizoram illegally from Bangladesh. The Mizo 
community has been apprehensive about getting swamped by 'outs iders' i.e. people from 
outside Mizoram. 
74. Mizoram is surrounded by two countries viz. Myanm ar in the East and Bangladesh 
in the West with about 700 Kms. long international border. Along the border of these two 
countries NSCN and CNF/CNA are reported to be indulging in violent activities in the 
South-Eastern region and all the extremist outfits of Northern regions are having training 
camps inside Bangladesh. There is every possibility and constant threat due to the fact that 
members of these extremist outfits may in.filtrate inside Mizoram and attempt to liquidate 
the VVIPs!VIPs of the State as weU as destroy vital installations. 
75. It has been observed that infiltration of insurgent groups in Mizoram from both the 
international borders has become a big problem. These militant groups find it easy to cross 
these international borders and come to Mizoram to reach their destination s. This problem is 
because of very long international borders. The international borders have been provided 
only a skeleton kind of covet by the security forces due to their inadequacy. At times, it has 
also been observed that there· is lack of coordination between the Central Para-military 
forces and the Mizoram Police. Therefore , to protect the international borders from any 
kind of militant activities, it is essential that adequate strength of the Assam Rifles and the 
BSF be deployed on the lndo-Myanmar and Indo-Bangladesh borders respectively. 
76. Another big problem being faced by the State is the infiltration of foretgners inside 
Mizoram, particularly from Myanmar and Bangladesh, who try to settle down within 
Mizoram unauthorizedly and thus not only causing extra burden on the economy of the 
State; but also creuting problems on law and order front and criminal activities. Many of 
them commit crimes in Mizoram and conveniently cross the border and stay out of sight for 
sometime. But again they re~enter and repeat the process. A number of them indulge in 
smuggling, drug trafficking, circulation of fake currency and other criminal activities. Many 
of them try to settle down permanently which is causing alarm because of the criminal 
tendencies on the part of some of them and also extra burden on the economy. Besides, it 
also creates security problem in respect of security of VVIPs!VIPs, other dignitaries, vital 
installations and vulnerable targets. Therefore, strict and effective vigilance on the borders 
has become more imperative. 
77. Mizoram Police is presently short of manpower and resources. It has only three 

19 
armed battalions and one India Reserve Police Battalion. It is necessary to equip the forces with 
latest weapons , communication network , transportation facilities and proper training. The State 
Government has not been able to provide these requirements because of extreme fund 
constraints. It is submitted that the Central Government may consider raising at least one more 
India Reserve Police Battalion for Mizoram. Till such time more battalions can be raised, the 
Government of India may consider deployment of one more battalion of CRPF in addition to 
the present strength deployed in the State. 
78. The Central Government may be requested to provide additional budget for getting the 
needful done in due course. The State Government is trying on its part to get whatever 
equipments etc., it can have within its limited resources. 
SAMATALW ASI VYBASAIK UNNA YAN KALY AN SAMITI (SA VUKS) 
79. The representatives of the SAVUKS submitted that in the incident of 27th September, 
1994, they had suffered most. All their belongings, trade articles had been looted and ransacked 
by the unknown miscreants. Even their shops had been taken away by the landlords. After the 
incident they were forced to take shelter at different protected areas of Government to be 
escorted out of Mizoram subsequently. 
80. The representatives also submitted that the Government had assured them that 
necessary facilities would be provided to them to enable them to re-start their business activities 
but till today no concrete action has been taken. Even their applications to the one-man 
Commission for award of compensation are yet to be disposed of. They requested the Study­
Group's indulgence in this regard. 
BRU (RIANG) TRIBAL COMMUNITY OF MIZORAM 
81. The representatives of the organisation mentioned that Bru (Riang) people, with a total 
population of seventy thousand, are sporadically scattered in different parts of Mizoram. ln the 
latest electoral rolls revision of Mizoram, majority of Bru (Riang) Community has been left out, 
thus depriving them of their Fundamental Right to Vote. They demanded inclusion of their 
names in the electoral roll to enable them to exercise their right of franchise. 
82. Shri A.K. Azad, Secretary, Samatalwasi Vybasaik Unnayan Kalyan Samiti 
(SAVUKS), Aizawl, informed Members that licences of the traders in the State had not been 
renewed after 1971. They were informed that no new licences have been issued since then. The 
non-Mizos are made to pay donations. They have not been able to open their shops for the last 
two years for fear of being looted. In his representation submitted to members of the Study­
Group he referred to an incident which took place on the 27th September, 1994, when the shops 
of the plains people were ransacked and their trade articles were looted by unknown miscreants. 
Their business premises were also taken over by the landlords. They had to take shelter in 
Government protected areas and later on escorted out of Mizoram. Later on, they had a 
meeting in the Circuit House, Guwahati, in the presence of then Union Ministers of State for 
Home Affairs and Steel and Chief Ministers of Assam and Mizoram and the Chief Secretaries of 
both the States. The Mizoram Government had assured the non-Mizo tenants that it would use 
its good offices for the return of their premises by the landlords and to make necessary 
arrangements for the smooth running of their business. They had also filed applications for 
compensation before the inquiry commission but no action had been taken so far. They had 
bought their articles on credit from outside the State. Their families are facing starvation and 
the creditors are pressing them for payment. They, therefore, requested members to take up the 
matter with the State Government for payment of compensation to enable them to survive. 
83. Shri Hmun Hui, member, Mizoram State Planning Board, Aizawl stated that there are 

20 
three Scheduled Tribes in Mizoram known as Lai, Mara and Chakma, having their own 
Autonomous District Councils under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. These councils 
are entrusted with the development of the Scheduled Tribes in accordance with their own 
traditions, customs and cultures. But with their entrustments, the councils are not able to 
meet their requirements. Earlier, the Central Plan funds to all the three districts of Mizoram 
were allocated in the ratio of 5 : 3 : 2. Since indedpendence, not a single major 
developmental project has been undertaken in any of the three council areas and the 
Chhimtupuri District has remained most backward. He, therefore, requested for allocation 
of plan funds in the ratio of 5 : 3 : 2 for the three council areas. He also stated that a 207 
kms. road upto Lawngtalai village, a tri-junction of the borders of Mizoram, Myanmar and 
Bangladesh was undertaken by the Ministry of Defence. After completion of 100· Kms. the 
work on the toad was abandoned on the plea that after return of normalcy in the State the 
same was not required. But this road was needed by the people of the area and work for its 
completion should be resumed. 
84. The Committee in view of the demand of the people of the area urges upon 
Government to examine the issue of construction of the road linking Lawngtalai village in 
Mizoram, afresh in its entirity and see whether entire stretch of the road can be completed 
within a time frame . 
TRIPURA 
85. The State of Tripura with its Capital at Agartala and an area of 10,486 sq. Kms. has 
a population of 27,44,827 (1991 census). The major communities are the Bengalis , Tripuris , 
Reangs , Jamatias and the Chakmas. The State is <1fflicted by the activities of over a dozen 
extremist groups prominent among them being A TTF and the NLFT. The State is seriously 
affected by tribal, non-tribal conflict. The State's official language is Bengali and the major 
tribal language is Kokborok spoken by the Tripuri Tribals. 
86. The representatives of Tripura Upjati Juba Samiti (TUJS) stated that this is really a 
difficult situation arising in Tripura since 1993 with the State Government's sponsored 
extremism really barricading the proce,.ss of development. In the last 3 years thousands of 
people have been killed by the extremists , thousands of tribals have to migrate to th e 
neighbouring States like Assam, Meghalaya and even in Bangladesh. The communal 
harmony is being disturbed because of extremist activities. He suggested that there should be 
a deadline for surrender of the extremists. He also stated that the State Government is 
determined not to ban any extremist organisation for unknown reasons. Since they are not 
banned they have access everywhere. The State Government has also no intention to curb 
these extremist activities. So he suggested applit:ation of Disturbed Areas Act so that the law 
and order is established here. 
87. The representative of the Janata Dal stated that the general Jaw and order situation 
in the State is not as bad as the problem arising out of insurgency. There has been increase 
in the kidnappings of the business people, passengers and the villagers. There is neither 
industry nor necessary infrastructure in the State. Unless the economy of the State is 
developed, particularly the tribal areas. There is no hope for the future. To combat 
terrorism he suggested that more police forces are necessary with sophisticated arms as the 
extremists have AK-47 and AK-56 , arms . During Congress-TUJS regime there were more 
than 60 Companies of para-military forces other than Assam Rifles. Now there are only 30 
companies. He also demanded that necessary funds for rehabilitation of the surrendered 
insurgents should be made available by the Centre to State Government. 
F78·6391/RS 

21 
88. The representative of the Democratic Youth Front on behalf of his organisation 
and the Tribal Youth Federation, Students Federation of India, Tribal Students Union, 
Tripura stated that there are only 6 Bns. of BSF which is insufficient to tackle the problem 
of influx and infiltration. So the strength should be increased to 12 Bns. The extremists are 
having sophisticated weapons. The State police has only .303 rifles. The State police should 
be armed with sophisticated weapons like AK 47, AK 56 to combat the terrorism. More 
than 4000 extremists have surrendered to join the main stream. For their rehabilitation, the 
amount required by the State Government must be released by the Central Government. 
89. The representative of the BJP told about the present law and order situation and 
insurgency problem. He mentioned that there were two types of insurgency-<>ne was the 
political insurgency and the other was the economic insurgency. If the political parties, 
particularly the left parties, want to tackle it, it can be tackled within no time. The second 
insurgency is economic insurgency which has to be tackled by the Government. Whatever 
money is released that has to be properly utilised by the State Government. Unless the 
State was declared a ·disturbed area, the people could not feel secured. 
90. The representative of the Indira Congress told that the present State Police force 
is not enough to combat the insurgency. He, therefore, suggested for more Central Force 
with sophisticated arms to be sent to Tripura to protect the life and properties of the 
people. Social and economic develop .ment also need to be given due priority. Utilisation of 
natural resources in Tripura will also help in combating unemployment in the State. The 
influx from Bangladesh must be stopped which will reduce insurgency and unemployment 
in the State. . 
91. At Jampuijala, the Study-Group met representatives from the people , who, in sum 
and substance stated that in Tripura, some terrorists have recently indulged in various 
criminal activities like murder, terror, kidnapping, getting donations by force, dacoity and 
stealing cattle, thus trying to disrupt the peace and amity among the people. 
92. The representatives also stated that some terrorist organisations like the N.L.F.T./ 
A.T.T.F./f.R.A. etc. are getting shelter and training in Bangladesh and they enter the 
State with modern arms which are used in different acts of terrorism. They also lure the 
tribal youths by promising a free, sovereign country in North-East area after separation 
from India and induce them to indulge in criminal activities. The State Government do not 
have the necessary Police Force and the modern arms to combat these insurgent 
organisations with latest arsenals supplied by foreign countries. 
. 
93. As a result , developmental works were being hindered in the areas inhabited by 
the tribals. The educational institutions are closed and the transport facilities are hindered. 
The non-tribal people are getting afraid of these groups and prefer to go to some safer 
place. 
94. Some people in the State have been demanding enforcement of the Disturbed 
Area Act to combat these activities. But they are opposed to such demand, because, 
according to them . declaration of the State as the Disturbed Area will disrupt the normal 
life and affect the peace and amity among the tribals and non-tribals. 
95. The following demands have been made by them for the well-being of the people 
of Tripura: -
(i) Provision of adequate finance by the Central Government to moderni~e the State 
Police Force; 

22 
(ii) Provision of adequate number of para-military forces to the State Government; 
(iii) B.S.F. posts shoula be effectively arranged to check the movement of terrorists at 
the Indo-Bangladesh border; 
(iv) To lay rail, road to Agartala and establish industries, factories, thus providing 
employment to the unemployed of the State; 
(v) To take up special developmental schemes for overall development of this problem­
ridden State. 
96. The Chief Secretary, Government of Tripura, in his presentation stated that while 
insurgency was their foremost problem, it was compounded by their difficult location. 
Tripura shares 839 kms. of its border with Bangladesh and the balance 162 kms. with Assam 
and Mizoram. Nearly two-third of the area is hilly, leaving very little cultivable land. About 
60% of the total areas is classified as 'Forest' and of this, nearly 90% land has actual forest 
cqver. This terrain is very rugged, thickly forested, thinly populated and, therefore, 
favourable for insurgent activities. 
97. The Chief Secretary further stated that till partition in 1947, Tripura was a tribal 
majority State (56% tribal population in 1921, and about 51% thereafter). Subsequently, the 
.demography of the State altered radically due to several waves of influx from across the 
international border. The tribals have been reduced to a minority (36% in 1951, 31.53% in 
1961, 28.5% in 1971, 28.44% in 1981). A recent survey has indicated that 73.58% of the 
rural households are below the poverty line. 
98. He mentioned that their proposal for extending NH-44, the lifeline of Tripura, to 
the southern tip of Sabroom, is still pending. The State has practically no railway line except 
for a small stretch in the northern part bordering Assam. From the recent Railway Budget 
speech, they have. been given to understand that Railways have approached Planning 
Commission for allocation of funds for extending the rail line to Agartala. 
99. The TNV the major insurgent outfit in tfte'-state in the 1980s, demanded deportation 
of all post 1947 foreigners, long term economic development and self-employment for 
tribals, tribal programmes in AIR, and Jhumia rehabilitation. 
100. Some of the 15 groups currently active· in Tripura are allied with NSCN, ULF A 
and PLA. As per confirmed intelligence report, training is being given by lSI in at least 14 
locations inside Bangladesh. 
101. Compared to the TNV days, today's insurgent groups are numerous, spread-out 
throughout the State, often vehicle-borne, have sophisticated weapons, have close links with 
lSI through Bangladesh and NSCN/ULFA/PLA and resort to frequent kidnappings. 
102. In 1990-91, 63 Coys. of ex-State force including CPMF, like CRPF, Assam Rifles, 
RAC and MPSAF were deployed in Tripura. This strength has progressively been reduced 
by intermittent withdrawals. The latest strength was 30 Coys. of CRPF. Another 5 Coys. 
have taken position recently. 5 more Coys. though authorised, have not yet taken position. 
The State Government require an additional minimum of 19 Coys. immediately. 
103. State forces are equipped mainly with .303 rifles and a few pieces of SLRs. In 
contrast, insurgent groups have and use sophisticated AK-47s156s. 
104. Against the authorised strength of 11 BSF Bns, 7 are currently deployed Existing 
BOPs are manned only by 2 Sections. This is insufficient for their jurisdiction. The average 

23 
distance between two BOPs is 11-12 km. This weakness encourages border crime besides 
providing all insurgent groups easy access to their sanctuaries in Bangladesh to dodge the 
security dragnet. 
105. A proposal to raise two additional TSR Bns as IR Bns has been pending since 
November 1992. This , coupled with ·the shortage of CPMF, has aggravated the situation. 
The Forces' modernisation grant proposal for Rs. 3.55 crores has also been pending since 
September 1993. A proposal for Rs. 6.15 crore to augment the MTF based on the 
recommendations of a Committee headed by the former DIB is also pending since April 
1992. NH-44 is the lifeline of the State and its portion inside Tripura needs to be firmly 
secured. A detailed scheme has been submitt ed and is pending for sanction. 
106. The State Government has left no stone unturned in bringing the misguided trib al 
youths into the mainstream. In response to the call of the State Government, as many as 
4238 extremists have laid down their arms and returned to normal life. Rehabilitation of the 
surrendered extremists is an important element in the overall strategy to combat insurgency. 
Unless the surrendered extremists are effectively rehabilitated. they may be compelled to 
return to the underground again out of frustration. The State Government requested the 
Government of India for Rs. 71.44 crores to rehabilitate 1635 surrendered A ITF insurgents. 
But Government of India has only released Rs. 2:38 crores so far. In comparison, Rs. 35.00 
crores was sanctioned earlier for settlement of only 447 surrendered insurgents. 
107. In the context of the problems being faced by the State Government as elaborated 
in the foregoing paragraphs , the Chief Secretary submitted that the State Government 
immediately requires deployment of at least 19 Coys. more of CPMf so that the total CPMF 
availability is 59 Coys. as well as sanction of the critically required pending proposals for 
effectively tackling the anti-insurgency situation. There is urgent need to augment the BSF 
strength on the S~ate's border and deploy Assam Rifles at least in selected areas as a grid 
which used to exist in the past. 
108. The Left Front Committee of Tripura, in their representation submitted to the 
Study Group stated that the population of Tripura , once .a tribal majority State, was 6.39 
lakhs in 1951 and it went upto 27.75 lakh in 1991 due to large scale migration of people from 
erstwhile East Pakistan. The tribal population is now 31% of the total population only. This 
rapid increase in population, coupled with economic backwardness has led to disparity 
between the tribals and non-tribals, resulting in ethnic problems and insurgency. The State 
has 839 kms. of International border with Bangladesh. In the absence of deployment of 
adequate forces along the international border and the para-military forces, to control 
insurgency. the State Government is unable to contain insurgency. They made the following 
suggestions:-
(i) Sealing of border with Bangladesh: 
Members of the three extremist groups active in the State namely All Tripur(i Tiger 
Force (AITF), National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) and Tripura Resurrection 
Army (TRA) take shelter and get training and other assistance in Bangladesh. They also 
have links with NSCN, ULFA, PLA and other extremist groups of North-Eastern region. 
Earlier, there used to be eleven BSF Bns along Bangladesh border, now there are only 6 
Bns. A proposal of the State Government to augment Mobile Task Force and another 
proposal to raise two additional Bns of TSR as IR Bns have been pending since 1992. These 
proposals and the execution of fencing work along the border should be sanctioned and 
implemented on priority. 
FSB-6391/RS 

24 
(ii) Deployment of additional para-military forces: 
Out of the twelve extremist groups active in the State, A TIE, NLFf , TRA 
are procuring sophisticated arms like AK-47, AK-56, SLR, etc. They are 
resorting to killing of innocent persons, kidnapping, attack on police and security 
personnel. Therefore, 25 companies of Central Para-Military Forces, including ten 
companies of Assam Rifles should be deployed immediately in the State . 
(iii) Modernisation of State Forces: 
The State is unable to deal with the extremists with the outdated and 
conventional weapons. A proposal for modernisation of police force has been 
pending with the Central Government since 1993. The State is unable to mobilize 
additional resources for modernisation without Central assistance .. 
(iv) Assistance for resettlement of surrendered extremists: 
The State Government is unable to rehabilitate the surrendered extremists 
and bring them to the national mainstream. For this purpose , Central assistance 
has been sought which is not forthcoming. 
(v) Maintenance of harmony and development of the State: 
The rising insurgency has compounded the ethnic problem in the State and 
mistrust and disparities between the tribals and non-tribals. The two pronged 
strategy-development programmes and enforcement of law and order can alone 
tackle the situation for which Central assistance is required. 
109. The Tribal Students' Federation, in their representation, raised some allegations 
of violation ·of human rights of the indigenous people which are illustrated below: 
(i) Dereservation of Reserve Tribal Land: 
At the time of merger of Tripura with the Indian Republic on 15th October , 
1949, 2050 sq. kms. of land was declared as scheduled and reserve , out of which 
300 sq kms. was dereserved by the Central Government to accommodate 
refugees. Again on 28th February, 1974, the then State Government had 
dereserved the entire remaining land , but due to stiff resistance from the tribals , 
the ordinance for this purpose was withdrawn. 
(ii) Dumbur Nagar Hydro-electric Project: 
In the year 1971, Government had decided to set up this project and evicted 
around 20000 tribals from this area with the help of CRPF and Army, without 
any compensation. They became landless and refugees and some of them had to 
migrate to Assam and Bangladesh to seek subsistence. 
(iii) Eviction of Tribal people from Howaibari, Sardarkarkari, Teliamura Reserve 
Forest: 
In 1971 more than 100 tribal families were evicted from their lands, 
measuring 85 acres, for the construction of a defence colony and Air Force 
facilities without any alternative resettlement, rehabilitation and allotment of land 
in lieu thereof. They were paid only meagre compensation. The tribals were also 
evicted from their lands for the construction of an airport in Khowai, Kamalpur, 
Amarpur and for construction of a cattle farm in Sadar sub-division. Government 

25 
is also planning to evict them for the . construction of a thermal project and wildlife 
sanctuaries, besides snatching their legal lands . . 
(iv) Communal riots in 1980: 
There were bloody ethnic clashes between tribals and non-tribals in Tripura in 
1980 in which civilians from both sections of the society took part and killed each 
other. People were not satisfied with the role played by the security personnel. 
They also narrated some incidents of torture, rape and killing of tribals people and 
deaths in police custody. Many tribal inhabitants. had deserted their homes and 
most of the educational institutions were closed down. The economic scenario in 
the tribals areas was in disarray. If remedial measures were not undertaken, 
indigenous tribal people will face extinction from the State. 
110. The Democratic Youth Federation , Tribal Youth Federation , Students ' Federation 
of India and Tribal Students Union in their joint representation made the following 
submissions:-
(i) closing of Indo-Bangladesh Border , since most of the extremist groups are taking 
shelter in Bangladesh; 
(ii) deployment of more para-military forces , as the extremists are armed with most 
sophisticated . arms. They also requested that Central Government must start 
dialogue with Bangladesh Government to rescue the Joint Secretary of Tribals 
Students Union , who is also an MLA and his bodyguard ; 
(iii) to equip the State police force with sophisticated weapons on the pattern of other 
extremists affected States like Assam , Nagaland and Manipur; 
(iv) adequate financial assistance for rehabilitation of surrendered extremists; and 
(v) adequate financial aid for overall development, especially the tribal area of the 
underdeveloped Tripura. 
111. The General Secretary of Tripura Motor Karmi Samiti submitted that the life and 
property of motor transport workers and vehicle owners is insecure. During the last three 
years a number of motor workers had been kidnapped , murdered and subjected to inhuman 
treatment by the extremists. The Government is unable to provide them adequate 
protection. The Government could not make the national highways and other motorable 
roads free from extremist disturbances , while huge amounts are being spent in the name of 
surrendered extremists. 
112. The General Secretary of the Indian National Trade Union Congress pointed to the 
extreme lawlessness and police inaction in the State. According to them , nepotism, political 
favouratism is rampant in t.he State in matter of employment and financial facilities. They 
also referred to the incident of attempt to murder the President of INTUC, Tripura branch 
and setting on fire the boundary fencing of his house on 13th September, 1995. Though the 
culprits were identified by CID, the police has still not arrested them. 
113. The Tripura Upjati Juba Samiti (TUJS) in its representation complained of serious 
law and order situation in the State and stated that the ADC areas have been under the 
control of extremists since 1993. Not a single school in the hill area is running for the last 
three years. No developmental activity could be implemented. Village after village have 
become deserted. More than 50 thousand tribals have migrated to Assam, Mizoram and 

26 
Bangladesh. A number of their workers and supporters have been killed by the extremists or 
by their cadres. They also narrated some incidents of lawlessness and extremist violence. 
They also alleged that Government has entered into a pact with A TTF (Tigers) not to 
operate in sout hern sub-division and not to use police and CRPF against the extremists. 
They, therefore, requested for the declaration of disturbed area, bann ing of extrem ists and 
dateline for surrender to improve the law and order situation in the State. 
114. The Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) alleged that a reign of terror 
has been Jet loose in the State and referred to the incidents of terrorisif)g and obstructing the 
candidates and voters during Panchayat and Nagar Palika elections, booth capturing and 
rigging. They also alleged diversion of Central Development Funds by State Governments in 
the name of surrendered extremists who are re-engaging themselves in looting, arsoning , 
kidnapping and rape etc. They also referred to the kidnapping business by way of 
negotiation and release of kidnapped persons on payment of huge ransoms. The outlawed 
groups are collect ing donations in the interior areas of the State. The Central Arm ed Forces 
are being wrongly deployed and are being misled by State Police. State Government did not 
accept an all party suggestion to declare the names of extrem ists and to fix a last date for 
their surrender. The so called extremists are torturing and killing members of a particular 
community and forcing them to leave Tripura. Many villages have become deserted and 
villagers have taken shelter in relief camps at various places. More than four thousand of 
Congress workers and supporters have been killed. They therefore, suggested for imm ediate 
declaration of disturbed area, empowering the central forces to take charge of the secur ity of 
the people and preventing the State Government from divert ing central funds for rewarding 
so called extremists. 
115. The Committee under stands that NH-44 is the life line, not only for the State of 
Tripura but also for Meghalaya and part of Assam, i.e. Cachar and Karimganj District. 
However the condition and maintenance of it is very dismal. Attacks by extremists and 
extortions, are also chronic problems not only for Tripura but for Meghalaya also. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend s that the highway may be maintained prop erly and 
extortions etc. on it be checked to instil a sense of security to the travellers. It is also desirabl e 
to extend the highway from Agartala to Sabroom, the southern border of the State as has 
been recommended by the Working Group set-up by the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Considering the importance of NH-44 in the economic development of the State it should be 
c<Jnverted into a double-lane Highway in line with Meghalaya and Assam. 
116. The Committee notes that the present surface route from Agartala to Calcutta is 
about 1500 kms., whereas the transit route through Bangladesh is roughly 300 kms. The 
Committee feels that Government should take up the. matter with that country for opening of 
such a transit route. 
Government's Policy and steps taken to control Insurgency 
117. The policy of the Government of India has been to deal firmly with those indulging 
in violent activities on the one hand und to encourage them to join the national mainstream 
on the other, provided they abjure violence and agree to work within the framew ork of the 
Const itution of India. 

27 
118. Government have taken the following steps to control insurgency in the North­
Eastern States:-
A. Insurgency and other law and order problems: 
(a) With a view to meeting the genuine demands and redressal of grievances of 
the tribal people, agreements/accords were signed with the Nagas in 1975, 
Mizo National Front (MNF) in 1986, Tripura National Volunteers (TNV) in 
1988 and Assam Accord in 1985. 
(b) The NSCN, Meitei Extremist Groups (PLA, PREPAK, KCP and UNLF), 
BDSF, and ULFA have been banned under the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967. 
(c) Insurgency-affected areas/States, viz. the whole of Manipur, Nagaland, Assam 
and Tirap and Changlang Districts of Arunachal Pradesh and a 20 km. belt 
from Assam in the neighbouring States have been declared as "disturbed 
areas" under the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958, as amended in 
1972. 
(d) The North-Eastern State Governments have been provided units of CPMFs 
and Army units, inducted from time to time for the aid of civil authorities. 
(e) In addition to the normal Central grants under the Scheme for Modernisation 
of State Police Forces, speciai Central assistance amounting to Rs. 14.70 crores 
to Assam,· Rs. 10.50 crores to Manipur and Rs. 7.40 crores to Nagaland was 
provided in the year 1993-94. Government of Manipur was also sanctioned Rs. 
00.50 crores in February, 1995 for repair/maintenance of State Police vehicles. 
During 1994-95, allocation under the Modernisation Scheme was doubled to all 
the seven North-Eastern States. 
(f) Collection and sharing of intelligence/information with the States/Security 
Forces have been improved. 
(g) Two India Reserve Battalions for Assam and one Battalion each for Manipur 
and Mizoram were sanctioned in 1993. 
(h) To facilitate co-ordination between the State administration/Police, Central 
Para-Military Forces and the Army, mechanism for co-ordination has been 
established, both for co-ordination within a State as also for ·the inter-state co­
ordination. 
(i) The situation in the North-Eastern States is also· reviewed at various levels 
from time to time. The Union Home Minister met the Chief Ministers of 
North-Eastern States on the 22nd January and 19th July, 1994. The Minister of 
State (IS) also reviewed the situation with North-Eastern Chief Ministers on 
the 29th April, 1995. The situation is also reviewed periodically in the meetings 
of North-East Regional Security Co-ordination Conference with Chief 
Secretaries/DGPs and senior officers of, Central Agencies. The last such review 
was held on the 28th April, 1995 at Shillong. Decisions taken in these meetings 
are followed up. Some of the major decisions taken/followed up are ots 
under:-
(i) Need for optimum co-ordination between States and Ce.ntral Security 
Agencies; 
(ii) Optimum use of units of Central Para-Military Forces for effective counter­
insurgency duties; 
(iii) Strengthening of jail security; 

28 
(iv) Effective implementation of legal provisions, particularly the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967; 
(v) Effe.ctive prosecutions/transfer of hardcore detenues outside the North-Eastern 
States; 
(vi) Sharing of actionable intelligence; and 
(vii) Constituting Special Squads to prevent extortions etc. 
B. Economic Development: 
In view of weak fin~ncial resource base of the States of North-Eastern region, in 
addition to the Plan expenditure, assistance to meet the non-Plan expenditure has also been 
provided. All the seven States have been declared special category States for Central 
assistance. For speedier economic development of whole of the region, the North-Eastern 
Council had also invested an amount of Rs. 2474 crores till March, 1995. It may be noted 
that 87% of this amount has been spent on the development of two major infrastructure 
sectors viz. power, transport and communications. 
C. Initiatives with neighbouring countries: 
With a view to take up matters of mutual concern at various levels with the 
Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar, an Indo-Bangladesh Joint Working Group was 
set-up in 1994 and an Agreement for maintenance of peace and tranquility on the lndo­
Myanmar border was signed in January, 1994 with the Government of Myanmar. Two 
national level meetings at the level of Home Secretary and five sectoral level meetings have 
been held with Myanmar. This initiative has been very successful. The Myanmar authorities 
and army have, in recent months, been providing good co-operation. With Bangladesh, one 
meeting at the level of Home Secretary and two meetings at the Joint Working Group level 
have been held. There has been partial success only in the initiative so far. Initiatives have 
also been taken with Thailand,' as some insurgent groups have been procur ing arms from 
that country. 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS 
119. The Committee is of the view that despite a number of measures taken by 
Government to control insurgency and to improve the law and order situation in the North­
Eastern region, the situation demands a Jot more to be done. Government is duty-bound to 
guarantee a secured life to its people. The Committee notes with serious concern that a 
number of Ministers in Manipur are under threat to life and are not feeling secure despite 
tight security. The Committee, therefore, feels that first and foremost. the local police, 
which is a demoralised Jot today, has to be given a morale boosting. They must be well­
equipped with matching arms and training. They need adequate number uf vehicles. The 
intelligence network needs urgent improvement for effective collection. collation and 
dissemination of intelligence information. The affected States must be provided with 
adequate police force, Central Para-Military forces and other security forces and there 
should be harmonious co-ordination between them. The kith and kin of the local policemen 
require adequate security so that they can work fearlessly in discharging their d~ties. It is 
suggested that a separate police housing colony may be set-up for the families o_f the police 
personnel in each of the insurgency-affected States. All the necessary funds should be made 
available for this purpose. 
120. The problem of insurgency cannot be solved by force alone. ll must be combined 

29 
with dialogue and negotlatton with various insurgent groups, in an atmosphere of mutual 
trust and understanding. The Committee is fully convinced that a permanent solution to the 
insurgency problem in the region can be found only through political negotiations. The 
Committee, theref ore, takes this opportunity to call upon the Government to try to create a 
conduc ive atmosphere for bringing all toe insurgent groups across the table for a dialogue, 
without any precondition. The insurgent groups must also understand that violence is no 
solution to any problem and it is only through dialogue that they can put forth their 
demands before Government and evolve an amicable solution. 
121. The existence of basic transport infrastructure such as rail, road and air link is the 
pre-requisite for economic and industrial development of the region. There is no denying the 
fact that most of the North-Eastern region is underdeveloped due to lack of proper air, rail 
and road network. Most of the places are not easily accessible. Even within the same State, 
it is extreme ly difficult to reach from one point to another. Transportation of goods is 
equally difficult. Communication network is in a bad shape. Power is also in short supply. 
Unless these difficulties are removed , all efforts for bringing about development of the 
region would be retarded. It is in this context that the Comm ittee feels that constr uction of 
roads, laying of new rail lines and adequate air service in the region need highest priority. 
The Committee is of the view that laying of a rail line from Danshree to Imphal shou ld be 
considered on a priority basis to improve the trade and commerce in the region. The North­
Eastern States have to be placed on a different footing in this regard. Action in these areas 
need to be taken in a time bound programme. 
122. The Committee also notes that the newly introdu ced Pawan Hans helicopter service 
with subsidy from Central Government in the States of Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland has 
not been fully operational. The Committee feels that frequency of these services should be 
enhanced and larg er helicopters (24 seater) instead of the present one (8 seater) be 
introduced immediately not only in the existing routes but also in other States/areas of the 
North-Eastern region, having regard to the needs of the people. 
123. The North-Eastern States are faced with the problem of large scale unemployment , 
especially amongst the youth. These yout hs, who are without jobs, fall an easy prey to 
insurgent activities. It is very essential that these youths are used for constructive work and 
brought in the mainstream of national life. If we are able to properly channelise their 
services in productive work, it will be, on the one hand, a serious blow to the insurgent 
activities, and on the other, it will lead to the economic development of the region. lt is, 
therefore , an immense need of the hour that these youths ttrc provided with gainful 
employment under various employment/self employment schtmes/program mes of the 
Government. Further, these programmes/schemes require periodic review and the follow -up 
action of their outcome is also essentially required. The small scale industries would also 
have to be developed in a big way to utilise the manpower potehtial. Government should 
establish recruitment Centres and launch recruitment drive in the region for Government 
undertakings such a~ Civil Aviation, Railways and Post & Telegraph etc., so that the 
unemployed youth ge~ an opportun ity of employment. It will be better if recruitment boards 
of these undertaking!- have representation from the North-East also . Government must 
explore all the possibilities in this regard. 
124. The Committee feels that financial construints should not come in the wa~ of 
fighting insurgency and undertaking speedy economic development of the North-Eastern 
region . insurgency i~ a nat ional problem and everyone will be required to make sacrif ice to 
solve this problem . The Committee has been apprised that there has been no proper 
utilisation of funds, with the result that the benefits intended- (or the common peop1e have 

30 
not reached them. The Committee, therefore, opines that there should be regular and close 
monitoring of funds to ensure their proper utilisation. 
125. There are reports that the NSCN (I) and other insurgent groups like ULFA , PLA , 
UNLF, ATTF, NLFT, TRA etc. have been enjoying training and other facilities in 
Bangladesh. The NSCN (Khaplang) is having its training camps on the Burmese side. There 
are reports of smuggling of arms by insurgent groups from Thailand via Bangladesh and then 
through the Indo-Myanmar borders in Mizoram and Manipur. Besides, the insurgents of 
insurgency affected States are setting up their training camps and sanctuaries in the 
comparatively peaceful neighbouring States. The Committee is seriously perturbed over this 
and urges upon Government to take urgent effective steps to tackle the situation. The 
Committee feels that efforts of Government in this regard have not yielded the desired 
results as the movement of illicit arms, narcotics and the insurgent outfits from across the 
borders is going on unabated. To combat the problem it is essential to take immediate steps 
for sealing of the border totally by providing fencing and increasing vigil by security force. 
The Committee is also of the view that to mitigate the discontentment among the inhabitants 
of these insurgency afflicted States, various accords signed by the Central Government with 
various insurgent groups like the Shillong Accord, MNF Accord, TNV Accord, A TTF 
Accord and Assam Accord etc., need to be implemented in true spirit. 
126. There are wide ethnic, religious and cultural diversities in the entire Region. 
Numerous tribes, sub-tribes in the region perceive their status in danger in remaining with 
other groups/tribes in that district/State. The problem has been aggravated due to poor vigil 
on our borders, resulting in illegal infiltrations and demographic changes. This situation has 
led to frustration, discontentment and insecurity among the original inhabitants of that State. 
This is why, a demand is now being raised for an ethnographic survey of the North-Eastern 
Region. The Committee, therefore, feels that · this problem needs immediate attention with 
due care for Constitutional safeguards. 
127. In its note, the Government of Assam has -stressed the need for a fresh legislation 
consequent upon the repeal of Terrorists and Disruptive Activities Act (TADA) to deal with 
insurgency in the State. A suggestion in this regard was earlier forwarded by it to the 
Government of India. The Committee desires that this suggestion be examined to see 
whether any fresh legislation is required or existing legislations are sufficient to deal with the 
insurgency situation in the entire North-Eastern Region. 
128. The Study Group was informed that Meghalaya has a combined All India Service 
Cadre with Assam while in Arunachal Pradesh UT Cadre Officers of All India Services are 
postea who are generally not acquainted with the local customs and traditions of the State 
arid remain ignorant of developmental needs of the local people. Government should, 
therefore, consider to create a Separate All India Service Cadre for these States. 
129. The Chakmas and Hajong refugees problem is a burning problem in Arunachal 
Pradesh and to some extent in Mizoram and Tripura. Government should devise ways and 
means for an amicable solution of the problem before the situation aggravates into a 
complicated law and order problem. 
130. The Members of the Study Group were informed that a number of . proposals 
submitted by the Governments of North-Eastern States including· rai.s(ng. of strength of 
Assam Rifles and more l.R. Bns. for North-Eastern States have been pending with the 
Central Government for years. Government should take action for expeditious clearance of 
those proposals. 
131. Government should provide adequate protection and security to the business and 

31 
trading community from other States carrying on thier business activities in the North­
Eastern States. Government should take steps for protection of life and property and also 
ensure immediate compensation and return of business premises of the traders whose 
premises were ransacked and destroyed. 
132. Government should ensure proper allocation of funds for enabling the Autonomous 
District Councils entrusted with the development of the Scheduled Tribes and preserving 
with their own traditions, customs and cultures to meet their requirements. For sanction of 
Funds for Tribal Autonomou s District Councils a separate yard-stick may be fixed by the 
Planning Commission. Government may , therefore , take up the matter with the Planning 
Commi ssion, so that the demand is suitably considered while sanctioning Plan allocations. 
133. Government should take steps to prevent alleged diversion of Central Development 
Funds for the rehabilitation of surrendered militants. Since the internal resources of all the 
North-Eastern States are limited, Centre should come forward with an economic package to 
assist the State Governments, in rehabilitation of these surrendered extremists. 
134. To strengthen National Integration and to boost economic development, the 
Regional Council needs to be strengthened. The North-Eastern Council should be 
reconstituted with the Union Home Minister/Dy. Chairman , Planning Commission as 
Chairman. In the Council, Union Ministers of Finance, Agriculture, Railway, Surface 
Transport, Welfare, Rural Development etc. should be included as members alongwith Chief 
Ministers of all the North-Eastern States. The Council should hold regular meetings. These 
meetings should be held in each State Capital by rotation. 
135. At the end, the Committee feels that the problem of insurgency in the North­
Eastern Region has become a national problem with multifaced dimensions. The problem 
needs to be viewed as the problem of the entire region, not confined to one State and 
should be tackled accordingly. This requires a concerted and sincere effort on the part of all 
concerned, rising above narrow considerations and without making any prestige issue , in the 
intere st of the country. 
. •, 

ANNEXURE- I 
(See para 4 of the Introduction) 
STUDY GROUP OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS WHICH VISITED 
IMPHAI,, KOIDMA AND GUW AHA TI FROM 28TH OCTOBER TO 3Ro NOVEMBER, 
1995 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu~ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
4. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
5. Shri ·Ram Singh 
6. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
7. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
8. Shri Guman Mar Lodha 
33 

ANNEXURE-II 
(See para 4 of the Report) 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES OF V ARlO US POLITICAL PARTIES, 
CONCERNED STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND PERSONS FROM 
CROSS SECTION OF SOCIETY ETC. WITH WHOM THE STUDY -GROUP 
INTERACTED DURING THE VISIT 
Imphal (29th and 30th October, 1995) 
I. Representatives of the Government of Manipur 
1. Shri K.K. Sethi, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Trinath Mishra, Director-General of Police 
3. Shri Kh. Mohendro Singh, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri S. Birnalchandra, IGP 
5. Shri A.K. Parasar, IGP 
6. Shri Y.N. Kashyam, DIG, CRPF 
7. Shri A. Pradeep, DIG 
II. Shri Rishang Keishing, Chief Minister 
III. Representatives of various political parties and persons from Cross Section of 
Society 
1. Shri Radhabinod Koijam, Deputy Chief Minister 
2. Shri P. Mangibabu, Deputy Chairman, State Planning Board 
3. Shri R.K. Ranbir Singh, MLA, Leader of Opposition 
4. Prof. Gangumei Kamei, MLA, Federal Party of Manipur 
5. Shri N. Mangi Singh, MLA, C~I 
6. Shri M. Kumar Singh, MLA, Manipur Peoples Party (K) 
7. Shri I.S. Khaidem, Vice-Chancellor, Manipur University 
8. Vice-Chancellor, Manipur Agricultural University 
9. Shri A. Nilamani Singh, Advocate, High Court Bar 
10. Shri Nodiyachand Singh, Advocate, President, Manipur Bar Association 
11. Shri Kailash Chand Patni, Secretary, Chamber of Commerce 
12. Shri Holkhomang Haokip, Co-Chairman, Committee for Restoration of Normalcy 
34 
- _ 

35 
13. Shri G. Goingam, Co·Cliainnan, Committee for Restoration of Normalcy 
Imp hal 
Kobima (3ht October and 1st November. 1995) 
I. Members of tbe Council of Minister$ 
1. Shri Kihoto Holohon, Minister of Indu,stry 
2. Shri lmJug , Minister of Rural Devel<>pmeJtt 
3. Shri Tert.Jie, Minister of PHE 
4. Shri S.K. Sangtam, Minister of Health and Medical 
5. Shri S. Serna , Minister ef Power and Higher Technical Education 
6. Shri Nyanrnyei Konya~. Minister of Animal Husbandry 
7. Shri H. Chuba Chang, HQme Minisrer 
8. Shri K. Serna, Minister of S~al SQences 
9. Shri T. Yepthomi , Minister of Transport 
10. Shri Sethricho, Minister of Excise 
II. Representatives of the Government of Nagaland. 
1. Shri T.C.K. Lotha , Chief Secretary 
III. Representatives of Nagaland People's Council 
1. Shri Vamuzo, MLA, Leader of Opposition 
2. Shri Khekiho, MLA 
3. Shri Thenucho, Ex-Speaker 
Representatives of NPCC (I) 
1. Shri N. Theyo, President 
2. Shri Gothoshe Serna, Vice-President 
3. Shri Mhavil Kheye, Genera] Secretary 
4. Shri K.G. Kenye~ Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Mhashiz:okho, Press Secretary 
Repn:sentatives of Naga Mothers'· :tssociaiion 
1. Mrs. Niedonuo 
2. Mrs. Lochunlo Yanthan 
3. Mrs. Rose Wati 
4. Mrs. Jernya Konyak 

36 
5. Mrs. Khehashe Serna 
Guwahati (2nd and 3rd November, 1995) 
Members of Council of Ministers 
1. Shri Bhumidhar Barman 
2. Shri Silvius Condpan 
3. Shri Gomeswar Pegu 
4. Shri Abu Saleh Nizamuddin 
5. Shri Amiyo Gogoi 
6. Shri Samsul Haque 
7. Shri Zaman Singh Brahma 
8. Shri Rashidul Haqu~ 
9. Shri Nurjamal Sarkar 
10. Shri Sarat Borkotoky 
11. Shri Anjan Dutta 
12. Sh·ri S.S. Ojah 
Representatives of Government OfliduJs 
1. Shri Arunoday Bhattacharya, Chief Secretary 
1. Shri B. V.P. Rao, Home Conunissionc1 
3. Shri Ranju Das, Director-Geul!r~J of J'oJice 

ANNEXURE ·· Ill 
(See para 5 of the Introduction) 
STUDY GROUP OF THE C0Ml\111'Tl~ft ON HOME AFFAIRS 
WHICH VISITED SHILLONG, ITANAOAR, AIZWAL AND 
AGARTALA FROM 16TH TO 21sT MARCH, 1996 
1. Shri Ram Singh - Convenor 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
3. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
WK SABRA 
4. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
5. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
6. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
/ 
37 

ANNEXURI~-tV 
(See para 5 of the Jnu-oduction) 
LIST OF REP~SENTATIVES OF VARlOlJS I~LJ'riCAL P.\RTlES, CONCERNED 
STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIAl~ AND r•ERSONS ·llROl\'f ~OSS 
SECTION OF SOCIETY ETC. WITH WROM' 1111t STUl>.Y GROUP 
INTERACTED DtJRING TIJ£ VISt'f 
·shiJJong (17 .3.96) 
I. Representatives of Ri War Area DeveiOfUr.uml Cuunt!il· 
1. Shri B. Ksaulah, President 
2. Shri G. W. Pohoti , Ge11eral Secretary 
3. Shri M.N. Nongrum, Treasure" 
4. Shri T. W. Chyne, Assistant General Secreto.ry 
11. Representatif'es of Central Police Orgaui~1ttUm 
1. Lt. Gen. T.P.S. RaWat, D.G. ~.R. 
2. Shri K. Lalcfn:Jnga, Jf:G., CRPF 
3. Shri Vikram Singh. D.f.G., USF 
III. Representatives of~ fin~ 
. . 
1. Shri J . Mawttoh'~ General Secret~ • . S)Lujuk ki Seng Sam]a Shuong (SSSS) 
2. Slu'i R. Dkl\ar, Pubfkity S4tcretary, SSS.~ 
3. Sijri L.M.K. Lyngroh , Cbainmm, SSS.S 
4. Shn S.t. Khjriem, Vice-Cttai;n~m. ssss-
5. Shri Paol Syngdih, PresideRf:!. Kha~~ Studcnfs \:Inion ( KSLJ) 
6. Sbri Gbrk.ert Khongura , General S<! ti£~ Uir)', KSU 
7. Shri Kammon Challam, AssiS:t•mt Gem:ral Sl"lT~I a ry. KS lJ 
IV. Representatit'es of tbe Government of l"lt•gllal1wa 
. 
1. Shri D.N. Srivastava, D·.G. Police 
2. Home Commissioner 
3. Shri Kijujing C.D., Home Secretary 

39 
V. Members of the Council of Ministers 
1. Shri S.C. Marak, Chief Minister 
2. Home Minister 
Itanagar (18.3.96) 
I. Representatives of the Government of Arunachal Pradesh 
1. Shri D.C. Misra, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri A.D. Souza, I.G.P. 
3. Shri Prabhakar Rao, Law Secretary 
4. Shri S.C. Poddar, Home Secretary 
5. Shri V. Prakash, D.I.G.P. 
6. Shri S.S. Patnaik, L.C.F. 
7. Shri J. Singh, Commandant, CRPF 
8. Shri A.K. Sinha, A.I.G.P. 
II. Representatives of Cross Section of Society 
1. Shri Yam Tikhak, Chairman, Arunachal Pradesh Indigenous Tribals' Rights 
(Protection) Organisation (APITRO) 
2. Shri Sanjay Taasan, Chairman, AP Chamber of Commerce 
3. Shri Talar Doye, President, Arunachal Pradesh Congress Committee (I), (APCC) (I) 
4. Shrimati Jorjum Ete and others, Arunachal Pradesh Women Welfare Society 
5. President, Nefa Indigenous Human Rights Organisation and others 
6. Shri Yam Natung, Chairman, Social Welfare Advisory Board 
Ill. Members of the Council of Ministers 
1. Shri Gegong Apang, Chief Minister 
2. Shri Neelam Taram, Home Minister 
3. Shri Sobeng Tayeng, Agriculture Minister 
4. Shri Lijum Rovya, Education, S and T Minister 
5. Shri R.K. Khrimey, PWD Minister 
6. Shri Mukut Mithi, Veterinary and Animal Husbandry Minister 
7. Shri Dera Natung, IPR Minister 
8. Shri Kameng Dolo, Rural Development Minister 
9. Shri Doi Ado, Sports and Youth Affairs Minister 
10. Shri Lowangcha Wanglat, Supply and Transportation Minister 
11. Shri Kabang Borang, Forest and Environment Minister 
12. Shri Talo Mugli, Irrigation and Food Control Minister 
13. Shri Tadar Taniang, Public Health Engineering Minister 
14. Shri Kardu Taipodia, Tax and Excise Minister 

40 
15. Shri P. W. Sona, Minister of State for Mines and Minerals 
16. Shri Hari Natung, Deputy Speaker 
17. Shri Kento Ete, Deputy Chairman (SPD) 
18. Shri Lichi Legi, Deputy Minister (RWD) 
19. Shri Nabam Tuki, Deputy Minister (Agriculture) 
20. Shri Tahung Tatak, Deputy Minister (Power) 
21. Shri Toban Jamoh, Deputy Minister (PWD) 
22. Shri Kalikho ~ Pul, Deputy Minister (Fin~nl:c) 
Aizwal (19.3.96) 
I. Representatives of Government . .of t.~i,zon)m 
1. Shri Lalfak Zuala, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Virendra Rai, officiating DGP 
3. Shri C. Hmingthanzuala, Joint Secretury (Home Department) . 
4. Shri Lalbiakthanga, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri A. Kumar, A.D., SIB 
6. Shri Rajendra Kumar, Deputy Commissioner 
7. Shri P.C. Awast.hi, Deputy Commissioner Spl. Bmea1i 
8. Shri Varchungnunga, S.P., CID (SB) 
II. Representatives of Samatalwasi Vybasalk Umm.rlln K11IJB11 SanJiti (SA VUKS) 
1. Shri A.K. Azad, Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Mahesh war, Executive Member 
3. Shri Makhan Bhatt, -do-
4. Shri Kabir Ahmed, -do-
III. Representatives of Bru (Riang) Students' Assodatimr (88.1) 
1. Shri Bruno Msha, President 
2. Shri Zonunmania, General Secretary 
3. Shri Vansanga Nsha, Treasurer 
4. Shri Solomon Probhul Ushoy, Finane<: Sectctacy 
5. Shri Bruto Ulaska, Organising Secretary 
Agartala (20th and 21st March, 1996) 
I. Representatives of Tripura Upjati Jublr S.unili (T.U .• I.S.) 
1. Shri Shyam Charan Tripura, Chairman. Advisory Committee 
2. Shri Ratimohan Jamatia, MLA, President 
3. Shri Rabindra Deb Barma, General Secretary 
4. Shri Shabda Kumar Jumatia, Organisi11g St~crctary 

41 
II. Representatives of Janata Dal 
1. Shri Arun Bhaumik, MLA, President 
2. Shri Kamini Dabbarma, Ex. MLA, Secretary General 
3. Shri Nikhil Debnath, General Secretary 
4. Shri Swapna Deb, General Secretary 
5. Shri Subrata Bhaumik, Member 
III. Representatives of the Student Unions 
1. Shri Prabin Chakraborty, President, DYFI 
2. Shri Naresh Jamatia, Secretary, Tribal Youth Federation (TYF) 
3. Shri Ratan Dei , Secretariat Member, DYFI, 
4. Shri Tapas Dutta, President, Students Federation of India (SFI) 
5. Shri Chandrahangshe Jantia, Joint Secretary, Triba l Students Union (TSU) 
6. Shri Sevak Bhatt~charya , Secretariat Member, SFI 
IV. Representatives of Bhartiya Janata Party 
1. Shri H.S. Roy Chaudhury, Pre~ident 
2. Shri Samir Pal, General Secretary 
3. Shri Purnendu Dhar , Member, State Committee 
v. Representatives of Indira Congress 
Shri. Tapas Dey , Ex. MLA 
VI. Representatives of Government of Tripura 
1. Shri V. Tulasidas, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri S.N. Oommen, Private Secretary 
3. Shri H.C. Mahajan, Commissioner 
4. Shri Anil Mishra, -do-
5. Shri S.K. Panda , -do-
6. Shri B.K. Bal , -do-
7. Shri N.K. Dutta, Secretary 
8. Shri S.K. Chatterjee, D.G.P. 
9. Shri c. s. Chattopadhyay, Secretary 
10. Shri B.B. Senapati, Additional Secretary, Law 
11. Shri S.K. Roy , Joint Secretary 
12. Shri S. Kumar , D.M. (West) 
13. Shri R. C. M. Reddy, Director, Tribal Welfare 
14. Shri R.M. Majumdar, Deputy Secretary 
15. Shri Mallik, DIG, CRPF 

42 
16. Shri S. Singha, DIG, BSF 
17. Shri T.K Sanyal, SP, West 
18. Shri Dilipjit Deb Barma, SP {Spl. Branch) 
19. Shri Lokranjan, Director of Industries 
20. Shri B.K. Chakraborty, Director (Food) 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
*xxn 
TWENTY -SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 25th November, 1993 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Gaya Singh 
5 .. Shri Rafique Alam 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
7. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
8. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
10. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Prof. M. Kamson 
12. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
14. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
15. Dr. Girija Vyas 
16. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
17. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
18. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
19. Shri Ram Singh 
20. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
21. Shri Yinaya Katiyar 
22. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee , Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai , Comm ittee Officer 
2. • • 
3. • • 
4. * lit 
* 
* 
* 
5. After a brief discussion on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and the insurgency in 
the North-Eastern States, the Committee decided that Papers on the Policy of the 
Government of India on Jammu and Kashmir and the latest situation in that State as also 
with regard to the Policy of the Government on the insurgency situation in the North­
Eastern States , should be obtained from the Ministry of Home Affairs for use of the 
Committee. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 t>.M. 
*Minutes of First to Twenty-first meetings of the Comm ittee (1993-94) relate to some ot her matters discussed by 
the Committee. 
•••omitted portions relate to some other matter s discussed by the Committee. 
43 

..; · 
*II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesdny, the 7th June, 1994 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Amwxe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shri Murasoli Maran 
7. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
9. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
10. Prof. M. Kamson 
11. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
12. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
13. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
14. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
15. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
16. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
17. Shri Ram Singh 
18. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
19. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
20. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
21. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
22. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
23. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B.G. Gujar, Consultant 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF IIUME AFfAIRS 
1. Shri K. Padmanabhaiah, Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Ahooja, Special Secretary 
3. Shri B.N. Jha, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri P.C. Haldar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri D.S. Poonia, Director 
-------------------· -··-·-···-·····---- --···---- -·-------
•Minutes of First meeting of the Committee {1994-95) relate tu some· otl1 •~ 1 matt~:r di~cussed by the Committee. 
44 

45 
2. After the opening observations of the Chairman, the Committee took up considera­
tion of the insurgency situation in the North-Eastern Region. 
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs made a visual presentation on the subject. 
Members then raised certain queries/points. The Secretary was asked to clarify those points 
in writing. 
4. The Committee decided to constitute a sub-Committee each for (i) the situation in 
Jammu and Kashmir and (ii) the insurgency in the North-Eastern Region and authorised the 
Chairman to nominate the members thereon , on its behalf. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 
the 27th June , 1994 to further consider the subject. 

ID 
THIRD MI~ETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 27th June, 1994 in Committee 
Room No. 50, First Floor, Parliament House, New DeihL 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
7. Shri Gay a Singh 
8. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
9. Shri Raj Babbar 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
14. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
15. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
16. Shrimati Bibhu · Kumari Devi 
17. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
18. Dr. Girija Vyas 
19. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
20. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
21. Shri Ram Singh 
22. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
23. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
24. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
25. Shri Rabi Ray 
26. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
27. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
28. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
29. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee , Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, ·Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY Of.' Ht>MI~ AFf'AlRS 
1. Shri K. Padmanabhaiah, Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Ahooja, Special Secretary 
3. Shri P.C. Haldar, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri D.S. Poonia, Director 
46 

47 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, on behalf of the Committee, welcomed Shri Raj 
Babbar and Shri Jayant KQmar Malhoutra (in absentia), the newly nominated Members on 
the Committee. 
3. * * * 
4. The Committee, then, took up further consideration of the insurgency situation in 
the North-Eastern Region and heard the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs in ·the matter. 
5. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 
the 28th June, 1994 to further consider the subject. 
***Omitted portion relate to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 

IV 
FOURm M£ETING 
1be Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 28th June , 1994 in Committee 
Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan · 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
S. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
7. Shri Gaya Singh 
8. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
LOK SABRA 
9. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
10. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Prof. M. Kamson 
12. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
14. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
15. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
16. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
17. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
18. Shri Ram Singh 
19. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
20. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
21. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
22. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
23. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
24. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
25. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B.G. Gujar , Consultant 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai , Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri K. Padmanabhaiah , Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Ahooja , Special Secretary 
3. Shri B.N . Jha , Joint Secretary 
4. Shri P.C. Haldar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri D.S . Poonia , Director 

. 49 
2. * * • 
3. The Committee, thereafter, resumeq further discussion on the insurgencfsituation in 
the North-Eastern Region and heard the Secretary and Special Secretary, Ministry at Home 
Affairs in the matter. 
4. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
5. • • • • 
6. The Committee then adjournd at 1.30 P.M. 
•••omitted portion relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 
., I 

• •xx 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 20th September, 1995, m 
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
9. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
11. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
12. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
13'. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Maj. Gen. (~etd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
16. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
17. Shri Ram Singh 
18. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
19. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
20. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
21. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
22. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
23. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Director 
Smt. Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. * 
' 
* 
3. The Committee then discussed the insurgency situation in the North-Eastern Region 
and decided that a Study Group of the Committee may visit Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur 
and Nagaland to make an on-the-spot assessment of the situation prevailing in those States , 
from the 28th October to 3rd November, 1995. The Chairman requested that Members 
interested to join the Study Group, may convey their willingness to the Secretariat to enable 
•Minutes of First to Nineteenth meetings of the Committee (1995-96) relate to some other matter discussed by 
the Committee. 
***Omitted portions relate to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 
50 
.. 

51 
him to const\tute the Study Group. The Committee also authorised the Chairman of the 
Committee to approach Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for his permission for the proposed 
visit and directed the Secretariat to draw a detailed programme of the visit for circulation 
among members of the Study Group . 
4. • * • 
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.15 P.M . to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 
21st September, 1995. 
•• *Omitted portions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee . 

*XXlll 
TWENTY · THIRD 1\'IEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, th~ 18th October, 1995 in Committee 
Room "A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Anm:xe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu --Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
· 2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
7. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Gaya Singh 
9. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
12. Shri M.O.H: Farook 
13. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
14 . . Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
15. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra· Khanduri · 
16. Shri Ram Singh 
17. Shri Ram N agina Mishra 
18. Shri Rabi Ray 
19. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
20. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
21. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
22. Shri Bhubanesw~r Prasad Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. C. Soperna, Director 
Shrimati J aswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
• • • 
2. The Chairman apprised members that as authorised by the Committee in its meeting 
•Minutes of Twenty-first and Twenty-second meetings or lhl: C<• mmillce (19~15-96) relates to some other matter 
discussed by the Committee. 
52 

53 
held on the 20th September, 1995, a Study Group of the Committee had been constituted by 
him to visit Imphal, Kohima, Shillong and Guwahati from the 28th October to 3rd 
November, 1995 and Hon'ble Chairman had granted his permission for the visit. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
* 
* 
* 
* * 
* * 
* * 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 
the 27th October, 1995. 
•••omitted portions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 

·xxXVI 
THIRTY -SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 19th February, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
3. Shri Ram Nath ~ovind 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
LOK SABRA 
6. Shri ~p Chaliha 
7. Shri Shantara.m Potdukhe 
8. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
9. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
10. Dr. Girija Vyas 
· 11. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
12. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
13. Shri Ram Singh 
14. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
15. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
16. Shri Rabi Ray 
17. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
18. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
19. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
20. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. C. Soperna, Director 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur , Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. 
3. 
• 
• 
* 
* 
4. The Committee, thereafter , took up consideration of the draft Report on the 
insurgency situations in the North-Eastern Region. Members were unanimous in their view 
•Minutes of Twenty-fourth to Thirty-fifth meetings of the Committee (1995-96) relates to some other matter 
discussed by the Committee. 
•••omitted portion relate to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 
54 

55 
that the report reflects the situation in the Region, partially only, as the Study-Group of the 
Committee had visited on the three States, out of the seven States in the Region. Some 
Members: therefore, suggested to change the title of Report, accordingly. Further, besides 
the insurgency problem, the States like Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura are facing the 
perennial problem of influx of Chakma refugees from Bangladesh and of their rehabilitation. 
For a fuller appreciation of . the situation, a study-group of the Committee may visit 
Meghalaya , Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and Mizoram also. It, accordingly, decided to visit 
Shillong, Agartala, Aizawl and Itanagar from the 15th to 21st March, 1996, to have a!). on 
the spot appraisal of the insurgency and Chakma probleJllS there . The Committee authorised 
its Chairman to constitute a Study-Group of Members of the Committee and seek 
permission of Hon'ble Chairman for the purpose. The Chairman also requested Members to 
send their suggestions on the draft Twenty•ninth Report on the insurgency situation in the 
North-Eastern Region, to be incorporated in the Report. 
5. • • • 
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.15 P . M . to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 23rd 
February, 1996. 
•••omitted portion relate to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 

ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 23rd September# 1996 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground F1oor, Parliament House Anncxe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
3. Dr. Jagannatb Misbra 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Sbri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Sbri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABRA 
7. Sbri Sushi} Chandra Verma 
8. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
9. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
10. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
11. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
12. Sbri Mangat Ram Sharma 
13. Shri M.O .H. Farooq 
14. Prof. M. Kamson 
15. Sbri Idris Ali 
16. Sbri Tara Chand Baghora 
17. Prof. P.J.1 Kurien 
18. Shri Taslimuddin 
19. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
20. Shri N.S.V. Chithan 
21. Sbri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
22. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
23. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
•Minutes of First to Tenth Meetings of. the Committee (1996·97) relate ·1o some other matter discussed by the 
Committee. 
56 

57 
2. The Committee, after detailed discussion on various aspects of the business currently 
pending with it and the subjects which could be taken up afresh for examination on the basis 
of the Annual Reports (1995-96) of the Ministries within its purview, decided as follows :-
I. * • • 
II. Draft Report of the previous Committee on the 'Insurgency Situation in North­
Eastern Region' . 
The Members felt that the points covered in the Report need to be updated in the 
context of latest developments concerning the situation in North-Eastern Region. The 
Committee decided that the Members could give their suggestions/views on various aspects 
of the insurgency pl'Oblem in North-East in writing to the Secretariat latest by October 7, 
1996, and based on that, further information, if necessary, could be obtained from the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee could, thereafter, take a view on making 
necessary changes/modifications in the Draft Report before it could be taken up for 
adoption. 
III. * • • 
IV. * * * 
v. • • • 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.05 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 
the 8th October, 1996. 
•••omitted portions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 
, . 

~I 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 6th February, 1997 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBER,S PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
3. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
7. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
8. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
10. Shri Vinay . Katiyar 
11. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
12. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
13. Shri Vijay Goel 
14. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
15. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
16. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
17. Prof. M. Kamson 
18. Shri ldris Ali 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
21. Shri Sudhir Girl 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, "Joint Secretary 
Shrimati J aswant ~aur, Director 
Shri Mukul Pande, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. ·The Committee, took up for .consideration its draft 36th Report on the 'Insurgency 
Situation in the North-Eastern Region'. After some discussion the Committee decided to 
adopt the Report with some- changes of factual nature. 
*Minutes of Twelfth to Seventeenth Meetings of the Committee (1996-97) relate to some other matter discussed 
by the Committee. 
58 
:l 
i 

59 
3. • • • 
4. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 P.M. to meet again on 19th February, 1997. 
•••omitted portion relate to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 