C.S. (H.A.)-57 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1996-97) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 30th August, 1996) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 30th August, 1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 1996/Bhadra, 1918 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OJ-' THE COMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCI'ION 
3. REPORT 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS Of THE COMMITTEE 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-13 
14-27 

COMPOSITION ·oF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
11. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
12. Shri N. Rajendran 
13. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
14. Shri Raj Babbar 
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
'. 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma 
17. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
18. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
21. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
22. Shri Vijay Gael 
23. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
24. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
25. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
26. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
27. Slui Mangat Ram Sharma 
28. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
29. Prof. M. Kamson 
30. Shri Idris Ali 
31. Shri Gopalbhai Kalan Tandel 
32. Shri Khelsai Singh 
(i) 

33. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
34. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
35. Shri Sharad Yadav 
36. Shri Taslimuddin 
37. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
38. Shri Sudhir Giri 
39. Shri N.S.Y. Chithan 
40. Shri N. Dennis 
41. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
42. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
43. Shri Kanshi Ram 
44. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
45. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
( 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the report on its behalf do hereby present this Report on the Demands 
for Grants (1996-97) relating to the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. 
2. The Committee heard the concerned officers of the Ministry and considered the 
relevant documents placed before it at its meetings held on the 8th, 9th, 20th and 23rd 
August, 1996. 
3. The Committee, while making its recommendations/observations has mainly relied 
upon the following: 
(i) Presentations made by the concerned officers of Ministry. 
(ii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 1996-97. 
(iii) Annual Reports of the Ministry for the year 1995-96. 
(lv) Explanatory Notes on the Demands received from the Ministry. 
(v) Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Seventeenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry. 
(vi) Written replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaires sent to it by the 
Secretariat. 
(vii) Written clarifications on the points/issues raised by the Members in the meetings 
of the Committee. 
4. The Committee considered the Report in its meetings held on 27th and 29th August, 
1996 and adopted the same in its meeting held on 29th August, 1996. 
NEW DELHI; 
August 29, 1996 
(iii) 
SOM PAL 
Chairmanl 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

REPORT 
OVERVIEW 
The Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs comprises the following 
Departments:-
(i) Department of Legal Affairs, 
(ii) Legislative Department, 
(iii) Department of Justice , and 
(iv) Department of Company Affairs. 
2. The main functions of the Department of Legal Affairs are:-
(i) To render advice to the various Ministries/Departments of the Government of 
India on legal mat ters; 
(ii) To carry out the conveyancing work of the Central Government; 
(iii) To attend the litigation work in the Supreme Court, High Courts and some of 
the subordina_te courts; 
(iv) To handle the treaties and agreements with foreign countries in matters of Civil 
Law; 
(v) To authorise officers to execute contracts and assurances of property on behalf 
of the President under Article 299 (1) of the Constitution. 
(vi) To sanction grants-in-aids to certain institutions engaged in research in the field 
of law. 
3. The Department of Legal Affairs is further concerned with appointment of the Law 
Officers, namely the Attorney-General of India, the Solicitor-General of India and the 
Additional Solicitors-General of India, etc. It is also administratively incharge of the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Appellate Board. 
4. The Legal Affairs Department has a two-tier organisational set-up, namely, the main 
Secretariat at New Delhi and the Branch Secretariats at Mumbai, Calcutta, Madras and 
Bangalore. 
5. The Legislative Department is concerned mainly with the following matters:-
(i) Scrutiny of Notes for the Cabinet in relation to all legislative proposals from 
drafting and constitutional points of view; 
(ii) Drafting of all Government Bills including Constitution (Amendment) Bills 
before introduction in Parliament; translation of all such Bills into Hindi and 
forwarding both English and Hindi versions of the Bills· to the Parliament 
Secretariat; drafting of non-official amendments and rendering of assistance to 
Administrative Ministries to decide on the acceptability or otherwise of non­
official amendments; 
(iii) Rendering assistance to Parliament and Joint, Select or Standing Committees of 
Parliament at all stages through which a Bill passes before enactment. This 
includes scrutiny of and/or preparation of reports of such Committees, and 
Hindi Translations of such reports and minutes of dissent; 
(iv) Drafting of Ordinances to be promulgated by the President; 
1 

2 
(v) Drafting of legislations to be enacted as President's Acts in respect of States 
under President's rule; 
(vi) Drafting of Regulations to be made by the President; 
(vii) Drafting of Constitution Orders, i.e., Orders required to be issued under the 
Constitution; 
(viii) Scrutiny of all statutory rules, orders and notifications and their translation into 
Hindi; 
(ix) Scrutiny of State Legislation in the Concurrent field which requires assent of the 
President under article 254 of the Constitution; 
(x) Scrutiny of legislations to be enacted by Union Territory Legislatures; 
(xi) Election of Parliament, Legislatures of States and Union Territories and Offices 
of the President and Vice-President; 
(xii) Election Commission; Electroral Reforms; 
(xiii) Apportionment of expenditure on Election between the Centre and the States! 
UTs with Legislatures; 
(xiv) Bringing out three Journals and reporting the cases of Supreme Court and 
selected cases of the High Courts in Hindi; 
(xv) Translation of Central Acts in the regional languages enumerated in the Eighth 
Schedule of the Constitution of India and publication of Authoritative Texts 
thereof. 
6. The Department of Justice deals with the constitutional organisation of the Supreme 
Co urt and the High Courts and the appointment of Judges thereto, conditions of their 
service and with the administration of judicial services in the Union Territories. Besides , it is 
the nodal Department in so far as the administration of Justice in States is concerned , 
although the Actual responsibility of judicial administration below the High Court level rests 
with the concerned State Government and High Court. Though this department forms a part 
of Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs, it is under the administrative control of 
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee in its Seventeenth Report had observed that this 
state of affairs gives an anomalous picture which needs to be set right. The Committee in the 
said Report had recommended that the Department of Justice should be placed under the 
Ministry of Law for all purposes thereby dispensing with the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. But so far no change has been made in this set-up. 
7. Till 1992-93, the budget of the Department of Justice was salary oriented. From 
1993-94, the Demands of the Department of Justice also include provision for the Centrally 
Sponsored Scherhe relating to infrastructural facilities for the judiciary and National Judicial 
Academy. From this financial year i.e., 1996-97 provision has also been made for the 
National Judicial Pay Commission. 
8. The Department of Company Affairs is the primary agency responsible for the 
development and efficient functioning of the corporate sector comprising the joint stock 
companies. The objectives in this regard are sought to be achieved by the Department 
mainly through administration of the Companies Act, 1956 and the Monopolies and 
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969. Further, it is also concerned with the Chartered 
Accountants Act, 1949, the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and the Company 
Secretaries Act, 1980. Apart from the aforesaid Acts, the responsibility of discharging the 
functions of the Central Government relating to the Administration of the Partnership Act, 
1932, the Companies(Donations to National Funds) Act, 1951 and Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 also rests with the Department. This Department first came into existence on the 
first August, 1955. 

3 
BUDGET IN GENERAL 
9. The total budgetary allocation made for the f\linistry of Law. Justice and Company 
Affairs for the year 1996-97 is shown under four Demands, n:.tmely, Dc.:mand Nos. 58, 59, 60 
and 61. Demand No. 58 which constitutes a m~tjor portion of the total allocation, relates to 
the Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative Dc.:partment and Department of Justice. 
10. Demand Nos. 59 and 60 have been assigricd to the Election Commission and 
Supreme Court of India, respectively. The expenditure to be incurr ed on the Supreme Court 
of India is 'charged'. Financial rquirement of the Department of Company Affairs is covered 
under Demand No. 61. 
DE!\IAND NO. Stl - LAW AND JUSTICE 
11 : The Budgetary provision under this Demand includes expenditure to be incurred on 
Secretariat-General Services of the Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative Department, 
Department of Justke, conduct of elections, Income-Tax Appellate Tribunal, National Legal 
Services Authority, National Judicial Academy, infrastructural facilities for the judiciary, etc. 
12. The Dudgct Estimates (1996-97) under the Demand are given below:-
(Rs. in crores) 
------ ·-----------------------------------------------------------------
Rev en ue 
Capital 
ToTAL: 
Plan 
50.00 
50.00 
Non-Plan Total 
494.61 544.61 
494.61 544.61 
13. A statement showing Budget Estimates 19<J5-96, Revised Estimates 1995-96 and 
Uudget Estimates 1996-97 under various heads is given below: 
I. Secretariat General 
Scrvit·e 1.01 Deptt. of 
Legal Affairs 
1.02 Legislative Dcptt. 
1.03 Deptt. of Justice 
I.~ Others 
2. Elections 2.01 Issue of 
Jndentity cards to Voters 
2.02 General Elections 
2.03 Normal Expenses 
3. Income Tax Appellate 
Tribun al 
Major 
Head 
2052 
2052 
2052 
2052 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2020 
B.E. 1995-96 
Plan Non-Plan 
5.37 
2.00 
0.32 
2.42 
225.00 
56.70 
5.35 
R.E. 1995-96 
Plan Non-Plan 
5.62 
2.00 
0.33 
2.52 
225.00 
56.70 
5.35 
(Rs. in crores) 
B.E. 1996-97 
Plan Non-Plan 
6.19 
2.20 
0.35 
2.77 
5.00 
400.00 
65.00 
5.88 

4: Administration of Justice 
4.01 National Judicial 
Academy 
4.02 Special Courts 
4.03 International Centre 
for Alternative 
Disputes Resolution 
(ICADR) 
4.04 Other Expenditure 
5. Other Administrative 
Services 
5.01 Infrastructural facilities 
for Judiciary 
5.02 Other Programmes 
GRAND TOTAL: 
Major 
Head 
2014 
3601 
2014 
2014 
3601 
2070 
4 
B.E. 1995-96 
Plan Non-Plan 
1.50 
2.70 
48.50 
1.76 
50.00 301.62 
R.E. 1995-96 B.E. 1996-97 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-PI:~n 
8.00 0.59 
0.33 0.01 
5.84 2.30 
2.73 2.97 
52.00 49.41 
1.76 1.94 
60.00 308.18 50.00 494.61 
14. The Committee having considered all aspects makes recommendations/observations 
in respect of the following: 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
National Legal Services Authority 
15. From the information provided by the Legal Affairs Department, the Committee 
notes that now with the enforcement of National Legal ·Services Authority Act, 1987, w .e.f. 
9.11.1995, the Committee for Implementing Legal Aid Scheme has been replaced with the 
Legal Services Authority. As stated in the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Supreme 
Court Legal Services Committee has also been constituted under the Act for rendering 
competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society whose cases are before the 
Supreme Court. The Act also provides for constitution of the State Legal Services 
Authorities, High Court Legal Services Committees, District Legal Services Authorities and 
Taluk Legal Services Committees. The main object of the Act is to provide free and 
competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society on a uniform basis throughout 
the country. Under the Legal Services Authorities Act, free legal aid is admissible to every 
citizen whose income is less than Rs. 9,000 per annum in cases before subordinate Courts 
and High Courts and Rs. 12,000 in cases before the Supreme Court. The limitation as to 
income is, however, not applicable in case of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the 
S,eheduled Tribes, women, children, handicapped persons etc. A budgetary provision of Rs. 
80 lakh~. has been made for grants under this Act in the Budget. Estimates for the year 1996-
97. A question was posed to the Department as to whether the estimated amount will be 
sufficient to fulfil the Government's commitment to give free legal aid to poor people. In 
reply to it, Committee was informed that with the enforcement of the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, the legal aid movement has been placed on a statutory base. For 
holding Lok Adalats, Legal Literacy Camps, 'Training of Para-Legals' etc., more funds are 
likely to be requisitioned by the. State Legal Aid & Advice Boards/State Legal Services 
Authorities etc. It is estimated that during the year 1996-97, about Rs. 1.00 crore will be 
needed for these programmes. The Department was informed that the Committee was 
prepared to extend help and to impress upon the Government to make provisions, but the 
Department should come out with some concrete proposals. 
16. In the written reply to the point raised by the Committee regarding progress made 
in implementing the legal aid scheme, the Department has informed that as on 1.8.1996 

5 
about 23,23,910 people have been benefited through Legal aid. As regards Lok Adalats, the 
Committee notes that 13,802 Lok Adalats were organised in the count ry where 60,87,467 
cases were settled. Compensation of Rs. 975,70,474 was awarded in about 3,06,086 Motor 
Accident Claims cases. 
17. The Comm itt ee has been informed by the Department that to reduce the number of 
the pending cases, special initiatives are being taken as regards Lok Adalats. In the first 
phase S-6 States are being selected whe re Lok Adalats at all the levels will be held every 15 
days. The Committee recommends that more categories of cases, i.e. cases pert aining to 
matrimony, election and education matters should also be covered und er Lok Adalats. The 
Committee feels that judgements of Lok Adalats should have legal sanction so as to serve the 
purpose of reducing the work load of courts. The Department informed the Committee that in 
the Budget propo sals for the year 1996-97, Rs. 50 lakhs have been allocated for holding Lok 
Adalats. but the Secretary, Legal Affairs in his presentation requested the Committee to 
recommend that this amount needs to be rai sed suitably to a level of Rs. 2 crores. The 
Commi ttee feels that the propo sed Budget allocation be suitably increased. The Committee 
furth er recommends that instead of deputing sitting judges of courts, retired judge s of courts 
should hold Lok Adalats so that the sitting judg es can devote their time in disposing of the 
cases listed in regular courts. 
18. While appr eciating the steps being taken by the Departm ent to enforce the National 
Legal Services Authority Act in letter and spirit , the Committee expresses its concern that the 
fee being paid to the Advocates taking up the cases under Free Legal Aid Scheme is very less. 
As a result of this good Advocates do not want to take up cases and the cases are not being 
handled prop erly. The Committee also feels that the Government lawyers either do not appear 
in time or do not file the papers properly as a result of which the cases are unn ecessarily 
delayed. The Committee , therefore, recommend s that the fees to be paid to the Advocates 
handling cases under Free Legal Aid Scheme should be suitably r aised so that proper talent is 
available. The Commi ttee also recommends that the process of appointing Govcrnm l·nt 
law)·ers and Government Standing Counsels at all the levels should be s treamlined . Some joint 
process should be evolved. The Go\'ernm ent lawyers should also be made accountable 
regarding handling the case entrus ted to them. 
19. The Committ ee expresses its concern over the complete lack of awareness among the 
common people with regard to their right s and obligations and emphasises the importa nce of 
para-legal training programme for creat ing legal awareness among the common people. The 
Committee expresses its serious doubts about the sufficiency of allocation of fund s proposed in 
the Budget Estimate for this purpose. The Committee is of the view that more alloction is 
req uired to be made for para-legal training progr amme, ::\S extensive work is to be done on 
this score . 
20. On a point raised regarding the jury system the Committee was inform ed th at on 
lower levels there is no jury system. Only in High Courts and Supreme Court Benches of 
more than one judge are constituted according to the requirem ent of the case. The Com mittee 
stresses the need for instituting jury system to make judicial system more credible and 
transparent. 
21. The Committee notes with concern that many grantee institutions could not fully 
utilise the grants-in-aid sanc tioned to them. The Department was pointedly asked as to what 
steps the Department is cotemplating to ensure that such grants-in-aid are fully utilised. 
1. Thl! Department has informed the Committee that-they have tentatively 
earmarke d the amount of the grunt-in-aid to be released to each State. 

6 
2. The grant-in-aid shall be released periodically so as to afford sufficient time to the 
grantee institution for utilisation of the grant-in-aid. 
3. The quantum of fresh grant-in-aid is determined on the basis of the trend of the 
expenditure by a grantee institution of the earlier grant-in-aid sanctioned to it. 
22. The Committee is constrained to note that most of the schemes launched by the 
Government were not upto the mark. The Committee feels that all these schemes must have 
been vetted by the Department of Legal Affairs. The Committee stresses that the Department 
of Legal Affairs should take special care to ensure that they don't approve the schemes/ 
policies which are not implementable. The Committee also observed that the Government is 
the biggest litigant in most of the cases. Hence the Committee recommends that while 
rendering legal advice, proper care must be taken so that unnecessary litigations can be 
avoided. Concerned officials must be made accountable for the advice renderd. 
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT) 
23. The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal constituted under the Income-Tax Act deals 
with second appeals in all the matters relating to direct taxes and with appeals in revision 
against order of the Commissioners as well as orders of acquisition of properties under 
Chapter XX-A of the Income Tax Act. The !TAT is headed by the Prisident who is assisted 
by one Senior Vice-President and three Vice-Presidents. 
24. The following tabel shows the actual expenditure during the year 1994-95, BE for 
1995-96 RE for 1995-96, and BE for 1996-97 in respect of the IT AT 
Actuals 
1994-95 
5.44 
BE 1995-96 
5.35 
(In crores of Rupees) 
RE 1995-96 BE 1996-97 
5.35 5.88 
25. According to the Annual Report of the Ministry the total number of pending cases 
before the !TAT as on 31.3.96 was 2,96,810. One of the reasons for accumulation of the 
cases is the mumber of vacancies of the members in the !TAT. The committee in its meeting 
held on 8.8.1996 expressed serious ~ncem on the increase in the number of pending cases 
and suggested the Department to come forward with more proposals. In reply to this the 
Department has informed the Committee that 5 posts of Judicial Members and 6 posts of 
Accountant members are lying vacant. Out of this, appointments of 2 Judicial Members and 
2 Accountant Members are under process. The rest of the vacancies are reserved for S.C. 
and S.T. for which the Selection Board could not find suitable candidates. The vacancies are 
being advertised again. The Department further informed the Committee that a Note for the 
cabinet for the creation of 15 additional Benches of the Tribunal with a view to bringing 
down the pendency of cases is currently under consideration of the Min~stry of Finance for 
their concurrence. The Committee would like to reiterate the recommendation made in its 
Seventeenth Report that the vacant posts of Members in the ITAT should be filled up with 
utmost expedition and adequate financial support be given for early creation of Benches of the 
ITAT. 

7 
LAW COMMISSION 
26. The Law Commission of India is a non-statutory body constituted by the 
Government from time to time. The Commission was originally constituted in 1955 and is 
reconstituted every three years. The administrative control of the Law Commission vests 
with the Department of Legal Affairs. The terms of reference of ·the Law Commission are 
also determined by the Department of Legal Affairs. The Law Commission presents its 
reports on various subjects to the Government which are then processed by the Department 
of legal Affairs for placing them on the Tables of Parliament. These reports are thereafter 
forwarded to the various Ministries/Departments of the Government of India who are 
administratively concerned with their implementation. A total of Rs. 78 lakhs Budgetary 
provision has been made for the expenses of Law Commission for the year 1996-97. 
27. The Committee had stressed the need for amending the Indian Penal Code, Code of 
Criminal Procedure and Evidence Act so that speedy justice can be provided to poor people. 
In reply to this the Department has informed the Committee that Government has requested 
the Law Commission of India to undertake comprehensive revision of these enactments. 
The Committee recommends that besides the above mentioned enactments, the revision of 
Code of Civil Procedure should also be undertaken. The Committee further recommends that 
while amending the C.P.C., provisions relating to service of process should · be 
comprehensively modified and streamlined. The Committee feels that there are certain 
procedural lacunae in the existing Code which prolongs the case. Hence Committee 
recommends that provision should be made to ensure quickers service of summons/process, 
all the steps of service i.e., sending through a process server, through registered post, etc. 
should be taken simultaneously. The Committee is of the view that in this modern age of 
communication and transport the Courts should not stick to the ancient system of sending a 
person with summons . The Committee also notes that as regards C.P.C. and Cr. P.C. at 
present there are different provision in different parts of the country whicb creates lots of 
problems. Hence the Committee also recommends that whUe modifying these enactments, 
efforts should be made to ensure that similar provisions are applied in the whole nation. The 
Committee further recommends that efforts should also be made to study the different 
customary laws prevalent in different parts of the country specially in North-Eastern parts. 
These customary laws give cheaper ~nd quicker justice. The Department should take steps to 
codify these laws. The Law Commission should be requested to expedite the Reports on the 
amendments of these Acts and some time frame should be fixed for it. The Committee also 
feels the Reports of the Law Commission should have some sanctity and the Department 
should ensure that these Reports are acted upon. 
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
28. From the Annual Action Plan submitted by the Department of Legal Affairs, the 
Committee notes that the Department is likely to organise four training workshops on the 
subject of Alternative Dispute Resolution with the technical assistance from the Asian 
Development Bank. Each of these workshops will train about 20-25 ADR trainers who will 
in turn impart similar training to ADR practitioners in workshops to be organised all over 
the country. The Asian Development Bank has urged to provide small scale technical 
assistance not exceeding U.S.$ 100,00<Y- for these workshops. This Departments will be the 
execut ing agency for these training programmes and the International Centre for Alternative 
Dispute Resolution (l_CADR) will be the implementing agency for these training 
programmes. 

8 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
29. The Committee point ed out that even after the Legislative Department vest the 
administrative proposal drafts a Bill, so many lacunae and anon talies are found which give 
way to avoidable disputes in the Courts. The Committee suggested to the Legislative 
Department that some loud thinking should be done and they should take steps to 
modern ise thei r Department by making use of Internet system and should have its own 
Research Wing to go into this aspect. The y should re-orient and sensitise the Department. 
They should take initiatives to rectify the mistakes, lacunae and anomalies at the initial stage 
so that the Act s a re in good form and they are not challenged in the Courts. The Committee 
further expressed its view that basic objective of the law should be to resolve a dispute rather 
than create bitterness. The Committee also suggested that there should be a separat e cell in 
the Department which should undertake an intergrated, holistic and a comprehensive 
research, not with an academic object ive but with a practical objective to make more 
practical Jaws which are less time-consuming, and less expensive. The Committee is of th.e 
view that necessary Budgetary provision should be made in this regard. 
30. The Committee also stressed the need for bringing out comprehensive Bill on electoral 
reforms. The representatives of the Legislative Department inform ed the Committ ee that a 
proposal has been submitted to Ministry of Parliament ary Affairs to convene an all-Party 
meeting to finalise the draft of comprehen sive electoral reforms Bill. 
31. The Committee also pointed out that since Manipuri, Nepali and Konkani 
Languages have been included in the 8th Schedule of the Constitution, appropriate 
provisions whould be made for the translation of Central Acts into these langu ages. The 
Department was also asked to give detailed information regarding publication of Central 
Acts in other regional languages. The Committee had pointedly asked the Department to send 
details, in the context of Budget proposals, as to under what Head the Department would like 
to have more money. But the Committee is pained to note that not such details could be 
furnished' by the Department. The Committee would like the Department to submit a 
comprehensive note covering all the points raised by the Committee. 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
32. The Committee expressed it concern over the pendency of cases in the courts. The 
Committee stressed that some time frame should be prescribed for the disposal of cases. While 
expressing concern over the pendency of cases, the Committee feels that mere filling up all the 
vacancies of judges in Supreme Courts and different High Courts will not solve the problem. 
Number of benches sMuld be increased. The Committee suggests that the Benches of High 
Courts could be set up according to the distance or the areas of the population they cover. 
The Committee specifically referred to the State of Uttar Pradesh and stated that Seventy-five 
percent of the cases in the Allahabad High Court pertain to the Western part of Uttar 
Pradesh which accounts for one third of the State , population-wise and one fourth area-wise. 
The Committee stressed that there is a long standing demand for setting up a Bench of 
Allahabad High Court in Western Uttar Pradesh. The Committee also recomm ends that 
posibility of decentralisation of Supreme Court, with Benches in different parts of the 
Country, may be considered. 
33. On the concern expressed by the Committee regarding pendency of cases, the 
Department of justice in its written reply informed the Committ ee that steps have been 
taken to fill up the vacancies of the Judges in the High Courts at the earliest possible. The 
Department informed that the memorandum of procedure for appointm ent of Judges of the. 

9 
High Courts prescribing a time schedule has been revised in consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India. Now, the pr( :'osal for appointment of a Judge of a High Court shall be 
ini~iated by the Chief Justice of that High Court as early as possible but at least six months 
before the date of occurrence of the vacancy. The Committee was not fully satisfied with the 
explanation given by the Department of Justice with regard to filling the vacant posts of 
Judges. On the query made by the Committee regarding transfer of Judges of High Court, 
the Department informed the Committee that the Government has accepted as a policy that 
one-third of Judges in each High Court should be from any other State. 
34. The Committee stressed that the Department should undertake study and research to 
evolve an alternative disputes resolution. The Committee also suggested that there should be 
some provision to specify time limit for the completion of each stage of the case. The 
Committee also suggested that stringent rules should be framed in the exercise of 
discretionary powers by the presi ding officers specially with regard to grant of adjournments. 
On the above mentioned points, the Committee was informed that the institution of Lok 
Adalats has been made functional and the Legal Services Authorities Act has been brought 
into force. The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill to encourage an alternate mode of dispute 
resolution has also been enacted. 
35. On a query made by the Committee as to whether ~llocation of adequate funds 
through the auspices of this Committee can help reduce the pendency of cases, the 
Department in its written reply informed the Committee that the reasons for accumulation 
of arrears are very complex and the provision of funds alone cannot be the solution. 
36. On a suggestion made by the Committee that as regards implementation of the 
Centra lly Sponsored Scheme for the development of infrastructural facilities grant to the 
extent of 75% as against SO% to the States may be recommended. The Department informed 
that if the grant component is increased from 50% to 75%, it will go a long way and would 
also encourage the State Government for the setting of new courts. The J?epartment also 
requested the Committee that besides increasing the grant component to States, the total 
allocation on this head should be increased. The Department further requested the 
Committee to consider recommending to the Planning Commission that the Scheme be 
continued beyond the 8th Plan as the Planning Commiss ion had approved this scheme for 
the Eighth Five Year Plan only. 
37. The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Government with rega rd 
to the developmen t of infrastructur al facilities for the judiciary and urg es upon the 
Governm ent to take up the matter with the Plannin g Commission for its continu ance b eyond 
the E ighth Five Year Plan. The Committee also recommends that the Centr al Government 
share s hould be 75% under this head and for the rest 25% may be provided by th e State 
Govern ments. 
38. As regards the National Judicial Academy , the Committee expressed its concern that 
though the Academ y was r egistered in 1993, it could not start full-fledged f!-)nctioning till now. 
The C ommittee suggests that f or the time being , the training a ctivities of Judicial officers can 
commence in the rented building rath er than waiting for the completion of Academy' s own 
building. 
39. The Committee notes that the Central Government has set up the Judici al Pay 
Commission for judicial officers of all States . The report of this Pay Commi ssion w ould be 
advisory in nature an d it, is for the Stat e Govern ments to ta ke a final view with regar d to its 
acceptance/i mplementat ion. O n a point raised by the Committe e r egard ing the Budgeta ry 
prov ision unde r this heaa, the Department has inform ed the Committee that an advance of 
Rs. 15 lak hs has been obtained from the Contingency Fund of I ndia to mee t the immediate 

10 
requirement of the Commission. This amount would be recouped to the Fund out of the 
provision of Rs. 17 lakhs which has been provided for the Commission (Major h ead '2014' in 
the regular Budget for the year 1996-97). It is expected that the Commission may incur 
expenditure of about Rs. 100 lakbs during the current financial year. The additional 
requirement would be met through advance from the Contingency Fund of India and suitable 
provision will be requested for in the supplementary Budget. 
40. The Committee recommends that the Government should evolve a mechanism to 
assess the situation in the State Governments where the pay and other facilities of the Judicial 
Officers ,are not at par with the executive thereof of that level. 
41. The Committee pointed out that though decision of separating Judiciary from 
Executive bas been taken way back, this separation has still not been effected in whole of 
Nagaland State and some parts of Andbra Pradesh, Assam and Megbalaya. The Committee 
pointedly enquired whether any decision has been taken in this regard and whether any 
provision has been made in the proposed Budget Estimates for establishing Courts in those 
areas. The Department of Justice in its written reply has informed that the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 sought to ensure the separation of Judiciary from the Executive on all India 
basis by providing for a new set-up of Criminal Courts. Though provisions regarding setting 
up of Criminal Courts do not apply to State of Nagaland and tribal areas, these States may 
by notification apply such provisions to the concerned States with such supplemental, 
incidental or consequential modifications as may be specified in the notification. The 
Committee has been informed that the State of Nagaland decided on 5th July, 1994 to 
separate the Judiciary from Executive and steps are being taken to implement the decision. 
The Committee further notes from the written reply of the Department of Justice that in 
Meghalaya, separat ion of Judiciary from the Executive .extends o nly to the cantonm ent and 
the normal areas of Shillong town. In Mizoram, phased separation of J udiciary has already 
been taken up by constituting separate Judicial Service and separate court buildings . T he 
Committee urges u pon the Government to take all possible steps to ensure that Judiciary is 
separated from the Executive. T he States where such separation has not been effected, 
should be impressed upon to take steps for the complete separation of Judiciary from 
Executive. 
42. Regarding use of Hindi in courts, the Committee notes that Article 348(1) of the 
Constitution provides that all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Cour t 
shall be in English until Parliament by Law otherwise provides. No law has been made by 
the Parliament so far. The Chief Justice of India had reported in October, 1991 that 
replacement of English at lower levels of the judiciary by the State Language had already 
been implemented throughout India. 
43 •. The Committee was informed that with a steep increase in number of advocates, the 
existing Supreme Court building complex having about 135 chambers for the lawyers of the 
Supreme Court, has been proved insufficient. The Government had approved the 
construction of 136 additional chambers and on that account administrative approval and 
expenditure sanction of Rs. 5.76 crores was issued. The CPWD had reported in June, 1996 
that the main building work was already under progress and also had sent a proposal for a 
revised estimate of Rs. 7.46 crores owing to the increased expenditure in respect of certain 
civil and electrical work. The Committee ur;es upon the Government to take suitable steps 
for completion of the work so that the lawyers could be allotted the chambers. 
44. The Committee recommends that a cell may be set up to go into the Judicial reforms 
which would monitor the recommendations/observations made in various conventions, 
conferences, seminars, symposia, parliamentary debates etc. and the Government, based upon 
this research work should come forward with concrete suggestions in this regard. 

11 
45. The plenary meeting of Law Secretaries and Law Ministers was held in Hyderabad 
during 23·25 November, 1995 to consider inter·alia, reforms in legal education and entry into 
legal profession. During the meeting the Law Ministers expressed their concern at the 
standards in legal education and also observed that the Supreme Court of India had also 
reacted to the fall in the standard of legal advocates. The Committee recommends that there 
is an urgent need of establishing a National Law School and funds must be provided therefor 
in the Budget. 
DEMAND NO. 59-ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
46. The Election Commission of India and Electoral Reforms come under the purview 
of the Legislative Department of the Ministry. The Demands for Grants of the Election 
Commission do not form part of the composite Demand No. 58. Demand No. 59 has 
separa.tely been assigned to Election Commission. The Expenditure of the Election 
Commission is 'Voted'. Budgetary allocation of a total of 547 crore rupees has been made 
for the year 1996·97 as against 355 crores allocated under the Revi sed Estimates for the year 
1995·96. The Committee appreciates that with a view to achieve the aim and objel.:tive of the 
Voters' awareness, the Commission has launched a 'National Voters' Awareness Campaign' 
and has allocated a sum of Rs. 30 crores for this purpose. The Committee stressed that since 
a huge amount has already been spent on the issuance of Voters Identity Cards, final decision 
must be taken on the issue of use of Identity Cards at the time of conduct of Assembly/ 
Parliament Elections/by-elections. The Committee has directed the Department to furnish 
the Committee a Detailed Note in this respect. 
DEMAND NO. 60-SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
47. Demand No. 60 in the detailed Demands of Grants of the Ministry has been 
assigned ·to the Supreme Court of India. The expenditure to be incurred on tl.e Supreme 
Court of India is 'Cha rged' . As regards the Committee's concern regarding pendency of 
cases, the Committee has been informed that at present there is only one vacancy in the 
Supreme Court and the pendency position has improved to a great extent during the last 18 
months. The number of pending cases which was over one lakh on 1st December, 1995, has 
come down to 37,000. It is expected that during the current financial year there will be lesser 
expenses on the Foreign Travel Head (Rs. 20 crores as against Rs. 55 crores granted for the 
year 1995·96) Salaries Head (Rs. 1079.60 crores as against Rs. 1330.19 crores for the year 
1995·96) and Office Expenses Head (Rs. 225 crores as against Rs. 340 crores allocated for 
the year 1995·96). Hence the total Budget Estit:pates of the Supreme Court of India under 
the Revenue are Rs. 14.07 crores as against Rs. 18.08 crores of Revised Estimates for the 
year 1995·96. 
DEMAND NO. 61-DEPARTMENT OF COMPANY AFFAIRS 
48. The total budgetary allocation (BE) made for the Department of Company Affairs 
for 1996·97 is Rs. 17.5 crores. The Department has no plan expenditure. The entire budget 
of the Department is non·plan and establishment·oriented. In his presentation, the 
representative of the Department informed the Committee that out of Rs. 17,50 crores 
which is projected for this year, 69.5 per cent goes for salaries and rent; 22 per cent for 
office expenses; a sum of Rs. 1.38 crores has been provided for computerication in the ROC 
offices. 
49. The Committee expressed its view that in the wake of liberalisation, the task which 
the Department of Company Affairs is facing is a very challenging one. So many companies 

12 
are being registered, so many multinational companies are coming in, so many 
amalgamations are taking place. The whole concept of a company has undergone a sea­
change. The role of companies has acquired a new dimension in an increasingly competitive 
market. There is, therefore, all the more need for greater supervision over them lest they 
may indulge in unfair and unhealthy trade practices. Most of the companies float public 
issues and debentures and collect huge amount from the public. Many companies again 
collect huge sums of money from the public through their Fixed Deposit Schemes. The 
Committee asked the Department to lay particular emphasis on the key areas and to explain 
difficulties which the Department is facing. In reply to this the representative of the 
Department informed the Committee that though there has been a steep increase and 
phenomenal growth in the number of companies registered during the last decade, the 
strength of the Registrars of Companies has almost stagnated. The Department informed the 
Committee that it had collected revenue by way of fees from companies of Rs. 240.60 crores 
during 1995-96 whereas in 1989-90 it was Rs. 29 crores only. 
50. The Committee is happy to note that to protect the interest of investors and to cope 
up with the increasing work load of investors' complaints, the Department has set-up an 
Investors' Pro tection Cell which is functioning satisfactorily. 
51. The Committee stressed that in view of the changing scenario in the field of 
Industry, the Companies Act, 1956 needs exhaustive amendments. The Depar~ment 
informed that the Government is aware of the fact that the Companies Act needs to be re­
written comprehensively. The Committee appreciates that a working group has been set up 
to prepare a new draft of the Company Bill and make it ready for public debate by January 
1997. 
COMPANY LAW BOARD 
52. As regards the Company Law Board, the Committee in its Seventeenth Report had 
observed that the pendency of the petitions/applications before the CLB could broadly be 
attributed to the vacant position of members at different benches as a consequence of which 
the members at headquarters have to bear extra burden of the work and they have to divert 
their attention to hear the cases at other benches. This certainly hampers the process of 
expeditious disposal of the cases. The Committee had recommended that the vacant posts of 
the members be filled up within the shor test time-frame. The Department has made an 
allocation of Rs. 81 lakhs to meet the expense s of the Board. In the context of the above 
mention ed recommendation the Committee asked the Department categorically if it could 
allocate some more amount for spending on the administrative machinery available to 
Company Law Board. The Department informed the Committee that the Company Law 
Board has indicated that the budgetary Outlay of Rs. 81.00 lakhs for 1996-97 is adequate. 
53. The Committee notes that the total number of petitions and appl ications pending 
before the CLB was 2579 as on 31.3.96. The Department has inform ed the Committee that 
as per the Companies Act , 1956, the Company Law Board is to consist of Chairman, Vice­
Chairm an and seven Memb ers. It has only three members at present, one out of whom is 
officiating as Chairman of the Board. The Committee was inform ed that the Selection 
Committe e und er the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Justice Shri J.S. Verma, Judge of the 
Supreme Court recomm ended 3 candidates for appointment as members of the Company 
Law Board and after approval by the competent authority, offers had been sent on the 18th 
July, 1996. The Department expressed the hope that the rate of disposal is likely to go up 
after these memb ers join Company Law Board. 

13 
54. The Additional Secretary, on a pointed query regarding the exemption to be sought 
by the multinational companies coming into our land, informed the Committee that no 
exemption would be extended. If it was a Branch Office of a foreign company, it must file 
with the Registrar of Companies its Balance sheets and other things. If it was purely a 
Liaison Officer then the Central Government would consider and give an exemption but 
there also it would have to file certain returns like its assests, liabilities etc. The Committee 
expressed satisfact ion over this. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th August, 1996, in Committee 
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
6. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sushi) Chandra Verma 
10. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
11. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
12. Shri Vijay Goel 
13. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
14. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
15. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
16. Prof M. Kamson 
17. Shri tdris Ali 
18. Shri Gopal Tandel 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Shri N. Dennis 
21. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
22. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
23. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the members felicitated the Chairman on his appointment as the 
Chairman of the Committee and wished him a successful tenure. The Chairman reciprocated 
the sentiments expressed by the members and thanked them for their gesture. He stated that 
with the co-operation of members, most of whom had distinguished themselves in v<· rious 
fields, the Committee would be able to fulfil its mandate. 
14 

15 
3. Thereafter he outlined in brief the functions of the Committee for the benefit of the 
new members and informed the members about the deta iled schedule of meetings of the 
Committee which had been worked out to take up consideration of the Detailed Demands 
for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries coming within its purview. 
4. Some members then raised points and gave suggestions .regarding the proposed 
consideration of the Demands for Grants of the related Ministries and the subjects which 
could be taken up by the Committee later. The Chairman of the Committee clarified the 
points raised by the members. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 

II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 8th August, 1996, in Committee 
Room No. 63, First Floor , Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Slui Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Anantray Devsh anke r Dave 
6. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma 
10. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
11. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
12. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
13. Shri \'ij~ty Goel 
14. Shri Ish war Dayal Swamy 
15. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
16. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
17. Prof M. Kamson 
18. Shri N. Dennis 
19. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
20. Shri Shatrughan Pra sad Singh 
21. Dr. J.ayanta Rongpi 
22. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani , Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
* 
•Relate to other matters. 
• • 
16 

17 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
Legislative Department 
1. Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
2. Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Raghubir Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
4. Shri Parkash Chandra, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri M.L. Mishra, Editor, Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan 
6. Shri Hakam Singh, Deputy Secretary 
7. Mrs. Neelam S. Kumar, Controller of Accounts 
8. Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary 
Department of Legal Affairs 
1. Dr. V.K. Aggarwal, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri C. Achuthan, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
3. Shri P.C. Kannan, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
4. Shri A.K. Gupta, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
5. Shri Krishan Kumar, Additional Legal Advisor 
6. Shri G.D. Chotmurada, Under Secretary, National Legal Services Authority 
7. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Assitant Legal Advisor 
Election Commission of India 
1. Shri Subhas Pani, Deputy Election Commissioner 
2. Shri S.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
2. * * * 
3. * • • 
4. The Committee then took up consideration of the Detailed Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. The Chairman welcomed the officers of 
the Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs and asked them to make a 
presentation on the functioning of their Departments and their allocations as projected in the 
Demands for Grants of their respective Departments which was accordingly done. The 
Members put queries to the representative of the Department of Legal Affairs relating to 
grants-in-aid under the Free Legal Aid Scheme and working of the National Legal Services 
Authority Act, 1987, Partial Legal Aid Scheme, para legal training programme, disposal a~ .i 
pendency of appeals in the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and existing vacancies in tn" 
Tribunal. The Members also sought clarifications from the Secretary, Legislative .Department 
on the existing mechanism to oversee operation of existing laws particularly IPC and CrPC 
and the need for their amendment through necessary enactments, electoral reforms, 
availability of authoritative texts of Central Acts in the regional languages, Election 
Commission and system of amalgamation of judicial and executive powers in some of the 
North-Eastern States. Some of the points raised by the Members were clarified by the 
representative of the Department of Legal Affairs. Both the Departments were directed to 
furnish the written replies to the questionnaires as well as the points raised by the Members. 
5. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 
9th August, 1996. 
*Relate to other matters. 

III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday , the 9th August, 1996, in Committee Roon 
'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annex e, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
3. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma 
7. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8. Shri J agatvir Singh Drona 
9. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
10. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
11. Shri Vijay Goel 
12. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
13. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
14. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
15. Prof M. Kamson 
16. Shri ldris Ali 
17. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Department of Justice 
1. Shri H.H. Tyabji, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S.K. Naik, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri M.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Tejinder Singh Laschar, Director 
Representatives of the Department of Company Affairs 
1. Shri B.B. Tandon, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Jainder Singh, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.D. Joshi, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh, Secretary, Company Law Board 
18 

19 
5. Shri K.C. Ganjwal, Secretary, MRTPC 
6. Slui A.K. Sharma, DGI&R 
7. Shri S.K. Pathak, Director 
8. Shri L.C. Goel, Director 
9. Shri A.K. Doshi, D.l.l. 
10. Shri S. Biswas, Joint Director 
11. Shri R. V. Vaswani, Under Secretary 
12. Shri V.S. Galgali, R.O.C. Delh i 
13. Shri K.M. Sayeed, Dy. Secretary 
14. Shri V.K. Gupta, Directo r (NIC) 
2. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Departments of Justice and 
Company Affairs and asked them to make a presentation on the Demands for Grants of 
their respective Departments. In their separate presentations, the representatives gave a 
broad overview of their activities and the nature of allocations as proposed in their 
budgetary demands. The Members put queries to the representative of the Department of 
Justice, on aspects related to appointment of Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, 
policy with regard to expeditious filling up of vacancies of Judges and their transfer, 
pendency of cases in courts and the need for suitable amendmepts in law to impart quicker 
justice to the people, National Judicial Academy and National Judicial Pay Commission. The 
Members also sought clarifications from the representative of the Department of Company 
Affairs on various points arising out of his submissions before the Committee particularly on 
the pendency position before the Company Law Board, working of the Monopolies & 
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, certain provisions of the Companies Act and 
exemptions extended to the multinational companies. Both the Departments were directed 
to provide written answers to the questionnaire/points raised by the members and give 
detailed notes on certain points. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. to meet again at 5.15 P.M. on Monday, 
the 12th August, 1996. 

VII 
"SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday , the 20th August, 1996, in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
6. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
9. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
10. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
11. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
12. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
13. Prof M. Kamson 
14. Shri Khelsai Singh 
15. Shri N. Dennis 
16. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
17. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Und er Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
Legislative Department 
1. Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
2. Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S. Sathyamoorthy, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
4. Dr. Raghubir Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
5. Shri Hakam Singh , Directo r 
6. Ms. Neelam S. Kumar, Controller of Accounts 
7. Dr. D.B. Singh , Under Secretary 
"Minut es of Fourth, Fifth and Sixth meetings of the Committee relate to some other matters of the Committee. 
20 

21 
Department of Legal Affairs 
1. Dr. V.K. Agarwal, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri C. Achuthan, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Gupta, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri P.C. Kannan, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor 
5. Shri M.L. Mishra, Editor 
6. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Assistant Legal Advisor 
7. Shri G.D. Chotmurada, Under Secretary 
8. Shri Krishan Kumar, Additional Legal Advisor 
Election Commission 
1. Ms. Archana Arora, Secretary 
2. Shri S.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
Department of Justice 
1. Shri H.H. Tyabji, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri M.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S.K. Naik, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Tejinder Singh Laschar, Director 
Department of Company Affairs 
1. Shri B.B. Tandon, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.P. Joshi, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Jainder Singh, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri S.P. Pathak, Director 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh, Secretary, Company Law Board 
6. Shri K.L. Ganjwal, Secretary, MRTPC 
7. Shri R.N. Vaswani, Under Secretary 
• • • 
2. At the outset, while welcoming the representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice 
and Company Affairs, the Committee took a serious view of the absence of Dr. P.C. Rao, 
Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs from whom no request for exemption from 
appearance had been received. The Committee in this context noted that earlier also on 
the 8th August, 1996, Dr. Rao had not appeared as he was stated to be unwell. The 
Committee authorised its Chairman to convey the displeasure of the Committee on this 
account to Dr. Rao in appropriate terms. The Committee then directed Dr. V.K. Agarwal, 
Additional Secretary of the Department, then present, to withdraw and decided not to 
take oral evidence of the Department on the subject till Dr. P.C. Rao appeared before it. 
(The witness, Dr. V.K. Agarwal, then withdrew) 
3. The Committee next, before taking evidence of the Secretary, Legislative 
Department, Shri K. L. Mohanpuria, noted that virtually no replies to the points raised by 
the Members earlier on the 8th August, 1996 had been furnished by the Department. The 
Committee did not feel satisfied with the explanation given by the Secretary and having 
regard to the apologies tendered by him and the assurance to furnish the replies by 2.00 
P.M., deferred his evidence till 3.00 P.M. that day. 
4. The Members then sought clarifications from the representatives of the 
Departments of Justice and Company Affairs in the context of the replies furnished by 
them to the points raised on the subject earlier in the meeting of the Committee on 9th 
... Relates to other matter. 

22 
August, 1996. The Committee Members voiced their concern over the huge pendency of 
cases in the Courts. 
5. * * * 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. and re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. to hear 
the Secretary, Legislative Department. The Committee expressed its dissatisfaction over the 
written replies furnished by the Department and noted that most of the points raised by the 
Members in the meeting, of the Committee held on 8th August, 1996 had been left 
untouched. The Committee Members, however, raised some more queries concerning the 
machinery to update laws, delimitation of constituencies and electoral reforms etc. The 
Secretary was given a questionnaire listing the points raised earlier by members on 8th 
August, 1996 and he was directed to send replies thereto in writing to the Secretariat. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 23rd 
August, 1996. 
•• •Relates to other matter . 

VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 23rd August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
7. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
8. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
9. Shri Vijay Goel 
10. Shri Iswar Dayal Swamy 
11. Shri Khelsai Singh 
12. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
13. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
14. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secreta!y 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Department of Legal 
Affairs) 
1. Dr. P. C. Rao, Secretary 
2. Dr. V. K. Agarwal, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri R. K. Gupta, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
4. Shri P. C. Kannan, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
5. Shri S. Sathyamoorthy, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
6. Shri Krishna Kumar, Additional Legal Advisor 
7. Shri P. K. Malhotra, Assistant Legal Advisor 
8. Shri G. D. Chotmurada, Under Secretary 
9. Mrs. Neelam S. Kumar, Controller of Accounts. 
2. The Committee took up further consideration of the Detailed Demands for Grants 
(1996-97) of the Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs) and heard the Secretary of the Department on the subject. Before making his 
23 

24 
presentation and replying to certain points/queries raised by the members in the meeting of 
the Committee held on August 8, 1996, the Secretary expressed his regrets for not being 
present before the Committee on August 20, 1996 and tendered his sincere apologies 
therefor. He clarified that he always held the Committee in high esteem and it was never his 
intention to disregard its authority. Thereafter, he made a brief presentation on the mandate 
of his Department and submitted that in view of the anxiety expressed by the members 
earlier for working out some solution to the problem of heavy pendency of cases in Courts, 
the Department had taken some initiatives and a mechanism of alternate dispute resolution 
was being evolved and the institution of Lok Adalats was being strengthened with increased 
financial provision therefore. The Members sought clarifications from him on various points, 
particularly on how the Department proposed to improve existing legislation in this regard. 
He was directed to send written comments on some other points/issues. A verbatim record 
of the proceeding was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 
the 27th August, 1996. 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A .M. on Monday, the 27th August, 1996, in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal _ _ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
4. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
5. Sl1ri Sushil Chandra Verma 
6. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Iswar Dayal Swamy 
9. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
10. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
11. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
12. Shri M.O.H . Farooq 
13. Shri Idris Ali 
14. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
15. Dr. Jayanta R~~gpi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
.Shrimati Jaswant Kaur , Director 
·shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft 32nd, 33rd and . 34th Reports on 
the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries of Home Affairs; Perso.nnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions and Law, Justice and Company Affairs and after some discussion 
decided to amend para 12 of the 32nd Report and make some additions in the 34th Report 
as per the discussions on the subject. The Committee then decided to take up the three 
Reports again for its consideration and adoption at its next meeting on August- 29, 1996. 
25 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 1.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 29th August, 1996, in Committee 
Room 'B' , Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma 
7. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
8. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
9. Shri Vijay Goel 
10. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
11. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
12. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
13. Shri ldris Ali 
14. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
15. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up further consideration of its draft Thirty-second, Thirty-third 
and Thirty-fourth Reports on the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries of Home 
Affairs; Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and Law, Justice and Company Affairs . 
3. • • • 
4. • • • 
5. • • • 
6. • • • 
•••Relate to other matters. 
26 

27 
Thirty-fourth Report 
7. After some discussion, the Committee decided to delete last sentence of para 42 of 
the Report. The Report was, thereafter adopted, as amended. 
8. The Committee decided to present/lay all these three Reports in the Rajya Sabha/ 
Lok Sabha on ·the 30th August , 1996 and authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri 
Pranab Mukherjee lo present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri M.O.H . Farooq and 
in his absence Shri Satya Pal Jain to lay them on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
9. The Committee also decided that three copies of the evidence tendered before it in 
connection with the consideration of Demands for Grants of the aforesaid Ministries be kept 
in the Library for reference purposes. 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 2.42 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on the 23rd 
September, 1996. 