PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
C.S. (H.4)-75 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1998-99) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
HOME AFFAIRS 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON THE 13TH JULY, 1998) 
(LAID IN LOK SABHA ON THE 13TH JULY, 1998) 
22Sl/RS / F- l·A 
RAJY N SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 19981 ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. CowPOSmoN OF THE CoMMrra ·ee 
2. IN'rRODUCTION 
3. REPORT 
4. ANMEXURE 
s. ReLEVANT MJNtn'ES OF TH8 MEimNGS OF THE eo .. ,.,... 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-29 
. 
31 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMIITEE 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
7. Shri Praf11U Goradia 
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
11. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
13. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan 
14. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
•1s. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
18. S~ri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
19, Shri Vijay Goel · 
20. Sl)ri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
21. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
22. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
24. Maj .. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
25. Snri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shrimati Meira Kumar 
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
2~. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
30. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
31. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
32. Shri Motilal · Vora 
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
34. Shri Sudhir Giri 
35·. Shri Samar Choudhury ' 
•Nomin.,tcd with- effect from 11th June , 1998. 
22Sl/RS/F-2·A {i) 

36. Shri Mohan Singh 
37. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
38. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
39.. Shri Lalu Prasad . 
40. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
41. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
42. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi 
43. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
44. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
*45. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
(ii) 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mathesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
•Nominated with effect from 26th June, 1998. 
. 22Sl/RS/F-2·B · 

INTRODUCfiON 
I, the O.airman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee . on 
Home Affain having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, 
do hereby present this Forty-third Report on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) relating to 
the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
2. The Committee held in all five sittings to complete the examination of the Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry. In its meetings held on the 22nd June, 1998 the Committee 
considered the relevant documents and papers received from the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and heard the Secretary of the Ministry. In its meeting held on 23rd June, 1998 the 
Committee heard DirC?ctors-General of ITBP, BSF and CRPF on the Demands relating to 
their respective forces. The Committee again heard the Secretary in its meeting held on the 
25th June, 1998. In its meeting held on the 30th June, 1998 the Committee heard the 
Commissioner of Police, Delhi, on Demands relating to Delhi Police. 
3. The Committee while makir.g its observations/recommendations ·has mainly relied 
upon the following : 
(i) Presentations made and c:larifications given by the Secretary and other senior 
representatives of the Ministry and Directors-General of lTBP, BSF and CRPF; 
(ii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 1998-99; 
(iii) Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 1997-98; 
(iv) Performance Budaet of the Ministry for the year 1998-99; 
(v) Detailed Explanatory Note on the Demands for Grants for the year 1998-99; 
(vi) Statement showing approved outlays . for and the expenditure incurred on Plan 
Schemes of the Ministry during the Eighth Plan period (1992-97); 
(vii) Written replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaires sent to it by the 
Secretariat; 
(viii) Written clarifications furnished by the Ministry on points I issues raised ~y the 
Members in the meetings of the Committee; and 
(ix) Action Taken Note on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Thirty-seventh Report on the Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted this Report in its sitting held on the 9th July; 
1998. 
NEW DELHI; 
July 9, 1998 
(iii) 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE, 
Chtlimutn, 
Committe-e on Horrw A/f~in. 

.. 
~ · 
REPORT 
The Ministry of Home Affairs has been entrusted broadly witti the following functions: 
(a) To deal with all matters relating to intermtl security; 
(b) To deal with all matters relating to Centre -State relations and lntea ·State 
relations; 
(c) implementation of the provisions of the Constitution relating to Official Language 
and the provisions of the Official Langut~ge Act. 1%3; 
(d) To discharge certain basic functions like notification of assumption of office by 
the President and the Vice-President ; notification of appointment of the Prime 
Minister and other Ministers: notification of appointment, resignation and removal of 
Govern ors and Lt. Governors, appointment of Lt. Governors, Chief Commissioners 
and Administrative Officers in Union Territories; 
(e) To deal with matters· ti~~ ~it'iie)lship and natura,isation, census of population, 
National Anthem, National · .F,tag, etc.; and · 
~ ~ .t . 
(f) To deal with all constitutional provisiof!s with respect to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir and all other matters relating to the State of Jammu and Kashmir excluding 
those with which the Ministry of External Affairs is concerned. 
2. To discharge the above functions, the Ministry has been divided into five 
Departmenh:-
(i) D•pGTtm•nt of Internal Security-to deal with Police, Law and Otder and rehabilita­
tion; 
(ii) lhpartm•nt of State6-to deal with Centre-St:tte relations, inter-State relations, 
Unio n Territories and Freedom Fighters' Pension; 
(iii) Departmer~t of OfficiallAngunre--to deal with the implementation of the provisions 
of Constitution relating to Official Langu:.tge 'and provisions of the Official Language 
Act, 1963; .. . 
(iv) D~pt~rlment of Home-to deal with notification oC as.~umption of office by the 
President and Vice-President, notification of appointment of the Prime Minister and 
other Ministers, etc .; and ~ · · 
(v) D~partment of Jammu and Kaslrnrir A.ffain-to deal with aU constitutional provisions 
with respect to the State of Jammu an~ K~hmir and ull other matters relating to the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir excluding those with which the Ministry of External 
Affairs is concerned. 
' 
3. On behalf of the Ministry, ten Demands have been presented to Parii·ament . 
4. In Vol. I of tbe Demands for Grants, there are five Demands na.mely. (i) Demand 
No. 43-Ministry of Home Affairs; (ii) Demand No. 44--Cabinet; (iii) Demand No. 
45-Police; (iv) Demand No. 46-0ther Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs; and 
(v) Demand No. 47-Transfers to Union Territory Governments . 
S. Vol. II of the Demands for Grants relates to Union Territories (without Lqislature), 
namely, Demand No. 99-Andaman and Nicobar Islands; Demand No.-100 Chandisam; 
Demand No.-101 Dadra and Nagar Haveli; Demand No.-1<)2 Daman and Diu and 
1 
2251/M/F-l·A 

2 
Demand No:-103 Lakshadweep. The entire Budget of the Union Territories (without 
Legislature) on the Plan as well as Non-Plan side is reflected in the Demands for Grants of 
the. Ministry of Home Affairs. 
6. A Table indicating the Actuals for 1996-97, B.E. 1997-98, R.E. 1997-98 and B.E. 
1998-99 in respect of various Demands of the Ministry is given below:-
(Rs. in crores) 
Demand Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E. 
No. 1996-97 1997-98 1997-98 1998-99 
43. Ministry of Home Affairs 307.07 333.94 . 408.15 453.11 
44. Cabinet 84.89 127.53 124.29 140.84 
45. Police 4500.40 4524.39 5688.50 5974.90 
46. Other Exp. of Ministry of Home Affairs 589.39 539.95 720.19 949.70 
47. Transfers to U.T. Governments 589.25 509.65 626.58 667.71 
99. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 506.28 557.44 607.68 677.62 
100. Chandigarh 468.93 463.30 606.58 616.32 
101. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 105.03 1~7.61 142.12 170.66 
102. Daman & Diu 90.13 102.28 122.12 143.32 
103. Lakshadweep 132.14 144.63 146.06 158.85 
TOTAL 7373.51 7440.72 9192.27 9953.03 
DEMAND NO. 43-MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
7. This Demand mainly includes expenditure relating to the Secretariat Registrar 
Genfral of India (Census), Official Language , Intelligence Bureau, Civil Defence, Home 
Guards and Payment to State Governments for administration of Central Acts and 
Regulations, etc. 
Budget 
(Rs. in crores) 
Actuals B.E. R.E. D.E. 
10';~97 1997-98 1997-98 1998-99 
307.07 333.94 408.15 453.11 
Reasons for variation in D.E. and R.E. 1997-98 
(a) Additional expenditure due to implementation of recommendations of the Fifth 
Central Pay Commission. 
(b) Meeting the operational requirements of IB; 
(c) Reimbursement of claim relating to 1991 census received from U.P. Government! 
and 
(d) Meeting requirements under other schemeS'j:)rogrammes. 
2251/RS/F-3-B 

3 
DEMAND NO. 44-CABINET 
8. This Demand includes .budget provisions for-
(i) Salaries of Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers; 
(ii) Expenditure on travel by Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy 
Ministers; 
(iii) Sumptuary and other allowances of Ministers; 
(iv) Expenditure on salaries, travel, office expenses of Cabinet Secretariat; 
(v) Expenditure on salaries, travel, office expenses etc. of Prime Minister's Office; 
(vi) Expenditure on Secretariat establishment of the Department of J & K; 
(vii) Expenditure on Special Prolection Group; 
(viii) Expenditure on Government hospitality and entertainment of foreign State 
guests; official entertainment arranged at Rashtrapati Bhawan on behalf of the Vice­
President and Prime Minister; reception of Ntltional Days, investiture and presenta­
tion of credential ceremonies etc.; and 
(ix) Expenditure on Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 
Budget 
Actuals 
1996-97 
84.89 
B.E. 
1997-98 
127.53 
R.E. 
1997-98 
124.29 
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1997-98 
B.E. 
1998-99 
140.84 
Less Expenditure under capital works of Special Protection Group. 
DEMAND NO. 45-POLICE 
(Rs. in crores) 
/ 
9. This Demand relates to expenditure on CRPF, NSG, BSF, ITBP, CISF, Assam 
Rifles, .Education, Training and Research, Criminal Investigation and Vigilance, Inter.,State 
Police Wireless Scheme, Special Police, Modernisation of Police Force, Crime, Criminal 
~formation System, Delhi Police, Construction of Residential Accommodation and Office 
Buildings for Police, Indo-Bangladesh and lndo-Pak Border works, etc. 
Budget 
Actuals 
1996-97 
4500.40 
B.E. 
1997-98 
4524.39 
R.E. 
.1997-98 
5688.50 
B.E. 
1998-99 
5974.90 
(Rs. in croru) 

4 
Reasons foe ~..a.uoa in B.E. and R.E . 1997-98 
(a) Additional Expenditure due to implementation of recommendations of the Fifth 
Central Pay Commission; 
• 
(b) Pr~rement of machinery & equipment for operational requirement of CPOs; 
(c) Additional expenditure on POL due to increase in their price; 
(d) Additional expenditure for increase in movement of para-military forces due to 
elections and revision in rates of their ration money; 
(e) Additional expenditure on implementation of Plan Schemes for creating awareness 
about road safety and tr.tffic regulations and strengthen ing of Ro01d Safety Cell; 
(f) Additional expendi ture on reimbursement of security -related expenditures to 
.. Governments of Assam and J<lmmu and Kashmir ;. and 
(g) Additional expenditu re on assistance to North-Eastern States and Andhra Pradesh 
for modernisation of their police forces. 
DEMAND NO. 46--0THER EXPENDITURE OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
10. This Demand includes expenditure relating to various relief and rehabilitation 
schemes/programmes, pensions ~md other benefits to freed<>.m fighters, development or 
North-Eastern region, modernisation of prison administration, subsidy for Helicopter 
services in North-Eastern region, Debt Relief Scheme for borrowers in J & K, etc. 
Budget . 
Actuals 
1996-97 
S89.39 
B.E. 
1997-98 
539.95 
R.E . 
1997-98 
120.19 
R~ for YM'iatioa in B.E . and: R.E. 1997-91 
B.E. 
1998-99 
949.70 
( Rs. in crom) 
(a) Implementation of Debt · Relief Scheme for the borrowers of J eft K; 
{b) Additional requirement of funds for Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Schemes 
due to revision in the rates o( pension and linking ·Of pension with price :index; .and 
(c) Provision of more funds for the North-Easterit ;;Coundl. 
DEMAND NO. 47-TRANS.FERS TO UNION TERRITORY GOVERNMENTS 
11. This Demand . ~overs assistance provided to Union Territories (with Legislature) ia 
the form of Grants and Loans. There are two such Union Territories, namely, Pondicherry 
and Ncr of Delhi. · 

. .. 
5 
Budget 
(Rs. in cr~res) 
Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E. 
1996-97 1997-98 1997-98 1998-99 
589.25 509.65 626.58 667.11 
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1997·98 
(a) Additional provision for assistance to the UT of Pondicherry and Ncr of Delhi for 
implementation of Basic Minimum Services and Slum Development Programmes; 
(b) Additional expenditure due to implementation of the recommendations of Fifth 
Central Pay Commission by UT of Pondicherry. 
(c) Repayment of loan to the Government of India by UT of Pondichcrry (Rs. 3.06 
crore). 
DEMAND NUMBERS 99, 100, 101, 102 AND 103 UNION TERRITORIES (WITHOUT 
LEG ISLA TVRE) 
Budget 
Actuals 
1996-97 
1302.51 
B.E. 
1997-98 
1405.26 
R.E. 
1997-98 
1624.56 
B.E. 
1998-99 
t766.n 
(lb. in crorn) . 
12. Demand Nos. 99, 100, 101, 102 and 103 which ure given in Volume-11 of the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs, relate to Union Tenitories (without 
Legishiture), namely Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Ch<tndigurh, Dadra & Naaar Haveli. 
Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep respectively . The ent ire budget of the Union Territories 
(without Legislature) on the Plan as well as Non-Plan si<.lc is retlected in the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry . Though the budget of thes e Union Territories fonns part of the 
Ministry of Home Afrairs, being the nodal Ministry, it, however, doe5 not dilute the 
responsibilities of the Ministries of the Central Government for scrutinising and Mnctioning 
the schemes under their purview . The factual position regarding budgetary procedure in this 
regard is that the entire ·budget requirement for Plan and Non-Plan, revised estimates for 
current year and Non-Plun budget estimates for the ensuing year is discussed by the Ministry 
of Finance in the pre-bu dget meetings with the representatives of the concerned Union 
Territories and Ministr y of Home Affairs. An oven11l ceiling is fixed in respect of ·each 
Union Territory . Annual Plan allocations for the ensuing year are decided by the Plannina 
Commission. The Union Territory Administrations, prepare budgetary break-up showina 
budget provisions aa:ordina to their respective budgetary he<ads and also showin& the 
allocation against Ministries I Departments of the Central Government administratively 
concerned. This budgetary break-up is included in the Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs . 
2251 IRS/ F---4-A 

6 
INTERNAL SECURITY-AN OVERVIEW 
13. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs made a detailed presentution before the 
Committee on June 22, 1998 in the course of which he explained the broad thrust of the 
Demands relating to his Ministry. A major portion of his presentation was devoted to the 
internal security scenario, left wing extremism, insurgency , ethnic conflicts in the North · 
East, communal violence, caste clashes and other extremisvterrorist activities in the country. 
The Home Secretary apprised the Committee that out of the 535 districts in the country, 210 
districts are affected by one crisis or the other. Out of the 14 districts in Jammu and 
Kashmir, 10 are affected by militancy. Out of 69 districts in the North-Eastern region, as 
many as 48 are affected by insurgency or ethnic violence. The situation in Assam is worse 
because 23 of its districts are badly affected by violer.ce, the Home Secretary stated. He 
further stated that in Jammu and Kashmir during the period 1990-1998. Indian Security 
Forces arrested 4397 Pak trained militants and intercepted 711 gangs of Pak trained militants 
from the border. The Security Forces killed 1501 terrorists and arrested 1031. Besides, 2820 
militants of various outfits , including 1003 Pak trained , surr endered to the authorities, the 
Home Secretary informed the Committee. He went on to apprise the Committee that 
Pakistan has shifted its focus towards Nepal which is a porous border. lSI agents in 
Kathnwndu and Dhaka have been imparting training to youth in border areas, particularly 
on Indo-Nepal border and the interceptions have revealed that not only funds flow from that 
route, but unwanted el~ments also are intruding through that route. In the North-East, while 
the situation in Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and Mcghalaya is comparatively peaceful as 
compared to other States, the situation in Assam is pretty bad. The situation in Nagaland is 
somewhat uneasy, the Home Secretary briefed the Committee. According to the Home 
Secretary, Jaw and order situation in Tripura is a matter of deep concern and if a good offer 
is made to the Tribal leadership in Tripura, the situation could improve. With regard to 
Manipur, the Home Secretary mentioned about the unrest in the State due to the extremist/ 
insurgent activities of the Naga, Kuki and Meitei outfits particularly the Nagas and Kukis. 
14. The Home Secretary went on to inform the Committee that the situation in Punjab 
has considerably improved. As per his submissions before the Committee, the overall law 
and order situation in Bihar is characterised by increasing crime growth and increasing 
activity of organised criminal groups as also left-wing extremists. The Home Secret ary 
further stated that the situation in Uttar Pradesh is marked by Communal incidents. ln 
Tamil Nadu, three factors have adversely affected the internal security situation . These are 
the intluence of the LTTE, growth of~ Muslim fundamental organisations and caste clashes. 
The Secretary made a reference to the series of bomb blasts in Delhi and apprised the 
Committee of reports of intensification of movement of anti-social elem e nts in Delhi. 
15. The Committee devoted considerable time in discussing the internal security situation, 
the problem of insurgency, left wing extremism especially naxalitc activities, ethnic clashes, 
the operation of private senas, etc. In this context the Committee noted that the States have 
been demanding the assistance of CPMFs from the Centre to deal with internal disturbances. 
The Committee noted that the supply of CJ>MFs to the States has not been commensurate 
with the demands of the States. The Committee also noted that a fresh look on BSF 
deployment is necessary. The existing BSF deployment has left large gaps, as a result of which 
the movement of extremists across the border is taking place very easily. This movement is 
not specific to any State but is regional in character. Unless additional BSF posts are created 
and deployment is increased, the border will remain porous particularly in the North-Eastern 
region as a result of which it will be difficult to contain the activities of the extremists. 
16. Article 355 of the Constitution enjoins upop the Centre to protect every State 
2251/RS/F-4-B 

7 
against external aggression or internal distu rbance . The Article stutes: "It shall be the duty 
of the Union to protect every State ugainst externa l agg ress ion and internal dist urbance and 
oo ensure that the Government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions 
of the Constitution ." The Committee feels if Central assistance could not be provided due to -... 
inadequacy of the forces, then the Centre shou ld raise more fo rces on urgent basis so that 
the requ irem ents o f the States may be adequately met. In this regard, the Ministry should 
formul ate their additional budgetary requirements and present them for approval. The 
Ministry should also ensu re that the existing vacancies in different CPMFs including the 
backlog vacancies of SCs!STs/013Cs should be filled in a time boun d manner . 
17. The Committee in this regard also takes note that a proposal for a special schem~ for 
modernisation of the Police Forces of insurgency affiicted States of the North-Eastern region is 
under active consideration of the Government and the Ministry is currently running this 
scheme on an adhoc basis out of the savings from the budget ullocated to it. The Committee 
strongly recommends that while there is a general necessity to substantially enhance the level 
of allocation under the ongoing scheme of modernisation of police forces, a similar proposal 
should also come from the Ministry for the States affected by the menace of a naxalism, left-
··• wing extremism etc. with a view to equipping their police forces · with latest arms and 
ammunitions, vehicles and sophisticated gadgets. 
18. The Committee also notes from the evidence tcnrkred before it by the Home 
Secretary that in recent times Pak has shifted its focus towurd s Indo-Nepal border and that 
I.S.I. agents in Kathmandu and Dhaka are imparting training to youth in border areas, 
particularly on Indo -Nepal border. It also notes that not only fund s flow through this.route 
but also unwanted elements are intruding through this route. The Committee takes a serious 
view of the situation in our neighbourhood. The Committee strongly urges upon the 
Government to take up the issue with Governments of Nepal and Bangladesh so that the 
ongoing I.S.I. activities could be curbed. The Committee also recommends that patrolling on 
borders with these countries may also be intensified . 
19. To deal with the terrorist/insurgency situation in various parts of the country, the 
Committee feels that there is a greater need for co-ordination amongst va~ious security and 
intelligence agencies at the Central Government level and their co-ordination with agencies of 
the State Governments. It is also required that all States suffering from terrorist/insurgency/ 
left-wing extremism activities should have a joint command under the control of Civil 
Administration with participation of security agencies of the Central Government as well as 
the State Governments. There is also a necessity for construction of roads and upgrading the 
communication facilities in the extremist affected and extremist prone areas . It has also been 
brought to the notice of the Committee that there is a lack of co-ordination between the Coast 
Guard and BSF in the border areas of Gujarat. The Committee therefore, recommends to the 
Government to examine these issues and apprise it of the outcome thereof. 
SWA TANTRA TA SAINIK SAMMAN PENSION SCHEME 
20. The Freedom Fighters' Pension Scheme has been in operation since 15th : August, 
1972, when it was introduced on the occas ion of the Silve r Ju bilee of our Ind epen dence. The 
scheme prov ides for grant of pension to those who had suffered at least six months of 
imprisonment/detention/externmentlinternment/abscondencc etc. while participating in the 
national freedom struggle. The amount of Samman Pension has been increased from time to 
time. During the Fiftieth year of Ind epe ndence, this <~mount of pension has been enhanced 
substantially w.e.f. t5th August, 1997. The revised pension in case of (i) Ex-Andaman 
Political Prisoners is Rs. 4,()()(V-, (ii) Andaman Freedom fighters' is Rs. 3,500/- and 

8 
(iii) other Freedom Fighters· i4l Rs. 3.0001-. The amount of pension has also now been linked 
to the Price Index. 
21. During consideration of the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry, the 
Committee brought to the notice of the Secretary in its sitting held on 12th August, 1996, 
issues like delay in process ing the cases for grant of Samman Pension to genuine freedom 
fighters and their widows, alleged bribes to expedite sanction of pension and rejectio n by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs of a number of cases forwarded by State Governments with 
favourable reco mmendations. In reply to this, the Secretary of the Ministry submitted that 
claims for grant of freedom fighters pension were processed strictly in accordance with the 
procedure laid down - in the Swatan trata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980 and the 
policy guide lines issued thereunder from time to time . The upplicunts were neve~ required to 
pay anything to get their work done and if any complaint is received against the staff 
memben, it was examined thoroughly and appropriate uction wu taken against the 
concerned person, if found guilty. The Secretary further stated that many cases received 
from State Governments were rejected by the Ministry because they lack. the ne~~sary 
supporting documents and expressed his readiness to set up a Committee of non-officials to 
review as a one time measure, all the cases, which had bee n rejected by the Ministry for 
want of supporting documents. 
22. The Committee in its 32nd Report had apprec iated the proposal of the Secretary of 
the Minist ry and hoped that the outcome of the review will be placed before the Committee. 
23. The Committee through its question naire wanted to know further information in the 
matter and outcome of the review made by the Committee of non-offteials. The Ministry in 
its ~eply has submitted that a Non-official Advisory Com mittee known as the Special Audit 
Team (SAT) was constituted by the Government on October 28, 1996, under the 
Chairmanship of the Joint Secretary (FFR) and it had started functioning frorn Decemt>er, 
1996. The SAT has not yet concluded its exercise. 
24. The Ministry has further informed that the SAT has so far reviewed about 2000 
cases and has expressed its disagreement in about 800 cases. The process for grant of 
pension has been started and so far pension has been sanctioned in 618 cases after 
completion of necessary formalities like obtaining identification documents from the 
applicants . Res\ of the cases are under process/re view. 
2S, The Committee is shocked at tht outcome of tbe exercbe undertaken by the Special 
AIICiit Team. It notes that the Team has expressed its disagreements with the earUer decision 
oltlle MiiJistry rejecting grant of Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pensio n, in as many as 40% of 
lite caMS. reviewed which is quite large. The Committ ee strongly disapprov es this state of 
llfralrs Ia handling of the cases under the scheme which only substantiates the various c:barges 
lavelled acainst the Ministry in processing of pension cases. Tbe Committee nota that the 
ldMtae was started on the occasion of Silver Jubilee of our Independence 1n ttll as a token 
t1 .,.Utude on behalf of tbe posterity to the freedom fighters who strugled with the Britisb 
latpin and made innumerable sacrifices in making India free. Tbe Committee feels that the 
•mber of freedom fighters is not very large and not all of them apply for pension under tbe 
ldaeaM. Therefore, if cases of cenuine freedom fighters get rejected by the Ministry then it is 
raiJ a sad state of affairs and a matter of shock and pief for tiM freedom fi&bters. The 
nsalts of die review made by SAT also puts a questiOD mark OD tbe ppulneness of 
pelllktaen' cases clearecl earlier by the Ministry and tbe Commif,tee demands a thorouab 
......., bilo the whole affair. The Committee stro ngly rec::onaaaeacll that accountability ill the 
... ter .. , be lkecl ancl penal action against penons held cailly be .. ken. Tbe Committee 

9 
reiterates its recommendation made in the 32nd Report that personnel with proven integrity 
and excellent record and behaviour be entrusted with the tasl< of dealing with the cases of the 
Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension with utmost care, caution swiftness, sympathy and 
respect. 
26. The Committee discussed the subject of Freedom Fighters' Pension at length and 
expressed its strong reservations with regard to the procedure for disposal of the requests 
forwarded by the State Governments, the delays that take place in the processing of the cases 
and humiliation and harassment being faced by many Freedom Fighters in the process. In this 
context the Committee would like to be informed about the procedure and policy guidelines 
relating . to the Pension Scheme; whether the State Governments are fully apprised of the 
manner in which the cases are to be forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs; whether 
there is a regular interface between the Ministry and the State Governments in the matter. 
The Committee would also like to be informed of the details of action taken on the complaints 
received again ct the staff members in the Ministry and the types of punishment awarded to 
the delinquent officials. The Committee would further like to know the latest figures of 
pending cases of Freedom Fighters - State-wise. 
27. Several Members raised the point regarding grant of pension to Goa Freedom 
Fighters. The Committee understands that the persons who took part in the freedom struggle 
of Goa and fulfil the criteria for grant of Samman Pension are being granted this Pension . 
28. In view of the strong sentiments expressed by the Members, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should clear all the pending cases of Freedom Fighters' Pension 
by the next Republic Day as it would be a befitting acknowledgement of the sacrifices made 
by them in our liberation struggle. The Committee desires that it may be apprised of the 
action taken/proposed to be taken on each of the items mentioned in the preceding 
paragraphs from time to time and the first such action taken note may be furnished within 30 
days. 
DELHI POLICE 
29. During consideration of the Demands for Grants (1997-~8) of the Ministry, it was 
submitted to the Committee that in order to manage the 1450 beats in the Capital round-the­
clock to keep a tab on criminals, 4350 Head Constables against the existing strength of 1180 
and 8700 Constables against the present complement of 2472, were required. The Committee 
in its 37th Report had recommended that constraints of manpower should not be allowed to 
hamper the task of preserving law & order in the Capital and the requirement of additional 
manpower be considered favourably. 
30. The Ministry has informed that in order to strengthen and augment the available 
police force in Delhi, a proposal to establish in the first phase 17 police stations involving 
creation of 3100 posts in various categories is under active consideration including 1125 posts 
of Head Constables/Constables for manning the beats under the proposed Police Stations. 
31. In reply to a point raised in the meeting of the Committee held on June 30, 1998 the 
Delhi Police has replied that as per criteria fixed by the S.D. Srivastava Committee which 
was set up to assess the resource requirement of Delhi Police, there is a need of 59 new 
police stations in Delhi. Many new localities like Rohini, Dwarka etc. do not have adequate 
police presence. Due to shortage of manpower, police personnel are forced to work for 
more than 12 hours a day without a weekly off. This has :.~fleeted the quality of performance 
of police personnel and resulted in distortion in their behavioural pattern. 
32. The Committee notes that the present strength of pc•·sonnel in Delhi Police is not 
2251/RS/F-5-A 

10 
adequate to cater to the need of effectively and efficiently managing the law and order and 
security duties in the Capital. It notes that there is a proposal for creation of 17 new Police 
Stations in Delhi but keeping in view the actual requirement of 59 police stations it is a far 
from satisfactory proposition. The Committee notes with concern that due to shortage of 
manpower some new localities do not have adequate police presence and due to this shortage 
police personnel are required to work more than 12 hours a day without getting a weekly orr 
and this bas cast an adverse effect on their overall performance. Th~ Committee feels that Jaw 
and order and internal ~ecurity are very delicate matters and no compromise on· these issues 
are desirable at any cost. 
33. The Commis sioner of Police, Delhi in his deposition before the Committee on 
30.6.1998, stated that the Delhi Police is a 53,000 strong force. Out of this 11,000 are 
auxiliary services like wireless operators, ministerial cadre, class IV and the remaining 43,000 
are executive policemen. Delhi have nine police distri cts, 36 sub-div isions and 106 police 
stations. After the riots in 1984, there was a review of the strength of the Delhi Police and 
37 new police stat ions were added to the then existing strength bringing the total to 100. 
Though the police stations strength had been increa sed, the sanction was actually given in 
1987 on the basis of the data submitted in. 1985. And since 1987 till date no increase has 
taken place. The Commissioner of Police further stated that in 1985, population of Delhi 
was around 80 lacs. Now, <,tccording to ration card figures, it has risen to 1.63 crores and 
according to census figures it is 1.30 crores. This does not take into account the floating 
population. Delhi has three important railway stations, one domestic and an international 
airport and a number of inter-state bus terminals. On an average, more than three to four 
lac passengers either come to Delhi or they go out from Delhi. Besides this, a number of 
people are coming from adjoining areas in search of jobs. Out of all four metropolitan cities, 
Delhi has the highest slum population. According to official figures, 40% people are living in 
slums. Delhi Police is entrusted with the task of maintaining Jaw and orde r with limited 
resources in the fastest growing metropolis which has a large share of young people prone to 
commission of crime. Delhi is the only city where there is Parliament House, State 
. Legislature, Chief Minister, President, Supreme Court, High Court, diplomatic zones, 
movement of VVIPs. • 
34. The Committee reviewed the subject at length in the background of the scenar !o 
drawn above. It is of the considered view that there is an imperative need to augment in fuU 
the strength of Delhi Police personnel as per the current requirements . Accordingly, . it 
recommends to the Ministry to take a ho)istic view and initiate immediate action for rais ing 
the strength of the Delhi Police lest the situation in the National Capital may- not go out of 
control. 
35. Delhi being the National Capital City it houses VVlPs such as President. Vice 
Pres ident , Prime Mini ster, Former Prim e Ministers, Chief Justice of India and Judges of the 
Supreme Court and Delhi High Court and the diplomatic missions. The Delhi Police is thus 
called upon to perform V.V.I.P. and V.l.P. securit y duties including movement of the Prime 
Minister, protection of visiting forei gn dignitarie s, diploma tic corps, National Leaders and 
other important personalities. Any untoward incident s in the National Capital will have a 
chain react ion within the country and outside. In view of the unique position of Delhi a 
special dispensation is needed. There is, therefore , an urgent nee d to not only raise the 
strength of Delhi Police personnel to the desired level but also to equ ip them suitably with 
latest equipments, arms and ammunitions to effectively deal with all types of situations 
36. The Ministry had also submitted that though,. the number of vehicles in Delhi 
outnumber the vehicles in the three other major metros taken together' yet the number of 
2251/RS/F-S.B 

• 
11 
traffic policemen to handle this mammoth number is less than in any of them. Keeping this in 
:view the Committee in its 37th Report on the Demands for Grants (1997-98) observed that the 
problem of managing tramc on Delhi roads is quite a serious one requiring a gigantic effort 
and the requirements of manpower to augment the fleet of traffic police be seriously examined ' 
to ensure that earnest effort in this direction are not hampered on account of shot:tage of · 
manpower. 
37. In clarification to a point whether there is any proposal to raise the strength of 
Delhi traffic police personnel to suitably manage the vehicular traffic on Delhi roads, the 
Ministry has stated that there is at present no propo sal under consideration of Government 
to augment the strength of its Traffic Police Wing . The strength of this Wing was last 
augmented in May, 1996 by creation of 1102 posts in. various categori es. 
38. The Commissioner of Police, Delhi, however, in his presenta tion before the 
Commi ttee on June 30, 1998, mentioned that the posts created in 1996 for traffic police were 
based on the requirement submitted to the Government in the year 1988. The proposal for 
creation of posts, therefore, got sanction of the Government after eight years and .bY the 
time it came, it had become inadequate. 1 he Commissioner added that in order to bridge 
this gap, Delhi Police is taking the services of 1596 Home Guards. These Home Guards 
have been imparted training in basic manual traffic drill and are also receiving on-the-job 
training. Though, they have been able to pick up to some extent, but they are not as good 
as police constables. 
39. The Committee understands that the task of managing traffic on Delhi roads is truly 
herculean. The Committee, however, does not understand why the strength of traffic police is 
not maintained upto the required level. The Committee notes with concern the bureaucratic 
delay h1 sanctioning of the proposals for creation of posts. It feels that in view of the volume 
of traffic and different modes of vehicles, it is, therefore, not wise to manage it through Home 
Guards who are not qualified to regulate the traffic in an efficient manner. The Committee 
expresses its dissatisfaction with this kind of adhoc arrangements and feels that there is a need 
to look into the matter seriously . The Committee recommends the Government to undertake 
an exercise to assess the requirement of mlditionnl manpower for traffic police as on date and 
take action for creation of posts accordingly. This should be completed within a period of 
three months. The Committee furOter notes that the casually rate in road accidents in Delhi 
as illustrated in the Table (Annexure) is very high and thousands of persons die every year in 
such a~cidents. In many cases accident victims die due to non-availability of immediate 
medical first aid. The Committee feels that if a rudimentary knowledge of first aid is made 
mandatory for acquiring driving licences then in the event of road accidents the driver/owner 
of the vehicle can render valuable aid, to the victim and many lives can be save~. The 
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry to take necessary action in the matter and 
make knowledge of medical first aid compulsory for all persons holding driving licenses. The 
Committee also feels that if police personnel possess medical first aid knowledge then in the 
case of accidents, they can also render valuable service to the victim. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that emergency first aid should be an integral part of the training 
courses of police personnel. The NGOs and the Automobiles Associations should also be 
involved in the exercise. 
40. In response to a query the Ministry has submitted that Delhi Police had launched on 
1st January, 1996 a scheme called the 'Crime Watch Scheme' under which any person 
without disclosing his I her identity, can inform the police about any crime or criminal. A 

12 
special desk in the Police Control Room has .been set up for the purpose and is being 
manned round the clock. The Ministry has furnished details of calls received under the 
scheme during the years 1996 to 1998 as given below-
1996 1997 1998 (upto 19.6.98) 
360 79 19 
The Ministry has further intimated that the information furnished to the Police under 
the scheme mostly related to gambling, prostitution etc. and did not result into arrest of any 
major criminal or gang. 
41. The Committee appreciates the Crime Watch S<.:hcme launched by Delhi Police and 
feels that it encourages the participation of public in controlling crime in their 
neighbourhood and in also nabbing persons involved in unlawful activities. The Committee, 
however, fails to understand why the response of public has been waning so sharply to this 
scheme. While in 1996 the total calls received were 360. it declined to 19 in the first six 
months of the current year (1998). The Committee urges upon the Government to make an 
analysis of the facts as to where the scheme has gone wrong and why the public response has 
been declining so rapidly. The Committee feels that it is desirable to give adequate publicity 
to this innovative scheme to increase the participation of general public in controlling the 
occurrence of crimes. The Committee also does not understand from the submission made 
before it as to why even in a single case the police could not succeed in apprehending the 
criminal on receiving a call from public under the scheme? It feels that either the 
information given to the police is not accurate or delay takes place for appropriate action. 
An indepth examination in the matter also needs to be done by the Government. 
42. The Committee enquired about the position of residential units made available to 
the Delhi police personnel. The Ministry h~ts intimated that the total sanctioned strength of 
Delhi Police is 52,879 and the gr:td-.:-wise satisfaction level in respect of residential housing 
is-
(i) Type I & 11-21.02°/., 
(ii) Type III-!O.l:WX> 
(iii) Type IY-12.22'Yo and 
(iv) Type V and above- 85.29''l, 
The overall s<,~tisfaction level accordingly is of the order of 19.33%. The Ministry has 
further submitted that out of the allocation of Rs.30. 75 crores made during the current year 
for construction of residential houses for Delhi Police, mound 533 houses of different 
categories are to be constructed. 
43. The Committee notes that the position of availability of residential units for Delhi 
Police personnel is unsatisfactory and the position with regard to Type I to Type-IV is dismal. 
Out of total re'1uirement of about 42,303 quarters of different types, it will be possible to 
construct only 533 dwelling units from the allocation made for the current year. The 
Committee feels it grossly inadequate. The Committee is of the considered opinio n that 
availability of residential houses is an essential ingredient to kc(.'p the morale of any force high 
and keep it totally committed to its assigned role. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the 
Ministry to look into the matter se.·iously and take suitable action by increasing the fund for 
this purpose and ensuring optimum utilisation thereof to increase the satisfaction level in 
respect of residt.•nt]:tl housing in Delhi Police. 

13 
NATIONAL POLICE COl\tl\IISSION 
44. The Committee in its Thirty-second Report while reviewing the law and order 
situation in the country also deliberated on the functioning of police system. It observed that 
"the functioning of Police System in our country leaves much to be desired and periodically 
it has come in for severe criticism from different quarters. To reform this system a National 
Police Commission headed by Dr. Dharma Yira was st:t up long back and the vital 
recommendations which it had made in its report have got bogged down awaiting their 
implementation. The Committee strongly feels that implementation of recommendations of 
this nature needs to be accorded top priority. The Committee does not know what factors 
.are delaying their implementation. It, therefore urges upon the Government to submit a 
status paper to it on the recommendations which have found acceptance and which have not 
and whether the ones which have been accepted could be implemented in a time bound 
manner." 
45. The Ministry in their Action Taken note furnished on the subject has stated that 
'police' being a state subject, it was Primarily for the State Governments to implement the 
recommendations of the National Police Commission. llowever, the Central Government 
have been requesting them to ensure expeditious action on the implementation of these 
recommendation. Responses received from the states indicate that the report have been 
considered by them and action has been taken to implement many of the recommendations. 
46. Recommendations in the National Police Commissions' Reports, which concern the 
Central Government, have been identified. Action has already been taken on the 
recommendations accepted by the Government. Some points, especially those where 
amendments to existing laws are required, are at various stages of implementation. 
47. The Home Minister had reviewed the recommendation of the Commission and the 
action taken thereon. He had also addressed the Chief Minister and the Administrators of 
Union Territories in April, 1997 for expeditious action on some of the vital recommendation 
of the Commission. 
48. A Committee under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs with some of the Directors General of Central Police Organisations as members was 
constituted in April, 1997 .for reviewing implementations of the recommendations of the 
Commission and suggesting further course of action, including steps which can be taken for 
the Union Territories and centrally administered areas. 
49. The Committee is not satisfied with the replies furnished by Government which are 
too general and vague. The Committee is of the opinion that Government should undertake 
the exercise of preparing a list of the recommendations of the National Police Commission 
which have been implemented by the States and Union Territories or are pending with them 
or have not been found possible to be implE-mented. The Committee is also of the view that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs being the nodal Ministry should also co-ordinate with the State 
Governments and Union Territory Administr~tions to ensure time bound implementation of 
these recommendations and to remove difliculties, if any, faced by the State Governments in 
their implementation. 
TRIAL OF PUNJAB POLICE PERSONNEL 
50. A point was raised in the meeting of the Committee on June 22, 1998 about the 
treatment meted out to the police personnel who were engaged in combating terrorism in 
Punjab when militancy was at its peak. Many of such officers arc now facing trial in the 
2251 I RSI F--Q-A 

14 
High Court and Supreme Court and some of them have been lodged in t~e jails as well. 
These officers had fought militancy against heavy odds with valour and bravery. There might 
have been cases where they excee ded their authority. The Committee wanted to know the 
stand taken by the Ministry in this rega rd and whether failure to come to their rescue would 
not only demorali se PunJab Police but also send wrong signals to the police in other States. 
51. The Committee was informed that the difficulties faced by Punjab Police Officials on 
account of filing writ petitions pertaining to the actions taken by them in tackling terrorism 
in the State , has been engag ing the attention of the Government of India and the State 
Gov--:rnment as well. The matter was discussed with lhe representatives of the State 
Government and it was felt that the task of police officers during the days of militancy was 
very tough and was complicated further by non-functioning of courts and the reluctance of 
people in general to give evidence against the terrorists. Though , it was not possible to grant 
a blanket immunity to any category of public servants from prosecution in relation to alleged 
crimes committed during the discharge of their duties, the best help that can be extended to 
these officers is to help them in arranging good legal assista nce. In this respect the 
Committee has been informed that the DGP Punjab has suggested an amendment in Section 
6 of the Punjab Disturbed Areas Act, 1983 to provide for previous sanction of Central 
Government for prosecution, in place of State Government. The Government of Punjab 
have been requested to send all such cases to the Central Government for sanction of 
prosecution relating to the period during which Punjab Disturb ed Areas Act, 1983 was in 
force in the State. Some such cases have bee n sent by the State Government to the Ministry 
of Home Affairs which are being examined by Ministry of Law. Regarding proposal to 
amend Section 197 Cr. P.C. in order to provide protection to all the police officers against 
false and malicious prosecution, it has been intimated by the Government of Punjab that 
they had issued a Notif ication dated May 5, 1983 which provides such protection available 
under Section 197 Cr. P.C. to officers of all ranks of Punja b Police. 
52. The Committee having noted the steps taken by the Ministry and the State 
Government reiterates it recommendation made in the 37th Report that in deservi n~ cases 
best legal aid should be provided to such of those officers as may require. . .. 
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO NORTH-EASTERN STATES FOR MODERNISATION OF 
POLICE FORCES 
53. There is a scheme of the Ministry of Home Affairs for modernisation of police 
forces under which financial assistance is provided to the State Governments in the. form of 
50% gr~nts·in-aid and 50% loan to be utilised for expenditure of non-recu rring nature on 
purchase of vehicles, wireless equipments, computers and other sophisticated equipments. 
This scheme has been in operation since 1969-70. 
54. The Ministry, has submitted that some of the States of the North-Eastern region 
have been facing the · menace of insurgency for quite some time and keep ing tn view their 
inadequate resources and the inadequacy of funds made available through the ongoing 
scheme of modernisation of police forces a separate scheme for modernisation of police 
forces in the North-Eastern region is under active consideration of the Government. 
55. The Minis.,try has informed that the State of police forces in the North-East in terms 
of its weaponry, mobility etc. was extremely poor while the militant groups in the North· 
East are far better equipped with modern weapons like AK-47, Ak-56, modern 
communication equipment etc. The allocations under the existing scheme for modernisatio n 
of police forces was very meagre and ipadequate and during the period 1969-70 to 1995-96 
only Rs.36.5 crores were released to North-Eastern States under the scheme whereas the 
2251/RS/f-6. B 

15 
requirement projected under the Specia l '>Cherne is Rs.370 crores in a five year period. The 
North-Eastern States are also facing financiai problems which has restricted their capacity to 
provide funds for this ~cheme . · 
56. The Ministry has further submitted that the special scheme for modernisation of 
police forces in the North-East was <tpproved in principle. However, in view of the ban on 
new schemes in:l997-98, this could not be sanctioned. The scheme was, however, sanctioned 
during 1997-98 on an adhoe basis provided the Ministry <:ould find savings from within the 
existing .budget. A sum · of Rs.35 crore s was found for this scheme through savings available 
in the Budget for 1997-98. Rs.lO crores have been provided in the BE 1998-99 only as an 
adhoc amount ·to meet the spill over commitment of bullet proofing for the vehicles supplied 
to the States in 1997-98, which could not be completed before the end of that financial year. 
It was, however, ~stimated that the requirement for the year 1998-99 would be Rs.80 cr?res . .. 
57. The scheme provides for 100% grant in kind to the State Governments of the 
North-East . over a five year period. In the first stage, the scheme was limited to four North­
Eastern States which have a serious insurgency situation. The criterion for disbursement of 
fund under this scheme is on the basis of the requirement for the State as projected by the 
BPR&D and the assessment of the State for upgntdation of its police force with respect to 
the · following items: arms and ammumt1on, vehicles including bullet-proofing, 
communication equipment and other equipment. 
58. The Committee agrees with the submissions of the Ministry that police forces of the 
North-Eastern States which are facing the menace of insurgency/secession since long are not 
equipped adequately and the insurgents/militants there have a definite edge over them in 
matters of sophisticated arms, ammunitions and other gadgets. It is also not possible to meet 
the requirement of police fo~ces of these States through the present scheme of modernisation 
of police forces. Keeping in view the strategic location of these States, their resource potentials 
etc., special ·assistance to modernise their police forces is an immediate necessity. The 
Committee, is therefore, of the considered view that it is not appropriate to run the scheme on 
an ad hoc basis from the savings of the Budget allocated for a year, but, there is an urgent 
necessity to operationalise the schemes on a regular basis and make al!ocation therein as per 
the requirement. 
59. The Committee, in view of the unpleasant/un fortunate phase through which 
insurgency amicted States of the North-Eastern region ure passing. through, is of the 
considered opinion that the Union Government should bear, on an ongoing basis, all the 
security related expenditure incurred by these States to counter the menace of insurgency. 
HOUSING FOR CPI\fFs 
60. CPMF personnel have to perform duties in far flung and inhospitable areas. Many 
of them rem<tin constantly moving from one phtce to another away from their families. It is, 
therefore, paramount that suit able level of housing facilities. are extended to them/their 
families so that their month! re mains intact and they do not get peturbed on account of this • 
problem while on duty. This bsue had come up before the Committee on quite a few earlier 
occasions also and the Commi ttee had made several recommendations in the matter as 
contained in its 15th, 32nd and 37 Reports. These recommendations include raising the level 
of allocation for this activity, r<lising the level of authorised satisfaction in case of 
constabulary from the existing 1-t% to 25%. From the information submitted on the matter 
the Committee had noticed that the allocations for constr\lcting dwelling units for CPMFs 
are not getting fully utilised due to infntstructure constraints and thin presence of CPWD 
which is the only agency authorised to construct these quarters. The Committee• in this 

16 
regard had recommended in the said reports to the Ministry to involve agencies other than 
CPWD to fully utilise the amount allocated under this activity. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs has submitted in this regard that it had approached the Ministry of Finance to relax 
GFR 136 to enable itself to engage other agencies also besides CPWD to construct these 
dwelling units, but the Ministry of finance has not given its concurrence in the matter. The 
Ministry has now submitted that it is now seeking relaxation under GFR-136 on case to case 
basis and after obtaining permission from Ministry of Finance, construction of residential 
quarters at Shillong was entrusted to Rashtriya Pariyojana Nirman Nigam Ltd. (RPNNL) 
(formerly NPCC), a Government of India Enterprise, under Ministry of Water Resources 
which has since been completed. Another project for construction at Kaithalmanbi 
(Manipur) has been entrusted to Border Roads Organisation. 
61. The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance has at least 
agreed on a case to case basis for relaxing GFR-136 so that agencies other than CPWD could 
be employed to construct dwelling units for CPI\1Fs as specially in far flung and remote areas 
where these forces have to work under adverse conditions. The Committee, however, 
impresses upon the Ministry to pursue the matter hard with the Ministry of Finance for grant 
of a general relaxation to the Ministry of Home Affairs to allow it to engage agencies other 
then CPWD to construct residential houses for CPl\1Fs. 
INDIA RESERVE BATT ALlONS 
62. The concept of India Reserve Battalions (IR 13ns.) was mooted by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs so as to motivate the State Governments to strengthen their Armed Police 
and reduce their dependence on the CPMFs for normal law and order situation. Under this 
scheme, the State Governments are required to raise Armed Police battalions called "India 
Reserve battalions". The responsibility for raising and maintaining the Bns. rests with the 
Stute Government. Government of India meet initial standard cost of raising of these Bns., 
limited to Rs. 9 crores per Bn., by way of 50% grant and 50°/c, interest free loan to the State 
Governments. 25% of the expenditure is paid to the State Government as advance after 
issue of the sanction and commencement of the recruitment process. The IR bns. become 
part of the State Armed Police. However, the Government of India has a right of first call 
on such Bns. during the first five years of raising. 
63. A statement about number of IR Bns. raised so far and details of pending demands 
from the State Governments is given below: 
State!UT Number of IR 
I3n. Sanctioned 
Proposal being 
processed for 
creation of 
additional 
IR 13n. during 
1998-99 
Pending demands 
which are not 
being considered 
during current 
financial year 
----------'--'--J,~~--------- -·--·-·- -·------ ---
Andhra Pradesh 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Assam 
Bihar 
Himachal Pradesh 
J & K 
Lakshdweep 
4 
2 
4 
1 
2 
1 
2 
2 
1 
3 

I 
17 
State/UT Number of IR Proposal being Pending demands 
Bn. Sanctioned processed for which are not 
creation of being considered 
additional during current 
IR Bn. during financial year 
1998-99 
Madhya Pradesh 2 
Manipur 2 1 
Mtghalaya. 1 
Mizoram 1 1 
Nagaland 1 
Punjab 7 2 
Rajasthan 2 
Sikkim 1 
Tam il Nadu 2 1 
Tripura 2 2 
TOTAL: 32 7 11 
64. The Committee recommend s that Government should continue its endeavour to 
encounge the State Governments in raising India Reserve Battalions for facing the challenges 
on the Jaw and order front. It, therefore, urges upon the Ministry to consider the pending 
demands of the State Governments to raise I.R. Battalions in their States. This will facilitate 
. the State Governments to deploy the force in time to deal with the situation effectively without 
waiting for the arrival of CPMFs. 
ASSAM RIFLES 
65. The Assam Rifles , raised initially as Cachar Levy in 1835, is the oldest Para Military 
force in the country . In the North East, its men are fondly called 'FRIENDS OF HILL 
PEOPLE' .· The Assam Rifles has been performing an auxiliary military role. Since its 
inception. the Force has been and continues to be "the Sentinels of the North East". 
66. The entire Force, except for two companies in Nagaland is deployed under the 
operational control of the Army, primarily for counter-insurgency operations in Nagaland, 
Manipur, Tripura and Tirap Sector of Arunachal Pradesh and for guarding the Line of 
Actual Control (LAC) in Arunachal Pradesh and the borde r in North Sikkim and Indo­
Myanmar border . 
67. Besides, the Force has been helping the villagers in improving their quality of life by 
providing assistance in constructing drinking water supply schemes, schooling facilties for 
their children, and playgrounds as well as providing medical assistance . The Force has also 
assisted the civil administration during natural calamities. 
68. The Committee notes that though financially, Assam Rines is under the Ministry of 
Home Afl'airs but operationally it is monitored by the Ministry of Defence. The Committee 
fails· to understand this duality of control and strongly feels that for operational . efficiency and 
effective use of the force in counter insurgency oa)erations it will he better if it is placed under 
the. control of Home Minist ry. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Government . to 
examine this issue from different angles with a view to centralising the control of the force 
under the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
PERSISTENCE OF DEPUTATION QUOTA VACANCIES IN BSF & CRPF 
69. In response in the query regarding filling up of senior level posts in BSF and CRPF 
through I.P.S. deputation quota these forces have furnished information relating to 
percentage of different posts being filled by officers of the IPS cadre and the; vacancies 
existing in this quota. 

18 
70. As per information furnished to the Committee by B.S.F., I.P.S. officers are 
inducted on deputation at the level of D.I.G., l.G ., Add!. D.G. and D.G. and the 
percentage of posts earmarked for them in each grade is as given below:-
Grade! 
D.G. 
Add!. D.G. 
I. G. 
D.I.G. 
No. of sanctioned posts 
1 
1 
17 
51 
Percentage allocation 
100% 
100~. 
66YJ~o 
48'Y. 
71. The Committee has been informed that vacancies persist in the deputation quota for 
IPS officers at the level of DIG due to their geneml reluctance to join . the force on 
. deputation. As against 20 posts reserved for l.P.S. officers in the rank of D.I.G. only 4 are 
presently tilled and 16 are lying vacant. However, out of these vacant posts, five have been 
diverted to cadre officers. 
72. The Committee has also been informed that over the years, as BSF cadre qfficers 
have gained experience, they have been prqmoted to various higher appointments. 
Accordingly, their participation in middle arid senior level leadership has gradually 
increased. Progressive increase in the percentage quota for promotion of BSF cadre officers 
at the level of D is G and above is shown below:-
Year IG DIG 
1982 40% 
1987 20% 40% 
1989 20% 50% 
1997 331h% 50'}{1 
73. Regarding justification of the presence of I.P.S. cadre officers in DSF, it has been 
submitted that the BSF has multifarious roles to perform sud1 as guarding the international 
horders. Internal Security Duties and assisting the Armed Forces in the event of war. While 
the duties connected with a war like situation will be a rare occurrence, most of the time, 
the Force is engaged on duties on the international borders, which is basicaily akin to 
policing and Internal Security Duties which are a mixture of policing and Military 
Operations. Therefore, presence of police officers of the lPS cadre who have adequate 
exposure to the style of functioning of Para Military Forces, at the senior level is considered 
approprinte in ordCr to ensure operational and ~•dministrative efficiency and harmonious 
functioning with the State Police, Customs as well as other Armed Forcts. 
74. The Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) has informed the Committee that 
induction of IPS Officers in the force on deuputation starts from the level of Deputy 
Commandants. The following percentage has been prescribed for induction of IPS Officers 
in CRPF:-
(i) Dy. Commandants 
(ii) Commandants 
10% of total posts of Dy. Commandants 
40% of total posts of Commandants 

(iii) DIGP' 
(iv) IGP 
19 
45,.o of total posts of DIOP 
66¥3% of total posts of IGP. 
75. Regarding vacancies in these posts it has been intimated that no. post at the Dy. 
Commandant level is filled at present by IPS quota and only one post has been fl1led 
through this quota at the Commandant level. One post at the 1.0. level 1nd nine post at the 
DIG level are currently vacant. 
76. Justifying the presence of IPS officers in CRPF it has been submitted that I.P.S. 
officers have a vast experience in the field of maintenance of law cl order and internal 
security management. These are the two basic duties of the CRPF. IPS Officers are 
therefore ideally suited for deputation to the CRPF. Ca:-ordination at senior level with State 
Police officials also become easier with their presence. 
77. The Committee notes that owing to their vast U()erience in the field of maintenance 
or law and order and internal security. I.P.S. officers In BSF and CRPF make valuab~e 
contribution ln the discharge or duties of these forces. It, however, raises a questloa mark on 
the number or posts earmarked for IPS officers which remain vacant due to reluctance of 
these otncers to join these posts. The case is worst at the level of D.I.G. There Is 80 perceat 
vacancies in deputation quota at this level ln BSF, and at the Dy. Commaodant level ln 
CRPF, out of the 10% posts reserved for them not a single· I.P.S. officer Is aYailable. Tbe 
Committee feels that vacancies in large number at these omcer level posts lbould not be 
allowed to c:Ontinue and if IPS officers are reluctant to join at these levels the orpnisation 
cannot be ten to suffer. In any organisation there exist a chain or command, a IJierarcby, 1nd 
il one Unk maps the organisational work is boand to suffer. A remedy to this problem 11. 
therefore, required to be evolved on an ar:eot basts. The Committee in this reprd is or the 
COD5idered opinion that an indeptb eumlaatfoo needs to be made in the Ministry to increue 
the quota or cadre officers in these fon:es at ditTerent levels particularly at the level of D.I.G. 
The Committee has noted that at times unnlled deputation quota vacancies have been clivertecl 
to cadre ~meers' promotion quota, but this adhoclsm wiU not bear fruit and a definite 
dediion in this regard is required urgently. It Is. therefore, recommended In the Interest of 
both the force and to ensure ' &bat vacancies do not remain vacant, that In the event the 
deputation po!.1 remain vacant fot a period of one ye.ar, the same should be de-reserved and 
transferred to ca~re officers promotion quo~. 
RAISING OF FLYING HOURS FOR ITBP 
78. In reply to a query regarding ad~uacy offlying hours for ITBP personnel who are 
deployed in hostile terrain which becomes inaet:essible during winter, to facilitate the 
movement of its personnel from border posts it has been intimated to the Committee that 
the ITBP has established 81 forward posts on Indo- Tibet Border, out of which 25 posts are 
seasonal and are withdrawn before the onset of snow fall. The remaining 56 posts are all 
weather posts including 6 air maintained posts tn Ladakh (J & K). The force has further 
submitted that only 215 flying hours have been sanctioned by Government · for all these 
forward posts and since 1996 casualty evacuation from forward posts have also been included 
in these flying hour on instructions from Ministry of Defence. 
79. The force has submitted that these flying hours are not sufficient for their 
requirement abd even if they play to visit one forward post once a month for 6 months 

20 
during winter season when the surfHce route is closed, the flying hours comes to 
S6x3x6k1008 hou rs. Even if 3 forw<lf<l posts are covered in one sortie the minimum flying 
hours 'come to 336 hours as against 215 flying hours allotted by the Ministry of Defence . 
80. The force has therefore submitted that raising of flying hours to a minimu m of 336 
hours may be considered sympathetically. It has also demanded that flying hours used in 
casualty evacuation from forward post may be excluded from the allotted flying hours as was 
the case before 1996. 
81. The Committee notes that ITBP personnel are deployed at altitudes rangin& from 
9000 to 18,000 feet above the sea level and are guarding 2,1 15 kms. of Indo. Tibetan Border 
which extends from Karakoram pass in Ladakh (Jammu and Kashmir) to Lipulekh pass at 
the Tri·Junction of lndo.Tibet-Nepal Boarder. All these areas are located in hazardous 
mountainous terrain and have hostile weather conditions with temperature dippin& to minus 
40 degree centigrade. The Committee, In view of adverse conditions in which the force 
personnel have to work, if of the opinion that the Dying hours allotted to the force by the 
Ministry of Defence are on a lower side. As analysed by the force in its submission, lt is 
perhaps not possible to effectively supervise and cater to the need of the troops deployed at 
higher altitude with the llotted fiying hours . The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
demand of ITBP to raise the quantum of Dying hours allotted to it may be pursued with the 
Ministery of Defence for a sympathetic consideration. 
; 
82. The Committee also recommends that the demand of the force for exclusion of hours 
taken for casualty evacuation from fornard posts should be agreed to with immediate etTect. 
WELFARE ACTIVITIES IN CPMFs 
83. The Committee has noted from the papers submitted to it that welfare activities of 
nrious nature including-Educational ·facilities, welfare me&isures for retired personnel , 
welfare measures for neJCt of kins-Widows, insurance (\OVer for force personnel, recre ational 
facilities and sports facilities etc . are in operation in lTBP, BSF and CRPF. It has, however . 
been intimated to the Committee that the grant received by these forces from Government is 
not sufficient and they have to run these schemes out of funds generated from their own 
resoures. They have, therefore, made a demand that their respective grants for welfare 
schemes may be raised. 
84. The Committee recommends that the demand of ITDP, BSF and CRPF for ralsina 
tile level of &nn~ provided to them for various welfare activities for their penonnel and 
wards! next of kins may be looked into and raised suitably. 
REQUIREMENT OF MORE FUNDS FOR CPMFs 
85. The Committee sought information from the BSF. CRPF and lTBP as to whether 
the allocations made for their respective forces during )998-99 are adequte to meet their 
requirements and if not what are the a.reas 'which will be affected most on account of this 

21 
lesser allocation? The information submitted to the Committee by these forces is given 
below: 
BSF 
The proposed allocation for BSF in BE 1998-99 is not adequate and the demands 
projected by the Force hns not been fully met. The major shortfalls in this regard are in the 
following areas: 
S.No. Head 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Arms and Ammunition 
Machinery and equipment 
Motor Vehicles 
Capital Outlay 
(Construction of residential building for 
Police) (Plan) 
Bwlget Demanded 
in 1998-89 
(Amount in lacs) 
14765.00 
2303.00 
7180.00 
3000.00 
Budget approved 
in 1998-99 
(Amount in lacs) 
7260.00 
1320.00 
4400.00 
1700.00 
86. Less allocation for arms & Ammunition, Machinery and Equipment and Motor 
Vehicle will adversely affect the operational efficiency of the Force. Less allocation for 
construction of residential houses for BSF personnel will hamper the construction of these 
houses in which field the picture is rather gloomy. As per the existing norms there is a 
requirement of 34,796 dwelling units against which the availability is only 22,345. It means, 
12,451 quarters are yet to be constructed. The BSF has submitted that with the current pace 
of allocation of about .Rs. 17 crores per year, it will take 35 years to make up the deficiency. 
C.R.P.F. 
87. There has been a cut of 82.37 crores under head 'Revenue' and a cut of Rs. 33.01 
crores under head 'capital'. A cut under head 'Machinery and equipment' will affect the 
procurement of various equipments for modernisation of training, bomb detection, 
comunication etc. Reduction of Rs. 41.7 crores under head 'Motor vehicle' will severely 
affect the operational commitments of the Battalions as it relates to purchase of 10 water 
cannons for RAF, bullet proofing of 135 ve!1icles and purchase of new vehicles. Reduction 
·or Rs. 5 crores under head 'Petrol, Oil and Lubricants' will also affect the operational 
efficiency. The cut under capital outlay will affect the number of quarters proposed to be 
built for the force personnel. 
I.T.B.P. 
88. There has been a cut of Rs. 18.44 crores in the Budget allocated for the year 1998-
99 against the projection made by the ITBP. The lesser allocation will affect the 
procurement of clothing, tentage & stores, machinery and equipments, arms and 
ammunitions, petrol oil, lubricants and minor works. Cut in the capital outlay will affect 
construction of residential and non residential buildings for the force. 
89. The Committee is of the considered view that it is of paramount importance that the 
requirements of CPMFs are given due ptiority and their operational preparedness is not 

22 
jeopardised on account of financial constraints. The cases of lesser allocations vis-a-vis 
projected -demands partitularly in core areas may be reviewed and allocations be suitably 
enhanced at R.E. stage. 
KAILASH MANSAROVAR Y ATRA 
90. The Director General I.T.B.P. during the course of his present~tion before the 
Committee pointed out that one of the duties performed by the force i~ addition to its 
-charter of duties is to look after the Kailash Mansarovar Yutris. Kailash Mansarovar Yatra is 
and annual pilgrimage and is organised on a regular basis by the Ministry of External 
Affairs. I.T.B.P. has been entrusted with tne task of selection of yatris, their medical 
examination and taking care of them upto our border with China. The Director General 
further stated tbat· the force is getting no special grant for this work from Government and it 
is meeting expenses on this work out of its own welfare fund. The Ministry of External 
Affairs is providing only a small grant to look after the medical examination and for 
providing medicines etc. It was also submitted to the Committee that there is a temple on 
the way and yatris on their return journey give some donations, which is used by the force 
for this purpose. 
91. It was also submitted to the Committee that ITBP incurred an ex~nditure of Rs. 
1.40 lakhs during 1997-98.to provide first aid kits for all the yatris which was not part of the 
organised ~heme and also provided them extra food and some win.ter clothing. There is an 
urgent need to· ·improve medical cover for the yatris and providing extra larder at the 
temporary out post at Guiji. The Director General, therefore, submitted . that a provision of 
Rs. 5 Jakhs may ·be made in the budget of the force to carry out this activity in a more 
purposeful, manner. . 1;;. 
92. The Committee appreciates the professional services rendered by ITBP in facilitating 
·the Kailash Mansarovar Yatris in completing their pilgrimage. It however, fails to understand 
why the Government have not made any financial provision in the. Budge~· of this force while 
assigning it a duty in addition tO its prescribed duties-. The Committee •. therefore, recommends 
that s~itable grant may be provided to ITBP for c:m:ying out this activity. The Committee 
also recommends that some facilities as suggested by ITBP may also be provided by the 
Government to make tbe yatra more comfortable. 
PRISON REFORMS 
93. In the meeting of the Committee held on Jun~ 22, 1998 a point was raised regarding 
the problems of prisons in the country and the reforms undertaking by the Gov~ ~rnment. In 
this respect, the Committee was informed that a 'Prisons' is a State subject the Central 
Government h·ave been interacting with the State Governments on the various issues relating 
to prisons and prisoners. As a result of reviews being conduct.ed by the Government and the 
periodical interactions with repersenatives of the State Governments the following problem 
have come to ! tne fore:- · · 
(i) The State Governments are according very low priority to the prison administration 
and there is no systematic monitoring of prison conditions in the States due to frequent 
transfers of officers at the senior level. Even the funds being released by the Central 
Government under the scheme of modernisation of prison administration are not being 
utilised; 
(ii) The high percentage of under-trials also affects the living conditions of prisoners. In 
most of the States, the under-trials population in the prisons nmges from 80% to 90%. The 
wider use of alter~atives to imprisonment and the reduction of under-trials in the prison 

23 
population are the two main areas that assume high priority in any action meant to ·reduce 
overcrowding in prisons; · 
(iii) Even though some of the State Government have·upgraded the basic amenities and · 
facilities in recent years with regard to food, clothing, medical care etc. the requirement~ ~(' ·· 
sanitation, water supply-, electrification etc . are yet to be adequately met; · 
(iv) There is also need for bringing improvement in the service conditions of prison 
personnel. The recruitment policy, recruitment procedures and promotional prospects are 
not properly orierited to attract the requisite talent. There is also problem of residential 
accommodation and schools for the children of prison personnel in most of the States; ·and 
I 
(v) The criminals who are lodged in jails for petty crimes come out as hardened 
criminals. 
94 .. The Committee was informed that in order to address . the aforesaid problems and 
keeping the importance of correctional administration in mind the Central Government have· 
been sending senior officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs frequently to States in order to 
assess the conditions of prisoners. In order to tackle the problem of und~r-trials, the Central 
Government has been stressing the need for devising effective procedures so that the 
periodical meetings of the representatives of the judiciary, district administration, poliqe 
department and prison authorities are conducted. A qu:uterly statement of under-trials is 
submitted to the High courts which in turn issues necessary instructions to the Courts for 
speedy disposal of cases and initiate suitable steps for setting up of special courts. The State 
Governments from time to time have also been advised to resort to the use of alternative 
measures to imprisonment such a the grant of bail, release of prisoners on probation, parole, 
grant of remission etc. and also to encourage the setting up of open prisons where the work 
release programmes help the prisoners to earn money to be used for their accommodation in 
the prisons and for the suppor~ of their family. 
95. The Committee was also informed that the Central Government had constituted a 
high pgwet committee known as AIJ India Jail Reforms Committee in 1980 under the 
Chairmanship of Justice A.N. Mullah (Retd.) to study various aspects of prison 
administra tion in the country and to suggest ·remedial measures to improve living conditions 
in prisons. The Mullah Committee made ·650 recommendation in 1983 majority of which 
pertained to the State Governments. Only 10% of the recommendations concerned the 
Central~ Government. The recommendation on which action was to be taken by the State 
Governments were forwar ded for their necessary action. The recommendations for which the 
Central Government had to take action mainly rehited to providing a financial assistance for 
strengthening of security , training of the prison staff, vocational training and rehabilitation, 
provision of medical and psychiatric services' etc. The Mullah Committee in its report, inter 
alia also recommended that all 'the Acts per.taining to prison administration should be 
consolidated and a new uniform and comprehensive legislation be enacted by Parliament for 
the entire coun try. In 1986 the Government of India also set up a Special Group with Shri 
R.K. Kapoor, former Director , IB, as Chairman to examine and review various aspects of 
administration and management of prisons. The group recommended better communication 
system, watch towers, wire fencing etc. In pursuance of recommendations of Mullah 
Committee and the Kapoor Group a scheme for modernisation of prison administration vras1 
introduced in 1987. Under this scheme an amount of about 100 crores have been rele~sed · to 
the various St(lte Governments. Besides, this the lOth Finance Commission have also 
recomr11ended ~n amount of Rs. 66.31 crore~ covering the period 1996-2000 for upgradation 
of.Jail Administration : The Ministry has also been interacting with National Human Rights 

24 
Commissi_on and the National Commission for Women. A proposal for enactment of 
legislation for transfer of foreign convicted nationals has also been under consideration so 
that they could be transferred to their Home Countries to serve the remaining period of jail 
terms. 
96. As far as the aspect of overcrowding in Central jail, Tihar, was concerned, the 
Committee was informed that Tihar had an authorised capacity of 3237 prisoners, while as 
on 19.6.98, there were 8767 prisoners in the jail. The Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi, in order to overcome the problem of overcrowding have taken steps to 
construct six new jails. These include four jails with a capacity of 1800 prisoners in the Tihar 
Jail Comp -lex, another jail with a capacity of 2000 prisoners at Mandoli and a jail at Rohini 
for lodging 950 prisoners. These jails are at present in various stages of construction and it is 
expected that one jail will be ready every year from 1998 onwards. The prisoners are 
provided round the clock medical services and separate medical faci 'ity also exists for women 
prisoners. Over 100 NGOs are engaged in providing vocational training to the prisoners. The 
prisoners are also encouraged to take parts in the games, sports and cultural activities 
organised for their benefit. A Committee in this respect appointed under the Chairmanship 
of Justice Santosh Duggal had since presented its Report. The recommendation made by this 
Committee have been accepted and implemented by the Government of Delhi. 
97. The Committee is dismayed over the sluggish pace of reforms in the Prison 
administration. It feels that the prevailing reforms are inadequate to meet the basic amenities 
of the swelling population of the prison inmates. The Committee notes with distress that the 
undertrials who are lodged in the prisons on charge of petty crimes, come out as hardened 
criminals. The Committee is shocked at the overcrowding in most of the prisons and expects 
that the Government will come out with well defined policies to decongest the prison premises 
and give a humane face to the prisons. 
INDO-BANGLADESH BORDER WORKS 
98. The Committee has observed from the papers submitted to it that construction/ 
erection of roads/bridges/fencing on our borders along Bangladesh in the States of Assam, 
Meghalaya, West Bengal, Tripura and Mizoram are running behind schedule. A table 
indicating the revised project content, progress upto 31st March, 1998 and balance of work is 
given below: 
Assam 
Roads 
Bridges 
Fence 
Meghalaya 
Roads 
Bridges 
Fence 
Revised Project 
content (1995) 
186.32 Km. 
4634.00 M 
152.34 Km. 
204.41 Km. 
1631.00 M 
184.78 Km. 
Progress upto 
31-3-98 
117.00 Km. 
3208.00 M 
131.00 Km. 
202.77 Km. 
1345.00 M 
199.55 Km. 
Balance 
69.32 Km. 
1426.00 M 
21.34 Km. 
NIL 
148.00 M 
NIL; 

West Bengal 
Roads 
Bridges 
Fence 
Tripura 
Roads 
Bridges 
Fence 
Mizoram 
Roads 
Bridges 
Fence 
Overall 
n ~ idges 
Fence 
25 
Revised Project 
content (1995) 
1770.00 Km. 
12562.00 M 
507.00 Km. 
579.49 Km. 
2615.00 M 
152.00 Km. 
1000.00 M 
2892.22 Km. 
22442.00 M. 
844.12 Km. 
Progress upto 
31-3-98 
1256.00 Km. 
9375.00 M 
445.00 Km. 
430.00 Km. 
1400.00 M 
89.00 Km. 
558.00 M 
2094.77 Km. 
15886.00 M 
775.55 Km. 
Balance 
514.00 Km. 
3187.00 M 
62.00 Km. 
149.00 Km. 
1215.00 M 
63.00 Km. 
442.00 M 
795.32 Km. 
6418.00 M 
83.34 Km. 
99. The Ministry has intimated that dehly in acquisition of land, increase in scope of 
work beyond initial estimates, time taken in setting up organisational infrastructure by th.e 
executing agencies, increase in the length of ·bridges over the initially envisaged , change in 
specification of work due to heavy rainfall and civilian requirements, identification of 
additional sensitive stretches of border for fencing etc . and short working season in the 
region due to heav y rainfall and floods led to cost and time overrun of the project . 
100. The Committee also took note of this delay aspect in the matter in its Fifteenth 
Report wherein it observed that while some of the constraints mentioned could not have 
been fores~en others could have been taken care of at the time of preparation of the project 
report with a little foresightedness, proper planning and better coordination amongst the 
executing agencies. The Committee had hoped that the revised project would be completed 
by 1998 through regular monitoring in view of the strategic importance and backwardness of 
the region. 
101. The Ministry in its submission has accepted that some of the reasons for delay 
could have been avoided with proper planning and foresight. 
102. The Committee expresses its distress that due to one reason or the other the 
construction/erection of roads/bridges/fencing along Indo-Bangladesh border is getting 
delayed. The Committee notes the strategic importance of this project which was taken up on 
1987 to prevent infiltration of Bangladeshi nnlionnls in India in pursuance of the Assam 
Accord. The Committee strongly disapproves this sluggish pace of work in completing the 
project and recommends that an all out effort be made to ensure completion of the project. 
For that purpose a revised time schedule mny be drawn up and steps taken to ensure strict 
compliance thereof. 
REHABILITATION OF SURRENDERED MILITANTS OF THE NORTH-EAST 
103. The Committee has been informed that Government has raised two BattaHons, 
one each in ffSF and CRPF, especially to reha bilitate the surrendered militants of Jammu 

26 
and Kashmir. The Committee appreciates the effort of the Government in rehabilitating the 
surrendered militants of Jammu and Kashmir . It, however, feels that there is a need to 
extend this suppor t to the surrendered insurgents/extremists of th£}~orth-East also, who have 
surrendered b~fore the authorities with arms. Government should endeavour to suitably 
rehabilitate such surrendl•rcd insurgents/r\lremists and examine whetlu~r their services could 
be utilised in our para-military forces on the pattern of Jammu and Kashmir surrendered 
militants. 
FUNCTIONING OF HOME MINISTER'S ADVISORY COMMITTEES (HMACs) 
104. In pursuance of the recommendations contained in 37th Report of the Committee , 
the Committee sought information from the Ministry whether the Home Ministers' Advisory 
Committee (HMACs) had become functional in the UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli and the position in regard to notification of HMACs in the UTs of 
Chandigarh, Lakshadweep and Anclaman & Nicobar Islands . 
105. The Committee was informed 'that the Home Minister's Advisory Committees 
(HMACs) for the Union Territories of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli were 
constituted on the 21st November, 1996. The process of nomination of members to the said 
Committees has also been completed and duly notified. However, it has not been possible, 
for vary ing reasons, to convene a meeting of the two Committees. It is the Government's 
endeavour to hold a meeting of these Committees within a month or so. The Committee was 
also informed that these Committees have also been constituted for the Union Territories of 
Cha!ldigarh, Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. However, the nomination of 
members to these Committees has not been so far completed. The meeting of these 
Committees would be convened soon after the nomination process is extended. 
106. The Committee in its Thirty-seventh Report had appreciated the steps taken by. the 
Ministry in this respect and had expected that the formalities relating to composition and 
nomination would be completed soon. However, the Commillce expresses dissatisfaction over 
the routine approach of t.~e Ministry in this regard and observes that even when the 
formalities have been completed in respect of JII\1ACs for Daman and Diu and Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli meetings have still not been convened, although one year ancl seven months have 
elapsed since their constitution. The Committee also expresses its concern over the cont inuing 
delay in completing the formalities of nomination of memher s on the Committee in respect of 
Union Territories of Chandigarh, Lal<shadweep and Andaman & Nicohar Islands. The 
Committee urges upon the Ministry to make all the five Committees functional and convene 
their meetings imme~iately and in no case later than 60 days. 
VACANCIES IN SCIENTIFIC BODIES IN NORTH-EASTERN STATES 
107. One of the a.nnpwncements which Slui I.K. Gujral, former Prime Minister, made 
during his visit tq. the North-Eastern States in May, 1997 was that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should check. 11p the latest position of vacant posts in scientific bodies etc. in the 
North-East region and review the position. The Committee sought latest position , in the 
matter from the Ministry. The Ministry has submitted the position, as on 1st January, 1998 
in different scientific bodies in the North-East where vacancies exist, as per table given 

27 
below. The Minist'ry has stated that action is being taken by the concerned Ministries to fill 
up the vacancies. 
Name of Ministry Posts Action taken 
Sanctioned in position Vacant 
Ministry of Environment 229 90 139 Actions to fill up the 
and Forest· vacancies have been 
initiated. 
Ministry of Food & 1 1 -do-
Consumer Affairs 
Ministry of Defence 6 2 4 Action have been taken 
to fill up the vacancies. 
Ministry of Petroleum & 127 127 Not intimated 
Natural Gas 
Dept. of Electronics 20 . 20 . Actions have been 
initiated to · fill up the 
posts . 
Dept. of Atomic Energy 9 9 -do-
Ministry of Health & 116 5 111 Actions have been 
Family Welfare ini_tiated to fill up the 
vacancies. 
108. The Committee is perturbed to note that not a single post sanctio~ed for scientific 
bodies under the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Departments of Electronics and 
Atomic Energy has been filled 4 out of 6 posts ·under Ministry of Defence, 13~ out 229 under 
the Ministry of .Environment and Forest and 111 out of 116 under the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare are vacant. The Committee has failed to understand how these organisations 
are continuing their activities and what useful contribution they are making for the 
development. of. Nprth-East region. The Committee feels it a total failure on part of the 
administrative Ministries and urges upon the Government to ensure that these vacancies are 
fiJled on a war footing so that the objectives for which these organisations have been set up 
can be achieved. 
REPRESENTATION OF LOCAL MP .IN THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, CHANDIGARH 
109. In the meetfng of the Committee held on June 22, 1998 a point was raised to the effect 
tha,Cconsequent on the 73rd amendment to the Constitution the MPs and MLAs were made the· 
members of the Municipal Corporation, Zila Parish ad etc., but in Chandigarh an anomalous 
situation bas arisen in that. MLAs (even though there is no Legislature or MLAs) continue to be 
members of the Municipal Corporation but not the local M.P. 
110. The Committee was informed that the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976, as 
amended in 1994 by the State Government of Punjab bas been with some amendments 
t . 

..•. 
I ...... ~. 
.•. 
28 
extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh under "the Punjab Municipal Corporation 
Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994." The Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 as 
amended in 1994 does not contain any provision for appointment of the local Member of 
Parliament to the Municipal Boards set up elsewhere in Punjab. The present status of the 
Union Territory of Chandigarh being transitory in nature, it is only expedient that the law as 
applicable in Punjab is harmoniously extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh. 
111. The Committee in para 79 of its Thirty-seventh Report on the Demands for Grants 
(1997-98) of the Ministry of Home Affairs dealt with the subject and hoped that as the 
matter was being reviewed by the Central Government, the situation would be rectified and 
the area M.P. would be <!eemed as a member of the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh, as 
per the provisions of the Seventy-third Amendment to the Constitution. 
112. The Committee is dissatisfied with the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry 
in regard to this matter and the reply to the query raised in its meeting held on 22nd June, 
1998. The Committee notes that instead of reviewing the matter the Ministry has sought to 
justify the status quo in this regard. However, the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs during 
his evidence before the Committee on 25th June, 1998 inter alia assured the Committee that 
within three months this issue with be resolved. The Committee accordingly, hopes that 
anomalous situation will be rectified within the indicated time-frame. 
RESERVATION BENEFITS TO SCHEDULED CASTES RESIDING IN CHANDIGARH 
113. In the meeting of the Committee held on 22nd June, 1998, a point was raised to 
review the Government's instructions under which the memebrs of Scheduled Castes 
communities residing in Chandigarh cannot avail of the reservation benefits unless they were 
residing in Chandigarh prior to 1.11.1966. 
114. The Committee has been informed that the matter was examined by th\! 
Chandigarh Administration tast year in consultation with the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions and it was opined by the latter that since the verification was 
required to be made on the basis of revenue records maintained by the Revenue authority of 
the district concerned, it was not possible to extend the benefit to those who migrated to 
Chandigarh after the issue of Presidential notification on 1st November, 1966. The Ministry 
has assured to take up the matter again with the Ministries concerned with the subject 
matter so that the issue could be resolved. 
115. The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation given by the Ministry and 
unable to appreciate the logic behind the stand of the Administration. The Committee notes 
that the Secretary of the Ministry has assured the Committee in its meeting held on 25th 
June, 1998 that the issue will be resolved within three months and hopes that the members of 
the Scheduled Caste communities residing in Chandigarh prior to 1.11.1966 will be able to 
avail the reservation benefits. 
PUNJAB AIDED SCHOOLS (SECURITY OF SEUVICE) ACT, 1969 AS EXTENDED TO 
UNION TERRITORY OF CHANDIGARH 
116. In the meeting of the Committee held on 22nd June, 1998 concern was expressed 
over the situation arising out of the extension of the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of 
Service) Act, 1969 to the Union Territory of Chancligarh in August, 1971. It was brought to 
the notice of the Committee that the Union Territory Administration had been writing to 
the Ministry of Home Affairs time and again for repeal of the Act, as extended to the Union 
Territory. The Committee was apprised that the eQlployees were not getting their revised 
salaries; they were not getting their pensions after retirement. 

29 
117. In reply the Ministry of Home Affairs has stated that the Pu'njab Aided Schools 
(Security of Service) Act, 1969 was extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh in 
August, 1971 under section 87 of the Punjab Reorganization Act, 1966 which empowers the 
Union Government to extend with such restric!ions or modifications as it thinks fit to the 
UT of ~handigarh, any enactment which is in force in a State on the date of notification. 
However, this section does not give power to the Union Government to repeal ·any 
enactment which is in force in the UT of Chandigarh. Such a repeal can be done only by a 
law of the Parliament. 
118. The matter has been referred for appropriate action to the Union Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (Departrpent of Education), being the Ministry concerned 
with the subject matter. 
119. The Committee while ·~ing note of the IIISSUI'IInce alven by the Secretary,' Ministry 
of Home Affairs in its meeting held on 25th June, 1998, that the issue win be resolved within 
three months, is optimistic that aberrations like this wUl be set rlaht. 

ANNEXURE 
! 
ROAD LENGTH, NO. OF ACCIDENT, NO. OF PERSONS KILLED ETC. 
SL. YEAR AS ON 31st DECEMBER NO. OF ACCIDENTS PERSONS ROAD LENG1H IN KMS. 
NO. 
POPULA· MOTOR SLOW FA· IN· NIINJ TOTAL KIUED IN· MCD NDMC DCB ODIR NHWY 
TION VEH. MOV· TAL JURY JURED 
IN LACS lNG 
1 1972 45.00 214049 6116 474 2810 1850 5134 503 3YI1 6874 832 124 331 219 
2 1973 46.05 260606 4615 442 2859 1533 4834 474 3.,54 7197 1069 124 344 219 
3 1974 48.00 279232 6120 445 2574 737 3756 482 3044 n98 1078 124 351 228 
4 1975 49.01 312072 12302 496 2439 393 3328 SlO 3853 8180 1090 124 376 243 
5 1976 50.00 346946 12118 557 2830 453 3840 587 3700 3463 1095 124 417 282 
6 t9n 51.03 381349 9497 6SO 3181 193 4024 694 3874 9407 1095 124 422 282 
7 1978 56.07 449053 14425 686 3549 233 4468 717 4391 9620 1095 124 479 282 
8 1979 51.55 479272 13441 726 3561 210 4497 763 4207 11672 1177 124 510 302 
9 1980 60.35 521457 16868 722 3434 144 4300 747 3980 12129 1191 124 510 302 
10 1981 62.20 561768 18396 1020 3224 140 4384 1072 3782 13136 1198 143 684 326 
11 1982 63.95 648531 18202 1171 3533 173 48n 1215 4278 13816 1218 143 810 372 
12 1983 65.72 724495 18528 1091 4269 117 54n 1156 5473 14124 1232 143 810 372 
13 1984 67.50 814803 16091 1179 4518 112 5809 1239 5166 14676 1239 143 826 372 
14 1985 74.63 n490S 16670 1185 4903 166 6254 1269 6366 14958 1244 143 873 372 
15 1986 77.63 1075486 18032 1180 5246 121 6547 1276 6583 15418 1259 143 873 372 
16 1987 81.51 1250755 12281 1198 4948 92 6238 1271 6388 16750 1267 143 873 372 
17 1988 82.50 1415931 17013 1403 5208 105 7616 1474 6830 17812 1272 143 1011 330 
18 1989 85.75 1589795 27869 1460 5608 124 7192 1581 7378 18373 1287 143 1042 330 
19 1990 89.10 1764558 33937 1559 6062 76 7697 1670 7883 18673 1289 143 1135 324 
20 1991 93.70 19~787 37961 1651 6312 102 8065 1n8 8051 19476 1293 143 1251 324 
21 1992 95.00 2064682 44854 1628 6800 91 8519 1727 8476 19476 1295 143 1251 324 
22 1993 97.50 2198908 58502 1686 6592 • 225 8503 1783 8237 21226 1293 144 1400 324 
23 1'994 106.80 2372990 8751 1790 6956 304 9050 1884 8927 21452 1295 144 1400 337 
24 1995 110.61 2575731 91645 1981 7643 514 10138 2070 9805 21467 1297 144 1400 337 
25 1996 114.54 2793605 92829 2148 8650 517 11315 2286 10363 22169 1298 144 1400 337 
26 1997 118.60 3033045 116352 2150 8218 581 10949 2276 9865 22169 1298 144 1400 337 
1998 979 3486 245 4710 1012 4205 
upto 
30.6 
1997 1127 4b47 267 5441 1131 4750 
upto Comparative for first 
30.6 six months of 
o/o Reduction 1997 & 1998 
over 
"!'t 1997 - 13.13 13.86 08.29 13.43 15.02 11.47 
J 
31 

• 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITtEE 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 2:30P.M. on Monday , the 22nd June , 1998, in Main Comm ittee 
Room, Grf)und Roor, Parliament House Anncxe , New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Prana b Mukhcrjce--Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Surcsh Pachouri 
3. Shri H . Hanum anthappa 
4. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
5. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
6. Shri Prafull Goradia 
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
9. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
10. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
LOK SABRA 
11. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
12. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
13. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
H . Shrl Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
15. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
16. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
17. Maj . Gen. B.C . Khanduri 
18. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
19. Smt. Meira Kumar 
20. Shri ~~vi Sitaram Naik 
21. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
22. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
23. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
24. Shri Moti Lal Vora 
33 

"2S. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
26. Shri Sudhir Giri 
I ~aiwe21. Shri Samar Choudhury 
28. Shri Mohan Singh 
29. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
30. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
31. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
32. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
33. Shri A,.F. G~lam Osmani 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
34 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy, ~ecretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee- Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAffiS 
1. Shri B.P. Singh, Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Pahwa, Secretary. Deptt. of Offici<ll Language 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar. Special Secretary 
4. Shri M.B. Kaushal, Special Secretllry 
5. Shri R.D. Kapur, Additional Secretary 
6. Shri P.D. Shenoy, Additional Secretary 
1. Shri M.P. Singh, Additional Sccreuuy 
8. Shri B.K. Haldar, Joint Secretary 
9. Shri V.K. Malhotra, Joint Secretary 
10. Shri Pornab Ray. Financial Adviser 
11. Shri Gurcharan Singh, Joint Secretary 
12. Shri Vinay Kumar, Joint Secretary 
13. Sbri Shiv Basant, Joint Secretary 
14. Shri.P.K. Jalali, Joint S.ecretary 
15. Shri G.K. Pillai, Joint Secretary 
16. Shri O.P. Arya, Joint Secretary 
17. Shri S.K. Otattopadhay, Joint Secretary 
18. Shri Yashwant Raj, Joint Secretary 
19. Smt. Sangita Gairola, Joint Secretary 
20. Shri Rakesh Hooja, Joint Secretnry 

I 
I 
35 
21. Shri Sandeep Bagchi, Joint Secretary 
22. Shri Dev Swaroop, Joint Secretary 
23. Shri P.K. Aggarwal, Joint Secretary 
24. Dr. M. Vijayanunni, RGI 
25. Shri T. Ringu, Secretary (NEC) 
26. Shri · Gautam Sen, FA (NEC) 
Tl. Shri Ravi Kant Chopra, Director 
28. Shri B.M.S. Negi, Director 
29. Shri Sunil Kohli , Director 
2. At the outset, the members felicitated the Chairman on his appointment as the 
Chairman of . the Committee and wished him a successful tenure. The Chairman while 
thanking the members reciprocated the sentiments expressed by them and sought their 
cooperation in fulfilling the mandate of the Committee . Thereafter, the Committee 
expressed its sens e o f grief at the loss of'human lives and devastation brought by the cyclone 
which ravaged Gujarat and other parts of the country. It also expressed its solidarity with 
the families of the cyclone victims. The Committee observed one minute's silence, all 
members standing, in the memory of those who perished in the natural calamity. 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman apprised the. members of the main functions of the 
Committee and informed them about the detailed schedule of meetings which had been 
worked out for consideration of the · detailed Demands for Grants {1998-99) of the Ministries 
coming within its purview. 
4. Some Members raised certain points and gave suggestions regarding the proposed 
considertation of the Demands for Grants of the related Ministries and subjects which could 
be taken up by the Committee later. The Chairman clarified the points. 
5. The Committee then took up consideration of the Demands for Grunts {1998-99) of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary of Ministry of Home 
Affairs and his team of officers and requested him to make a presentation on the Demands 
for Grants of his Ministry. 
6. The Secretary, accordingly, made a detailed presentation covering at length the 
aspects related to internal security, menace of terrorism, infiltration of foreign elements. lSI 
activities in India', smuggling of arms and ammunition from across the border, situation in 
J&K, increasing terrorist/sessionist activities in some of the North-Eastern States, challenges 
faced by the security forces on the border and general Jaw and order situation in some parts 
of the country. He inter alia emphasized the need for additional allocation of Rs. 200· crores 
during the current year to meet the requirements of raising of new battalion of CPMFs, 
modernisation of forces and their . fire power and housing for CPMFs. 
7. The Members raised various points on these issues und sought clarifications frem the 
Secretary. The Committee directed the Secretary to furnish written replies to the points 
raised by the Members within two days. 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
9. The Committee then adjourned at 7.50 P.M. to meet ~tgain at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, 
the 23rd June, 19Q.8. 

37 
26. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
27. Shri Chad a Suresh Reddy 
28. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
29. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
.Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES 01' INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE (ITBP) 
1. Pt. Gnutam Kaul, DG 
2. Shri Divankar Prasad, JG (HQ) 
3. Smt. lndu Liberhan, FA 
. 4. Shri R.L . Manon DIG (Adm.) 
5. Shri R. Nagar, Chief Admn. Officer 
6. Shri Sarwan Ram, Dy. Chief Accounts Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF BORDER SECURITY FORCE (BSF) 
1. Shri E .N. Rammohan, DG 
2. Shri Ajit Narayan, IG (Adm .) . 
3. Shri C.M. Bhat, IG (Pers .) 
4. Shri Kamlesh Deka , IG (Comn.) 
S. Shri V.N. Rai, IG (PG) 
6. Dr. G .P. Bhatnagar, IG (Prov.) 
7, Shri R.S. Mehta, IG (Trg.) 
8. Shri U.C. Chhabra, IG (Ops.) 
9. Smj. lndu Liberhan, FA 
10. Shri Y. Joy Kumar Singh, DD (Adm.) 
11. Shri Nare sh Gaur, AD (Wei.) 
REPRESENTATIVES OF CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE (CRPF) 
1. Shri M.N. Sabharwal, D.G. 
2. Shri A.S. Gill, l.G . (H . Qrs.) 
3. Shri S.K. Sharma, F.A. 
4. Shri A.K . Singh, Dy. Director (Admn.) 
5. Shri K.D.S. Dullat, ADIG (Coord .) 

38 
2. "J:'he Committee separately heard the Directors General of Indo-Tibetan Border 
Police (ITBP), Border Security Force (BSF) and Centrul Reserve Police Force (CRPF) on 
the Demands for Grants (1998-99) relating to their respective forces. The Chairman and 
Members sou&ht clarifications from the Directors General on various points relating to their 
respective forces. The Chairman directed the DGs to send detailed notes/replies to the 
points/queries raised by him and other Members of the Committee within two days. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 7.15 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 
Wednesday, the 24th June, 1998. 

IV 
•FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on 111ursday, the 2Sth June. 1998, in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Padlouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
5. Shri M . Venkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri Prafull Goradia 
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
9. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
LOK SABHA 
10. S1lri ·satya Pal J.ain 
11. Shri Lal Bihar Tiwari · 
12~ Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
13. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
14. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
15. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
16. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
17. Smt. Meira Kp~ar 
18. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
19. Shri Nedurumalli Jana~dhana Reddy 
20. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
/ 21. Shri Motilal Vora 
22. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
23. Shri Samar Choudhury 
24. Shri Mohan Singh 
· 25. ·shri C. Sreenivaasan 
26. Shn Chada Suresh Reddy 
27. Sbri Ram~sh Thakur 
is. Shr( A :f':··oolam Osmani 
• Minutes of the: Third meeting of the Committee relate to 50me other matte~ 4iscussed by the Committee . 
39 

40 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secret<•ry 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri B. P. Singh, Home Secretary 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar, Special Secretary 
3. Shri M.B. Kaushal, Special Secretary 
4. Shri R.D. Kapoor, Addl. Secretary 
5. Shri M. P. Singh, Addl. Secretary 
6. Dr. P.O. Shenoy, Addl. Secretary 
7. Shri B.K. Haldar, Joint Secretary 
8. Shri V.K. Mulhotra, Joint Secretary 
9. Shri Pranab Ray, Financial Advisor 
10. Shri Dev Swaroop, Joint Secretary 
11. Dr. M. Vijayanunni, RGI 
12. Shri Gurucharan Singh, Joint Secretary 
13. Shri Vinay Kumar, Joint Secretary 
14. Shiv Shiv Basant, Joint Secretary 
15. Shri P.K. Jalali, Joint Secretary 
16. Shri G.K. Pillai, Joint Secretary 
.17. Shri O.P. Arya, Joint Secretary 
· 18. Shri S.K. Chattopadhyay, Joint Secretary 
19. Smt. Sangeeta Gairola, Joint Secretary 
20. Shri Yaswant Raj, Joint Secretary 
21. Shri Rakesh Hooja, Joint Secretary 
22.' Shri Sandeep Bagch i, Joint Secretary 
23. Shri B.M.S. Negi. Director (OL) 
24. Shri Sunil Kohli, Director (Finance) 
25. Shri P.K. Swain, Dy. F.A . 
• 
2. • 
t • 
* 
* 
• 
• 
3. The Committee, then, heard the Secre tary, Ministry of Home Affai rs on the points 
raised by the Chairman and its Members in the meeting held on 22nd June, 1998. The 
Chairman and Members further sought clarifications. The Secre tary· replied . to the points, 
(nte Committee adjourned at 1 t•.M . and reassembled at 2.45 p.m.) 
4. • * • 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
' 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 7.00 P.M . to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesda y, 
tbe 30th 1June, 1998. 
••• Omitted portions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. .·.;· 

v 
FIFTH 1\·IEETING 
. The Committee met at 11.00 i\.1\t. on Tuesday, the 30th June, 1998 , in Room No. 63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjcc--Chairman 
RAJYA SA811A 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
4. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
5. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
LOK SABIIA 
6. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
7. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
8. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
9. Slui Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
10. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand llari Sakshi 
11. Maj. Ge·n. B.C. Khanduri 
12. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayccd 
13. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
14. Shri Samar Choudhury 
15. Shri Mohan Singh 
16. Shri C. Srcenivaasan 
17. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
18. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DELHI POLICE 
1. Shri V.N. Singh, Commissioner of Police 
2. Shri S.K. Jain. Additional Commissioner 
3. Mrs. Kanwaljit Dcol. Additional Commissioner 
4. Shri Mohan Kudasia, Dy. Commissioner of Police 
* * 
* * 
2 * * 
3 . * * 
... Omitted portions relate to some other matter~ di~t:usscd by the Commiuec. 
41 
* 
-~ 
* 
* 

.... . 
4.1 ' • 
42 
• • 
• • 
S. 'Thereafter. the Committee heard the Cotnmiuioner, Delhi Police on the Demands 
for Orants (1998-99) pertaining to Delhi l,olice. The Commisioner aave a brief presentation 
OD stnK'ture and functionina of Delhi Police. He also made u brief presentation on the law 
and order tcenario in the Capit:d. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised 
some points relating to the ftmctioning .and the prohlcn\s being faced by the Delhi Police. 
The Commislioner was dire~ted by the Commiuce to send the replies to the points raised in 
wriri,. within two days. 
The Committee adjourned at l.CX) P.M. and reassembled at 3.00 P.t.t.) 
6. • • • 
7. • • • 
8 A ~rbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
9. The Commiuee adjourned <tt 4.30 r.~t. to n~eet a10tin at 3.(•) l".t.t, on Thursday. the 
2nd July. 1998. · 

VIII 
•EIGIITH MEETING 
The Committee met at 6.00 r.~t. on Thunday, the 9th July. 1998 • ia Room No. 63, 
Fint Floor, Parliament House, New OcUli. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee-Chaimtdll 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhotrdwaj 
3. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
4. Shri Prafull Goradia 
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
LOK SABRA ' · . 
7. Shri Krishna Kum<~r Chotudhary 
8. Shri Lal Bihitri Tiwari 
9. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
10. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
11. Shri ·Ram Nagin:s ¥i5hra 
12. Shri Ravi Sitaram ·Naik 
13. Shri Mufti Mohamnied Sayc~d 
14. Shri Nedurvmalli Janardhana Reddy 
15. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
16. Shri Motilal Vora 
17. Shri Samar Choudhury 
18. Shri Mohan Sin&h 
19. Motid . Ali Asbar.tf fntmi 
20. Shri Lal~ Prasad 
21. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
2l. Shri A. F. Golam Osmani 
23. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesb C. Tiwari, Committee Ofrla:r 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Meanben of the Committee and apprised 
them about the agenda of the meeting. The Committee then took up consideration of Draft 
43rd Report on the Demands for Gro~nts (1998-99) of the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
discussed it at length. Members raised a number of points which included - enhaftC:IemCnt in 
• Minute~ of the Silth and Se•cnth mcctinp of tiM: Commiuc:c rclutc: 10 some oilier matlcn ~ 'f tbc 
Committee. 
43 

44 
the level of assistance to the State Governments for nH.><.lernisution of their police forces and 
special assistance to the States afflicted with the menace of nexalism/left wing extremism/ 
terrorism/communal violence/ethnic dashes etc.; responsibility of the Central Government 
under Article 355 of the Constituion in assisting the States in case of internal disturbance; 
inadequa<.~y of CPMFs in meeting the requirements of States; visits of Central Teams to 
some States to take stock of taw and order situation there; cases pending in the Ministry of 
Home Affairs under the Swawntrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme; entitlement of 
Samman Pension to persons ,who struggled for liberation of Goa; l.S.l. activities in our 
borders with Nepal. Bhutan and l3angladesh; unsatisfactory position in implementation of 
the recommendations of the National Police Commission Reports; and incidents of 
withdrawal of security cover from some prominent politicians. The Chairman then proposed 
that the points raised by the Members as were having a bearing on the Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs could be incorporated in the report. The Committee agreed 
thereto and authorised its Chairman to make the necessary addiC~ons in the report. The 
Chairman then announced that if tvlemb<.!rs wished some points to be incorporated in the 
report , the same may be sent in writing to the Secret;triat by 1.00 p.m. of lOth July, 1998. 
The Committee then adopted the report. 
3. * 
·i· 
* 
4. * * ·~ • 
5. The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports in the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha on 
the 13th July, 1998. It authorised, its Chairman. and iri his absence Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri tvlotilal Vora and in his absence Shri Lal 
Bihari Tiwari to lay the- Reports in Lok Sabha. 
6. One of the Members strongly objected to certain observations of the Secretary, 
Ministry of Home Affairs relating to Dodo issue, made during the course of the latter's 
presentation before the Committee on 22ml June, 1998, on the Demands for Grants (1998-
99) of his Ministry. He also obje<.:ted to <.:c.rtain l)bservatinns of another Member made in the 
same sitting of the Committee relating to the said issue and expressed his viewpoints in the 
matter. The Chairman stated that the submissions of the member with reference to the 
observations of the Secretary of the Ministry would be forwarded to the latter for his 
comments. As regards the rebuttal by a t\'lcmbcr of the observations made by another 
Mem~er1 the Chairman ruled that a Member had freedom to express his views on a subject 
discussed in the Committee and his rights wuld not be curtailed. He stated that had the 
aggrieved Member been present in the Meeting in which the other Member -;poke on the 
subject, he could also have had the opportunity to express his views. 
7. The Committee then adjourned .at 7.35 P.M . 
... Omitted portions relate to some oth..:r m:llter~ di~cuss..:d hy the Committee. 