Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
 
REPORT NO. 
168
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st March, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th March, 2013)  
The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges)
Amendment Bill, 2012


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

C.S.(H.A.)-326
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges)
Amendment Bill, 2012
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... 1—5
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF M EETING OF C OMMITTEE ........................................................... 7—13
5. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 15—23
The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012 17—23

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  — Chairman
^2. Shri D. Raja
*3. Vacant
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
**9. Vacant
10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
16. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
^ Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated w.e.f. 28th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home
Affairs due to the appointment of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet.
* Due to the resignation of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on
Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.
** Due to the appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Sixty Eighth Report on the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred
♣ the
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012  (Annexure-1) as
introduced and pending in Lok Sabha, to the Committee on 28 th December, 2012, for examination
and report within three months.
3. This Bill seeks to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982.
The proposed amendment makes provision for secretarial assistance to ex-Governors in the form
of one Personal Assistant which the concerned ex-Governor may appoint on reimbursable basis, for
the remainder of his life.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in its sitting held on 21
st January, 2013, wherein it heard
the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs.  As per practice, the officers of the Legislative
Department and Department of Legal Affairs were also present in the sitting to respond to
legislative/legal queries of the Members. The Committee in that sitting also took up the clause-by-
clause consideration of the Bill.
4.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 26
th February, 2013 considered and adopted this Report.
5. The Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:–
(i) The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012;
(ii) Detailed background Note on the Bill as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iii) The Governors’ (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982; and
(iv) Oral evidence tendered by the representatives of Ministries of Home Affairs and Law
and Justice.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI Department-related Parliamentary
1st March,  2013 Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
♣  Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 50467 dated 2 nd January, 2013.

1
REPORT
1.1 The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012 seeks to
provide Secretarial Assistance of one Personal Assistant to Ex-Governors on reimbursement basis,
during his life time.
1.2 According to Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances
and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012 seeks to achieve the following objectives:–
“As per the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982 the Governor
is entitled to emoluments amounting to one lakh ten thousand rupees per month. However,
the said Act does not provide for any pension or post-retirement benefits to ex-Governors
except medical facilities governed by the rules or orders issued by the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare, from time to time. Keeping in view the high constitutional office that
a Governor holds and considering the contributions in public discourse that they would
continue to make after they retire, it is proposed to provide the secretarial assistance to ex-
Governors in the form of one Personal Assistant, which the ex-Governor concerned may
appoint on reimbursement basis, during his life time. However, he shall not be eligible for
such secretarial assistance for the period during which he is re-appointed to the office of
Governor or elected to Parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any office of
profit under the Union or a State Government.”
1.3 According to the background note as furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the
emoluments, allowances and privileges of Governors are governed by the Governors’
(Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982 and rules framed thereunder, namely, the
Governors’ (Allowances and Privileges) Rules, 1987. It was also stated that the issue of making
available secretarial assistance to Governors’ post retirement had been raised at various levels
including the Governors Conferences. The Ministry stated that the matter had been considered
and keeping in view the high constitutional office that the Governors hold and considering the
contributions in public discourse that they would continue to make after they retire, it was
proposed to provide secretarial assistance to ex-Governors in the form of one Personal Assistant
which the concerned ex-Governor may appoint on reimbursable basis, for the remainder of his
life.
1.4 The background note further stated that as per the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances
and Privileges) Act, 1982 and the Governors (Allowances and Privileges) Rules 1987 the
expenditure on various activities involving the office of the Governor is met out of the
Consolidated Fund of the respective State. Keeping in view the number of ex-Governors and the
small quantum of the amount involved, it was proposed that this amount may be met by the
Central Government. Accordingly the matter was placed before the Cabinet vide this Ministry’s
notes dated 17.10.2012. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 25.10.2012 approved the proposal
to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982 to provide
secretarial assistance to ex-Governors in the form of one Personal Assistant, which the ex-
Governor concerned may appoint on reimbursable basis. The cabinet directed that to begin with,
the reimbursement amount for providing secretarial assistance may be restricted to Rs. 25,000/- per
month.

2
1.5 The Committee was apprised that the possible financial implication annually on
implementation of the proposal would be rupees one crore ninety five lakh approximately for
around 65 ex-Governors.
PROPOSED AMENDMENT
1.6 The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012 was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 10.12.2012 proposing the following amendment in the existing act:–
• In section 2 of the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982 for
the clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely:–
(a) “ex-Governor” means a person who has been the Governor of a State or
two or more States;
(aa) “Go vernor” means the Governor, or any person discharging the functions
of the Governor, of any State or of two or more States;
• After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:–
“12A. Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the ex-Governor shall, for the
remainder of his life, be entitled to secretarial assistance of one Personal Assistant on
reimbursement basis:
Provided that where such ex-Governor is re-appointed to the office of Governor or
elected to Parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any office of profit under
the Union or a State Government, he shall not be eligible for such secretarial assistance
for the period during which he holds such office.”
• In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (g), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(h) the manner of providing secretarial assistance and reimbursement under
section 12A.”
PRESENTATION BY THE MINISTRY
1.7 The Committee in its sitting held on 21 st January, 2013 heard the presentation of the Union
Home Secretary on the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012.
As per practice, the representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice were also present during the
meeting.
1.8 During the course of the presentation, the Chairman of the Committee sought to know
whether there had been any discussion in the Committee of Governors on the issue of pension for
Governors. Replying to the Committee’s query, the Union Home Secretary stated as under:–
“…that issue, most likely will be raised. Actually, they had made 4-5 requests. One was
regarding pension. The other one was regarding cashless medical treatment for retired
Governors. Right now, they have to pay for their treatment and seek reimbursement later.
Another one was regarding Identity Cards for former Governors. There was also a request
for former Governors’ entry into the Warrant of Precedence. The last one was for secretarial
assistance to Ex-Governors.

3
On secretarial assistance to ex-Governors, we have this Bill which is before the
Committee now. Then, we have decided to give Identity Cards to ex-Governors. We have
asked the people who make identity cards to submit the designs. After that is finalised, we
would be writing to all the ex-Governors to either send their photographs, or, we would be
making the arrangements to have them photographed for the purpose. That whole process
is being gone through.
On cashless medical treatment for ex-Governors, earlier when we had written to the
Ministry of Health, they had expressed some problems. They had also said that they were
coming up with a scheme of health insurance for everybody. That scheme, they had said,
would be for cashless medical treatment. But, somehow, that scheme has not yet
materialized, and it appears that it would take some more time. So, I had another discussion
with the Health Secretary. He has agreed to consider this proposal separately. He had asked
me to send a separate reference for that. So, on this issue, Sir, this proposal will also go
through.
On entry of ex-Governors in the Warrant of Precedence, we had referred the matter
to a committee under the Cabinet Secretary which decides on these things. No decision has
yet been taken on this issue”.
1.9 One Member of the Committee pointed out the provision mentioned in the Memorandum
regarding Delegated Legislation which reads as under and sought to know the proposed mechanism
of reimbursement in this regard:
“Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 13 of the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances
and Privileges) Act, 1982 relating to the power to make rules, by inserting Clause (h) in
sub-section (2) of section 13. Clause (h), proposed to be so inserted, empowers the
President to make rules for the manner of providing secretarial assistance and
reimbursement thereof under section 12A. The rules made by the President are required to
be laid before Parliament. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the
President are matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character”.
1.10 In response to the Committee’s query, Home Secretary submitted as under:–
“…I will keep that in mind; when drawing up the rules, our Ministry will ensure that the
ex-Governor is not made to pay first.  We will try and make sure that he is given sufficient
advances so that he need not get into any embarrassment on account of funds. We will take
care of that in the rules.”
1.11 Some Members observed that as per the provision of Section 12A the ex-Governors would
have discretion to appoint somebody as her/his Personal Assistant and the expenditure would be
borne by the Union Government. The Committee accorded the proposal in the Memorandum
Regarding Delegated Legislation that secretarial assistance with reimbursement may be provided to
ex-Governors.
1.12 Some Members sought to know whether there were any requests for pension for ex-
Governors. Replying to the Committee’s query, Home Secretary answered that there had been

4
requests from time to time that ex-Governors might also be given pension. On a query as to why
the Government has not considered this demand also along with the other issues, the Home
Secretary responded as under:–
“This was examined by the Ministry. It was examined a number of times. The view taken
was that Governors enjoy an exalted office; most people become Governors after having
held some high office which has pension benefit — whether it is the Parliament or some
other civil office. There have been instances of ex-Governors rejoining active politics or
some other vocation. On balance of things, it was decided that it was not really necessary
to provide for a separate pension to ex-Governors.”
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL
1.13 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. The details are
enumerated as below:–
Clause-2
1.14 Clause-2 of the Bill proposes to substitute Clause (a) of Section 2 of the Act by clause (a)
providing definition of ‘‘ex-Governor’’ as a person who has been the Governor of a State or two
or more States and clause (aa) keeping the existing definition of ‘‘Governor’’.
1.15 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause-3
1.16 Clause-3 proposes insertion of new Section 12A in the principal Act providing for
entitlement of ex-Governor, for the remainder of his term, secretarial assistance of one Personal
Assistant on reimbursement basis. It also provides that where such ex-Governor is re-appointed to
the office of the Governor or elected to Parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any
office of profit under the Union or a State Government, he shall not be eligible for such secretarial
assistance for the period during which he holds such office.’’
1.17 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause-4
1.18 Clause-4 proposes insertion of Clause (h) after Clause (g) of sub-section (2) of Section 13
of the principal Act to deal with procedural and administrative mechanism for reimbursement.
1.19 The Clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
1.20 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential/drafting nature, namely “2012” and ‘Sixty-Third’ to be substituted by
‘2013’ and “sixty-Fourth” year, respectively.
1.21 Since, this Bill proposes changes which are a matter of procedure and administrative
in nature, the Committee adopts the Bill without any change and commends for being
passed.

5
1.22 The Committee, while adopting the Bill, also suggests that the rules to be framed for
implementing proposed amendment for providing secretarial assistance to ex-Governors on
reimbursement basis should be formulated in such a manner as to empower the ex-
Governors to appoint Personal Assistant of her/his choice but at the same time there should
be some minimum qualification for eligibility for being appointed as Personal Assistant to
ex-Governors so that the appointed person should be able to provide the desired secretarial
assistance. The Committee also desires that, as has been agreed to by the Home Secretary,
while drifting rules, it may be ensured that the Ex-governor is not made to pay first and
sufficient advances may be made available to him to meet the requirement.

MINUTES

8

9
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21 st January, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Adsul
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
13. Shri Datta Meghe
14. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
15. Shri Rathod Ramesh
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
17. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shumsher K. Sheriff, Secretary-General
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
9

10
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Secretary
2. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
3. Shri J.L. Chugh, Joint Secretary (Judicial)
4. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (CS)
5. Shri Ashutosh Jain, Director
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1 Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri K.V. Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Law Secretary
I. Opening Remarks
2.0 At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. The
Chairman then made a reference to the presence of Secretary General, Rajya Sabha in the meeting
and welcomed him and stated that his presence would prove to be useful during deliberations of
the Committee. He then apprised the members about the Agenda of the day which was to hear the
presentation of the Home Secretary on the following Bills:–
(i) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012; and
(ii) The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012.
Reference of Bills to the Committee
(i) ***
3.0 * * *
(ii) The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
4.0 The Chairman also stated that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred another Bill named
the  Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012, which was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 10
th December, 2012 and pending therein, to the Committee on
28th December, 2012, for examination and report within three months.
4.1 He mentioned that this Bill seeks to provide Secretarial Assistance to Ex-Governors in the
form of one Personal Assistant, which the ex-Governor concerned may appoint on reimbursement
basis, during his/her life time.
4.2 He added that this Bill proposed changes which were general in nature and the Committee
may complete the process of considering the Bill in that sitting itself and direct the Secretariat to
prepare the Report on the Bill.
*** Relates to other matters.

11
II. Declaration of Interest by Members in Subject/Bill undertaken for examination
5.0 The Chairman then read out the following rule 294 (1) of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business of Rajya Sabha for information of the Members:–
“Whenever a member has a personal or specific pecuniary interest (direct or indirect) in a
matter being considered by the Council or a Committee thereof, he shall declare the nature
of such interest notwithstanding any registration of his interests in the Register, and shall
not participate in any debate taking place in the Council or its Committees before making
such declaration”.
[On Arrival of Union Home Secretary and other officials]
III. Presentation on the Bill
(i) The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
6.0 The Chairman welcomed the Union Home Secretary and other officials to the sitting of the
Committee. He stated that since the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges)
Amendment Bill, 2012 was of general nature, the Home Secretary should make a presentation on
it at first. The Home Secretary stated that there was no presentation on this Bill as it has very
small amendment. The Chairman and Members then raised/asked following issues/query:–
• Was there any discussion on pension for retired Governors in Governors’ conference
held in February 2012?
• Whether there had been requests from Ex-Governors, then why the Government did not
consider it alongwith other issues.
6.1 Replying to the Committee’s query, Home Secretary answered that there had been requests
from time to time that ex-Governors might also be given pension. On a query as to why the
Government has not considered this demand also along with the other issues, the Home Secretary
responded as under:–
“This was examined by the Ministry. It was examined a number of times. The view taken
was that Governors enjoy an exalted office; most people become Governors after having
held some high office which has pension benefit — whether it is the Parliament or some
other civil office. There have been instances of ex-Governors rejoining active politics or
some other vocation. On balance of things, it was decided that it was not really necessary
to provide for a separate pension to ex-Governors.”
6.2 The Home Secretary clarified on the issues. The Chairman and Members then agreed to the
proposed amendments in the Bill and directed the Secretariat to prepare the report.
(iii) ***
7.0 * * *
8.0 * * *
9.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.0 The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet again on Monday, the 28 th January, 2013.
*** Relates to other matters.

12
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 26 th February, 2013 in Committee Room
“C”, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shrimati Kanimozhi
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Adsul
9. Shri L.K. Advani
10. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Ramen Deka
13. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
14. Shri Naveen Jindal
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
***
12
*** Relate to other matters.

13
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e. consideration and adoption of 165 th and 166 th Action Taken
Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations of the Committee
contained in 161
st and 162 nd Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of DoNER respectively, 167 th Report on Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 and 168 th Report on the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012. The Chairman proposed that  in the first instance, the Committee
could adopt the 165
th, 166 th and 168 th Reports of the Committee and  invited Members to give this
suggestions on these Reports. The Committee then adopted the above mentioned Reports with some
minor modifications.
3.0–6.2 * * *
6.3 The Committee authorised the Chairman to cause presentation of the Reports to Parliament
on a suitable date and also to decide the names of Members for presentation.
7.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept and also to decide the names
of Members for presentations.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
04 Dec., 2012
Bill No. 137 of 2012
THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND
PRIVILEGES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Act, 1982.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Governors (Emoluments,
Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances
and Privileges) Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for clause ( a), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(a) “ex-Governor” means a person who has been the
Governor of a State or two or more States;
(aa) “Governor” means the Governor, or any person
discharging the functions of the Governor, of any State or of
two or more States;’.
17
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.45 of 1860.

18
3. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“12A. Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the
ex-Governor shall, for the remainder of his life, be
entitled to secretarial assistance of one Personal
Assistant  on reimbursement basis:
Provided that where such ex-Governor is re-
appointed to the office of the Governor or elected to
Parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any
office of profit under the Union or a State Government,
he shall not be eligible for such secretarial assistance for
the period during which he holds such office.”.
4. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after
clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(h) the manner of providing secretarial assistance and
reimbursement under section 12A.”.
Insertion of
new section
12A.
Entitlement of
ex-Governor
to secretarial
assistance.
Amendment
of section 13.
45 of 1860.

19
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As per the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Act, 1982 the Governor is entitled to emoluments
amounting to one lakh ten thousand rupees per month. However, the
said Act does not provide for any pension or post-retirement
benefits to ex-Governors except medical facilities governed by the
rules or orders issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
from time to time. Keeping in view the high constitutional office
that a Governor holds and considering the contributions in public
discourse that they would continue to make after they retire, it is
proposed to provide the secretarial assistance to ex-Governors in the
form of one Personal Assistant, which the ex-Governor concerned
may appoint on reimbursement basis, during his life time. However,
he shall not be eligible for such secretarial assistance for the period
during which he is re-appointed to the office of Governor or elected
to Parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any office of
profit under the Union or a State Government.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
The 30 th November, 2012.
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 7/31/2011-M&G, dated 30th November, 2012
from Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of Home Affairs to
the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of
the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment
Bill, 2012, recommends the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha
under article 117(1) of the Constitution as also the consideration of
the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
19

20
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 12A so as to
provide for secretarial assistance to an ex-Governor in the form of
one Personal Assistant, on reimbursement basis, during his life time
and shall not be eligible for such secretarial assistance for the period
during which he is re-appointed to the office of Governor or elected
to parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any office of
profit under the Union or a State Government.
2. In order to implement the aforesaid provision it is estimated
that, an approximate amount of rupees one crore ninety-five lakh
per annum would be involved. The said expenditure will be met
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
3. This Bill, if enacted, will not incur any other recurring or
non-recurring expenditure.
20

21
21
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 13 of the
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982,
relating to the power to make rules, by inserting clause ( h) in sub-
section ( 2) of section 13. Clause ( h) proposed to be so inserted
empowers the President to make rules for the manner of providing
secretarial assistance and reimbursement thereof under section 12A.
2. The rules made by the President are required to be laid
before Parliament. The matters in respect of which rules may be
made by the President are matters of procedure and administrative
details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

22
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE G OVERNORS (E MOLUMENTS, A LLOWANCES AND
PRIVILEGES) A CT, 1982
(43 OF 1982)
** * **
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Governor” means the Governor, or any person
discharging the functions of the Governor, of any State or of
two or more States;
** * * *
13.(1) * ** **
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
** * **
22
Definitions.
Power to
make rules.

23
23
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges)
Act, 1982.
(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of Home Affairs)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.