RAJYA SABRA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
THIRTY -SECOND REPORT 
ON 
C.S.(H.A.)-53 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1996-97) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
HOME AFFAIRS 
(Presented to Rajya Sabba on the 30th August, 1996) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 30th August, 1996) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 1996/Bhadra, 1918 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
1. CoMPOSITION oF THE CoMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCriON 
3. REPORT 
4. RELEVA!'IT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE CoMMITTEE 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-26 
27-42 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shrj Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
11. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
12. Shri N. Rajendran 
13. Slui Jalaludin Ansari 
14. Shri Raj Babbar 
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
17. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
18. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
21. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
22. Shri Vijay Goel 
23. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
24. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
25. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
26. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
27. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
28. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
29. Prof. M. Kamson 
30. Shri ldris Ali 
31. Shri Gopalbhai Kalan Tandel 
32. Shri Khelsai Singh 
33. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
34. Prof. P .J. Kurien 
35. Shri Sharad Yadav 
36. Shri Taslimuddin 
37. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
38. Shri Sudhir Giri 
39. Shri N.S.V. Chithan 
(i) 

40. Shri N. Dennis 
41. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
42. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
43. Shri Kanshi Ram 
44. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
45. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

INTRODUCfiON 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby present this Thirty-second Report 
on the Demands for Grants (1996-97) relating to the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
2. The Committee held in all 7 sittings to complete the examination of the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry. In its first meeting held on the 7th August, 1996 the Committee had 
&eneral discussion on the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the three Ministries within its 
purview. In its meetings held on the 8th and 12th August, 1996 the Committee considered 
the relevant documents and papers received from the Ministry of Home Affairs and held 
discussions with its representatives on the subject. It also heard the Directors-General of 
BSF, CRPF, CISF, ITBP and NSG and the Commissioner of Police, Delhi relating to 
demands of their respective Forces at its meetings held on the 14th and 19th August, 1996. 
3. The Committee while making its recommendations/observations has mainly relied 
upon the following: 
(i) Presentations made by the Secretary of the Ministry, Directors-General of BSF, 
CRPF, CISF, ITBP and NSG and Commissioner of Police, Delhi; 
(ii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 1996-97; 
(iii) Annual Report of the Ministry for 1995-96; 
(iv) Performance Budget of the Ministry for the year 1996-97; 
(v) Detailed explanatory note on the Demands for Grants fer 1996-97; 
(vi) Statement showing approved outlay and expenditure incurred ·On Plan Schemes of 
the Ministry during the Eighth Plan period (1992-97); 
(vii) Written replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaires sent to it by the 
Secretariat; and 
(viii) Written clarifications on poinWissues raised by the Members in the meetings of 
the Committee. 
4. The Committee considered the Report in its sittings held on the 27th and 29th 
August, 1996 and adopted the same in its sitting held on the 29th August, 1996. 
NEw DELHI; 
August 29, 1996 
(iii) 
· SOM PAL 
Chairman 
Committee on Home Affairs 

REPORT 
The Ministry of Home Affairs has been entrusted broadly with the following functions: 
(a) To deal with all matters relating to internal security; 
(b) To deal with all matters relating to Centre-State relations and Inter-State relations; 
(c) Implementation of the provisions of the Constitution relating to Official Language 
and the provisions of the Official Language Act, 1963; 
(d) To discharge certain basic functions like notification of assumption of office by the 
President and the Vice-President; notification of appointment of the Prime Minister 
and other Ministers; notification of appointment, resignation and removal of 
Governors and Lt. Governors, appointment of Lt. Governors, Chief Commissioners 
and Administrative Officers in Union Territories; and 
(e) To deal with matters like citizenship and naturalisation census of Population, 
National Anthem, National Flag of India, etc. 
To discharge the above fuRctions, the Ministry has been divided into four Depart­
ments:-
(i) Department -of Internal Security - to deal with Police, Law and Order and 
rehabilitation; 
(ii) Department of States - to deal with Centre-State relations, inter.-State relations, 
Union Territories and Freedom Fighters' Pension; 
(iii) Department of Official Language - to deal with the implementation of the 
provisions of the Constitution relating to Official Language and the provisions of 
the Official Language Act, 1963; 
(iv) Department of Home- to deal with the notification of assumption of office by the 
President and Vice-President, notification of appointment of the Prime Minister 
and other Ministers, etc. 
3. On behalf of the Ministry, ten Demands have been presented to Parliament. 
4. In Vol.-1 of the Demands for Grants, there are five Demands, namely, (i) Demand 
No. 42-Ministry of Home Affairs; (ii) Demand No. 43--Cabinet; (iii) Demand No. 
44-Police; (iv) Demand No. 45-0ther Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs; and 
Demand No. 46 - Transfers to Union Territory Governments. 
5. Vol.-11 of the Demands for Grants relates to Union Territories (without Legislature), 
namely, Demand No. 97-Andaman and Nicobar Islands; Demand No. 98-Chandigarh; 
Demand No. 99-Dadra and Nagar Haveli; Demand No. 100 - Daman and Diu and 
Demand No. 101-Lakshadweep. The entire Budget of the Union Territories (without 
Legislature) on the Plan afi well as Non-Plan side is reflected in the Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
1 

2 
6. A Statement indicating the Actuals for 1994-95 B.E.-1995-96 R.E.-1995-96 and B.E.-
1996-97 in respect of various Demands of the Ministry is given below:-
(Rs. in crores) 
Demand Actuals B.E. R.E. B.E. 
No. 1994-95 1995-96 1995-96 1996-97 
42. Ministry of Home 254.82 273.68 293.87 302.70 
Affairs 
43. Cabinet 76.83 77.56 90.30 104.81 
44. Police 3223.89 3444.81 3783.50 4401.07 
45. Other Exp. of 514.88 578.13 564.11 516.90 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
46. Transfers 434.00 484.29 491.49 461.04 
97. And a man & 433.28 473.03 500.27 517.72 
Nicobar Islands 
98. Chandigarh 391.47 415.86 436.38 443.01 
99. Dadra & Nagar 68.85 84.51 86.72 112.27 
Haveli 
100. Daman & Diu 63.21 71.60 74.50 84.96 
101. Lakshadweep 115.10 130.98 133.88 140.89 
ToTAL: 5576.33 6034.45 6455.02 7085.37 
DEMAND NO. 42- MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
7. This demand mainly includes expenditure relating to the Secretariat, Census, Official 
Language, Intelligence Bureau, Civil Defence, Home Guards and :?ayment to State 
Governments to administration of Central Acts and Regulations, etc. 
Budget 
A.E.-1994-95 
254.82 
B.E.-1995-96 
273.68 
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1995-96 
R.E.-1995-96 
293.87 
(Rs. in crores) 
B.E.-1996-97 
302.70 
(a) Additional establishment related expenditure on the Secretariat of the Ministry and 
the Committee of Parliament on Official Language on account of grant of additional 
D.A., interim relief, enhanced bonus ceiling, replacement of staff cars, purchase of 
Bullet Proof cars and office equipment, tours by officers and undertaking of foreign 
tour by the Committee of Parliament on Official Language; 
(b) Additional establishment related expenditure of the LB. and Bureau of Immigration 
on grant of additional D.A., interim relief, enhanced bonus ceiling, replacement of 
old vehicles, purchase of machinery/equipment etc. 

3 
(c) Additional expenditure on grant of additional D.A., interim relief and enhanced 
bonus ceiling to organisation of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner of 
India; and 
(d) Additional expenditure on the minor works at residences of the protected persons. 
Reasons for variation in R.E.-1995-96 and B.E.-1996-97 
(a) Normal annual growth 
(b) Additional provision for reimbursement to State Governments for Civil Defence. 
INTERNAL SECURITY 
8. The Secretary of the Ministry in his presentation gave a broad overview of the 
internal security scenario of the country and submitted that various factors such as 
demolition of the disputed Ram Janam Bhoomi-Babri Masjid structure at Ayodhya, the riots 
and a series of bomb blasts thereafter in Mumbai, activities of certain insurgent groups with 
aid from certain external forces, proxy war by Pakistan in Jammu and Kashmir abetted by 
infiltration by Afghan and other foreign mercenaries (as per some American agencies' 
reports there are about three million pieces of AK-46 rifles lying in an unopened condition 
in Pakistan), have had some negative impact on the security environment in the country and 
the security forces have come under severe strain. In this context, he referred to the 
malfunctioning of police system in some of the States where transfers of police officials 
particularly at the senior level are effected in haste for reasons unrelated to their efficiency 
so much so that even in a few months 5-6 persons change places. This has a debilatating 
effect on the functioning of the police force and tends to demoralise it. He underlined the 
need to do something in this regard. 
9. On the basis of the evidence tendered by the Secretary of the Ministry, the 
Committee has come to the conclusion that the law and order situation in the country as a 
whole is not a happy one. The budgetary outlays which run into thousands. of crores of 
rupees for Central Para Military Forces to maintain tranquillity within the country as also 
across its borders seem to be a substantial drain on our resources. There is no denying the 
fact that maintenance of law and order is the responsibility of the State Governments 
concerned but the Ministry of Home Affairs has to play nodal role in this regard by 
coordinating activities of intelligence agencies and having necessary liaison with the Home 
Departments of the States concerned. The Committee is given to understand that some 
thinking in the Government is going on to bring law and order on the Concurrent List and 
that would perhaps help deal with the matters concerning law and order in a better and 
integrated way. The Committee feels that before any exercise to include the subject of law and 
order in the Concurrent List is undertaken, necessary consultations be had with the State 
Governments concerned at the appropriate level and their views be ascertained in the -matter. 
10. The CommiUee expresses its concern that the infiltration of people from the 
neighbouring countries particularly Bangladesh is continuing unabated and our Security 
Forces have perhaps not been that much successful in checking this influx. The migration of 
people from other countries on this scale tends to not only disturb the cultural ethos of the 
country but also creates law and order problem and acts as a severe strain on the economy of 
the country. The Committee in this context feels that the intelligence agencies of the 
Government have failed together necessary intelligence about the infiltration of secessionist 
elements and once they have entered the country the efforts to nab them have either been half 
hearted or have not met with the desired results. The recent incident of arms dropping in 

4 
Purulia has exposed the inherent flaws in our security network. Special emphasis has to be 
laid on our air surveillance. Our Coastal security set up also needs to be suitably geared up to 
prevent smuggling of huge consignments of arms and ammunitions through our vast coastline 
which has assumed menacing proportions. 
11. The Committee n;commends to the Government to take urgent steps to ensure that 
the networking of Central and State Intelligence Agencies is institutionalised and their 
strength and capabilities are raised to an appropriate level so that they act in a well 
coordinated and integrated manner and share information with their State counterparts so 
that the phenomenon of illegal migration is brought to an end. Suitable mechanism may also 
be evolved ~o lay down certain norms of accountability in case there are cases of intelligence 
failure and with that end in view a nodal officer be appointed for each State to coordinate 
activities of the Intelligence Agencies-whether they be Central or State-in that area. 
Something also needs to be done to mount special surveillance on our porous international 
borders. 
12. The Committee has also noted that of late there has been a spurt in the violent 
activities in different parts of the country and some anti-national organisations particularly in 
North-East and extremist groups in Andhra Pradesh have become active. The Committee feefs 
that the discontentment, which· may be brewing among the people in these regions because of 
socio-economic factors or underdevelopment, is exploited by the extremist elements to rope 
them in violent and seccessionist activities. What is, therefore, needed most is to have a 
dialogue with them; motivate them to come in the national mainstream, identify the causes of 
their unrest and to undertake speedy development of their areas. Special emphasis in that 
context is required to hasten up the process of land reforms which seems to have somewhat 
got bogged down. The Committee also expresses its displeasure over the tardy pace of 
implementation of various Accords entered into by the Government with different organisa­
tions such as Assam Accord, T.N.V. Accord, Bodo Accord and MOU involving representative 
organisations of Karbi, Anglong and North Cachar Hills Districts and. urges upon Govern­
ment to speed up their implementation. 
13. In the course of the evidence of the Secretary it came to the notice of the 
Committee that the practice of issuing Photo Identity Cards to the people in the border 
areas was prevalent in some cases but after the Election Commission decided to issue Photo 
Identity Cards to the voters all over country it was thought that they would be of better use 
even in border areas and the earlier exercise of issuing Identity Cards to the border people 
was somewhat slowed down and neither could make any headway, Government has now 
decided to resume the exercise of issuing Photo Identity Cards to the people in border areas 
as it was being done earlier, and to begin with, border areas in Rajasthan and certain areas 
in the North-East are proposed to be taken as a pilot scheme. 
14. Tht! Committee feels that expenditure of enormous proportions has already been 
incurred on the Photo Identity Cards for voters but we still are at a dead end. The Photo 
Identity cal'ds, as a matter of fact, issued on a national plan will be of immense use to the 
citizens in many ways particularly from the point of view of internal security. They will also 
help identify the illegal foreign migrants who could be deported back to the countries of their 
origin. A look in its entirety has, therefore, to be had on this issue and since the Photo 
Identity Cards are of prime importance in a national perspective it may be ensured that they 
are issued lo all the people within a definite tirite frame. 
15. The Committee is of the view that the functioning of Police system in our country 
leaves much to be desired and periodically it has come in for severe criticism from different 
quarters. To reform this system a National Police Commission headed by Dr. Dharma Vira. 

5 
was set up long back and the vital recommendations which it had made in its report have got 
bogged down awaiting their implementation. The Committee strongly feels that implementa· 
tion of recommendations of this nature needs to be accorded top priority. The Committee does 
not know what factors are delaying their implementation. It, therefore, urges upon the 
Government to submit a status paper to it on the recommendations which have found 
acceptance and which have not and whether the ones which have been accepted could be 
implemented in a time bound manner. 
16. The Committee views very seriously the growing phenomenon of frequent transfers of 
senior police and civil officials in some of the States which has a demoralising effect on the 
administration and a serious bearing on the law and order situation. The Committee feels that 
this tendency has to be curbed in the interest of generating an efficient and vibrant law 
enforcement machinery. It is quite imperative that this matter may be taken up by all States 
concerned at the highest level, if possible, through a conference of Chief Ministers and an 
objective transfer policy in the matter of high police and civil officials be worked out and 
effectively implemented. The officers concerned should have a fixity of tenure particularly in 
the districts, where they can grapple with the problems of the area seriously and purposefully. 
TRAINING OF INSURGENT GROUPS 
17. In reply to a point regarding insurgent activities in the North-Eastern region the 
Ministry has informed that there exists a number of camps of various insurgent groups 
including United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA), National Socialist Council of 
Nagaland (Issao Swu/Muivah), All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF), Tripura Revolutionary 
Army (TRA), National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT), People's Liberation Army 
(PLA), etc. in Bangladesh across the Indian border. The training includes training in use of 
arms, information about Indian Security Forces, etc. Similarly camps of Bodo Security 
Force, ULFA and NSCN exist in Bhutan across Indian border. Joint training camps are also 
being organised by these militant groups. 
18. The Ministry has stated that to prevent the activities of the insurgent groups from 
across the border an Institutional mechanism for ongoing cooperation with neighbouring 
countries has been evolved. This has been very successful in restricting the activities and 
bases of insurgent elements from Myanmar. While this mechanism is also in place with 
Bangladesh, though not very effectively, it has so far not been possible with Bhutan. Since 
dealings with other countries are being conducted in coordination with Ministry of External 
Affairs, a proposal for starting, such institutional mechanism for on going cooperation with 
Bhutan is under discussion with Ministry of External Affairs. 
19. The Committee feels that establishment of bases and running of training Centres by 
the insurgent groups in Bangladesh, Bhutan and Myanmar is a matter of serious concern 
much as they encourage them to pursue their hostile activities in our country. A viable 
strategy has to be devised to strengthen the borders with these countries on priority basis, seal 
the escape routes of the insurgents and if necessary, as a last resort, if. the diplomatic efforts 
do not yield results, doctrine of hot pursuit which is internationally accepted, be adopted to 
foil their designs. 
20. The Committee has also noted that of late all groups involved in anti-India activities 
are having an easy passage through our border with Nepal and either no institutional 
mechanism for cooperation with that country to check activities of such elements is currently 
in place or it is· not working effectively. India has had traditionally ;good relations with Nepal 
and cooperation of the _two countries is manifest in different areas. The Committee sees no 
reason why we should not have necessary cooperation from that country to prevent the entry 

6 
of terrorists and secessionist elements into our country. The Committee recommends that an 
all out diplomatic initiative be undertaken at the appropriate level with Nepal to work out a 
satisfactory solution of the problem. 
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE 
21. An amount of Rs. 8.00 crores had been sanctioned by the Planning Commission for 
the implementation of various schemes of the Department of Official Language during the 
Eighth Five Year Plan (1992-97). However, as illustrated below, there has been a recurring 
under utilisation of yearly allocations: 
(Rs. in crores) 
1992-93 1993-94 1994-95 1995-96 1996-97 
Outlay Exp. Outlay Exp. Outlay Exp. Outlay Exp .. Outlay Exp. 
(upto June '96) 
3.00 0.45 4.00 0.67 3.00 1.05 2.75 1.85 2.75 0.15 
22. It is evident that as against the total approved outlay of Rs. 8.00 crores for the 
Eighth plan period (1992-97) an expenditure of only Rs. 4.17 crores has been incurred upto 
June, 1996. The main reason advanced by the Ministry for shortfall in expenditure is that ten 
schemes of the Department of Official Language and its subordinate Offices are staff 
oriented and proposal for creation of 364 additional posts is pending with the Staff 
Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance. These schemes aim at:-
(i) Strengthening of Hindi Language and Typing wing of Correspondence Course; 
(ii) Strengthening of Research and Analysis Wing in the Central Hindi Training 
Institute; 
(iii) Strengthening of Sub-Institutes of Central Hindi Training Institute; . 
(iv) Creation of post of Dy. Director, Typing/Stenography in Examination wmg; 
(v) Establishment of five new Regional Implementation Offices; 
(vi) Strengthening of existing eight Regional Implementation Offices; 
(vii) Crash Programme for Translation Training; 
(viii) E~pansion Scheme for Translation Training; 
(ix) Augmentation of Translation capacity (Honorarium) Scheme; and 
(x) Strengthening of Department of Official Language. 
23. The Committee was informed that till such time additional posts are sanctioned the 
Department has worked out some alternative proposals for implementation of Official 
Language policy through use of modem equipments. The Committee in its Ninth Report on 
the Demands for Grants · (1994-95) of the Ministry had impressed upon the Ministry to 
ensure proper and maximum utilisation of the funds allotted for implementation of the 
Official Language and the Official Language Act, 1963. The Committee, however, feels 
concerned that the position in this regard has not improved and the trend of under 
utilisation of the plan funds for implementation of various schemes continue,s unabated. 

7 
24. The Committee expresses its displeasure over the laxity of the Staff Inspection Unit of 
the Ministry of Finance for not initiating prompt action on the proposal of the Department of 
Official Language for creation of additional posts. The Committee recommends that the · 
requisite number of posts be sanctioned and filled up within the current year. In this context, 
the Committee would also like to impress upon the Ministry to adopt a· more rational and 
positive approach in the matter to ensure timely implementation of its schemes. The 
Committee would also like to impress upon the Government to devise some plan so that where 
more than one Ministry or Department is involved in implementation of its programmes! 
schemes, a coordinated approach is followed and implementation does not suffer. 
NATIONAL FIRE SERVICE COLLEGE, NAGPUR 
25. Although fire is a State subject and fire services are administered by the State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations the Ministry of Home Affairs renders 
technical advice to the States/UTs and Central Ministries on fire protection, fire prevention 
and fire legislation. 
26. The National Fire Service College, Nagpur, conducts different types of courses for 
the training of Fire Officers in India. Fire Officers from foreign countries also get training in 
this college. • 
27. Officers from foreign countries also get training in this college. The Committee felt 
that given the importance of the College, which is the only College of its kind in South-East 
Asia, the course capacity of 239 is not of satisfactory proportions and the feasibility of raising 
it substantially upward needs to be examined. It was submitted to the Committee that a 
Committee to review the functioning of the college and declare it as an Institute of Excellence 
has been constituted which may consider the need for enhancing the capacity of Institute. The 
Committee feels that a definite time frame for submission of the Report by the said 
Committee be laid down so that its recommendations are duly examined and implemented 
within the current year itself. The Committee also recommends that in view of the increasing 
number of fire incidents, the pressure for training from different quarters particularly from 
other countries is likely to mount in the coming years. Therefore, there is aU the more need to 
set up similar colleges in other parts of the country which could have great potential for 
employment generation as well. 
DEMAND NO. 43- CABINET 
28. This Demand includes budget provisions for-
(i) Salaries of Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of States and Deputy Ministers; 
(ii) Expenditure on travel by Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy 
Ministers; 
(iii) Sumptuary and other allowances of Ministers; 
(iv) E'Wenditure on salaries; travel, office expenses of Cabinet Secretariat; 
(v) Expenditure on salaries, travel, office expenses etc. of PM's Office; 
(vi) Expenditure on Secretariat establishment of the :P.epartment of J and K; 
(vii) Special Protection Group; 

8 
(viii) Expenditure on Government hospitality and entertainment of foreign State guests; 
Official entertainment arranged at Rashtrapati Bhawan on behalf of the Vice­
President and Prime Minister; reception on National Days, investiture and 
presentation of credential ceremonies etc.; and 
(ix) Expenditure on Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 
Budget 
(Rs. in crores) 
A.E. 1994-95 B.E.-1995-96 R.E.-1995-96 B.E.-1996-97 
76.83 77.56 90.30 104.81 
. 
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1995-96 
(a) Additional establishment related expenditure on account of additional D.A , 
Interim Relief, enhanced bonus ceiling, purchase of Vehicles, machinery and 
equipments by S.P.G., P.M.'s Office, and Cabinet Secretariat; 
{b) Provision for office and residential complex for S.P.G. at Pappenkalan in Delhi; 
(c) Payment of Airlift charges to the Ministry of Defence and more tours by Officers 
in the Department of J&K Affairs in connection with Law and Order problem in 
J&K; and 
(d) Enhanced provision for salary and sumptuary allowances of the Ministers and 
expenditure on Government hospitality/entertainment of , guests at Rashtrapati 
Bhawan on National day, investiture etc. 
Reasons for variation in R.E. 1995-96 and B.E. 1996-97 
Additional provision for office and residential complex of S.P.G. and more provision for 
tour of Ministers besides normal growth. 
29. The Committee has noted that the reason given for variation in the revised estimates 
of 1995-96 and Budget estimates of 1996-97 is more provision for tour of Ministers besides 
normal growth. The Committee fails to understand the rational behind higher provision for 
tour of Ministers when the present Government is comparatively of a smaller size and it 
assumed office when about a quarter of the current financial year was already over. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the view that allocations for foreign travel of Ministers be brought 
to a reasonable level. 
DEMAND NO. 44 - POLICE 
30. This demand relates to expenditure on CRPF, NSG, BSF, ITBP, CISF, Assam 
Rifles, Educational Training and Research, CJiminal Investigation and Vigilance, Inter-State 
Police Wireless Scheme, Special Police, Modernisation of Police Force, Crime Criminal 
Information system, Delhi Police, Construction of Residential Accommodation and Build­
ings for Police, Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Pak Border works etc. 

9 
Budget 
(Rs. in crores) 
A.E. 1994-95 B.E.-1995-96 R.E.-1995-96 B.E.-1996-97 
3223.89 3444.81 3783.50 4401.07 
Reasons for variation in B.E. and R.E. 1995-96 
(a) Additional D.A., Interim Relief and enhancement in the ceiling of Bonus; 
.(b) Increased expenditure on travel expenses and other various provisioning items of 
the CPMFs due to their frequent movement on internal security duty , enhance­
ment in rates of ration money and purchase of new vehicles; 
(c) Clearance of pending liabilities; 
(d) Additional reimbursement to the Ministry of Defence for increased expenditure on 
Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry; 
(e) Additional special central assistance for security related expenditure to the State 
Governments; 
(f) Clearance of pending payment and creation of infrastructure facilities for installa­
tion of computers in States under Crime Criminal Information System; 
(g) Additional provision for barbed wire fencing and flood lighting for taking up 
works in Jammu sector and additional expenditure in Rajasthan Sector under 
lndo-Pak Border works. 
Reasons foa· variation in R.E. 1995-96 and B.E. 1996-97 
(a) Enhanced provision for strengthening and nonnal g;·owth of CPMFs; 
(b) Additional provision for modernisation of State Police Forces; 
(c) P10vision for Delhi Police; 
(d) Additional provision for Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Pak Border works. 
HOUSING FOR CENTRAL PARA MILITARY FORCES (CPMFs) 
31. It is well recognised that provision of housing facilities for the CPMF pf';~;onnel has 
.an important bearing on the morale of the Forces. Government has been sc· ' ed of the 
problem concerning lack of housing facilities for CPMF personnel and accordingly faced with 
inadequacy of Non-Plan allocations to meet the chaJlenge on this account, housing was 
included as a Plan scheme for the first time in 1993-94. Against initial allocation of Rs. 25 
crores each in first two years, the allocation was enhanced to Rs.40 crores during 1995-96 
and it has been retained at the same level during 1996-97. Funds are also being allocated in 
the Non-Plan Budget of CPMFs for housing in addition to Plan funds. The approved level of 
satisfm:tion for housing for non-gazetted CPMF personnel is curren~ly stated to be 14% 
whereas it is the vicinity of 50% for officers. The raising of allocations for this sector under 

10 
Plan Head has also not made any significant impact as the satisfaction level among the 
constabulary still continues to be far below the approved authorisation of 14%. The table 
below will bear this out:-
Sl. Name of Current No. of Housing Units Deficiency Percentage 
No. CPMFs Strength Housing held and satisfaction of 
Units under total strength 
authorised construction 
1. B.S.F. 181288 34548 16359 18189 9.02 
2. CRPF 165334 26414 14234 12180 8.61 
3. ITBP 30291 5543 3615 1898 11.93 
4. AR 52504 10090 4080 6010 7.77 
TOTAL: 429417 76595 38288 38277 8.91 
32. The Ministry has stated that an amount of approx. Rs.625.00 crores would be 
required at the current cost index to reach the authorised satisfaction level. The quantum of 
Plan and Non-Plan fund being made available presently, has only a marginal impact on the 
total requirement of the residential accommodation. At the current level of aJJocation, the 
existing deficiency would be covered in 10-15 years only, but with the raising of more 
battalions of CPMFs, the housing scenario appears to be bleak. There is another dimension 
of the problem in that out of Plan fund of Rs. 40 crores earmarked for the scheme during 
1995-96, only Rs. 29.66 crores could be utilised on account of infrastructural constraints of 
CPWD and the location of CPMF units in remote, far flung and difficult terrains. 
33. In its 15th Report the Committee bad gone into aspects related with housing for 
CPMFs personnel and emphasised the need to adopt a holistic approach to the problem. The 
Para-military Forces have to work in far-Dung areas and difficult terrains and in States like 
Nagai and, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram after day's hard work they have to walk down 
upto a distance of S-6 kms. in dark nights after traversing narrow roads in order to reach 
their homes. They have to be shown special consideration and dwelling units have to be 
constructed for them near to their places of work on utmost priority. The Committee in its 
said report had urged the Ministry to study the cases of a few States which had set up State 
Housing Boards and also taken commercial loans to tackle the situation. The Committee, 
however, expresses its displeasure that no headway has so far been made in this direction. 
34. The Committee also fails to understand the rationale behind pegging the satisfaction 
level of housing for lower ranks arbitrarily at 14% and accordingly recommends that a more 
realistic view in the matter be taken and it be raised to the level of 25%. The Committee feels 
that constraints of fund should not hamper raising the number of dwelling units for CPMF 
personnel, particularly of lower ranks and an additional requirement of Rs.SO crores as 
placed before the Committee by the Home Secretary for housing for CPMF personnel be met 
on priority basis. 
35. The Committee, however, feels concerned that while additional allocation is sought to 
provide residential accommodation to more CPMF personnel, the approved outlays are not 
utilised to the optimum as an amount of Rs.10.34 crores had to be surrendered during 
1995-96. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that some diversification in terms of agencies 

11 
involved in construction of dwelJing units for CPMF personnel has to be thought of and 
organisations like HUDCO, NBCC etc. may be given a role so that such units are raised 
expeditiously without any hiccups and the funds are utilised fully. 
DELHI POLICE 
36. Financial outlays for Delhi Police were hitherto provided in the Budget of 
Government of N.C.T. of Delhi during the last three years. However, from the year 1996-97 
(from August, 1996), allocations for Delhi Police have been made in the Budget on the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. An outlay of Rs.255.86 crores on the Non-Plan side and Rs.1 
crore on the Plan side has been provided for 1996-97. 
37. In the course of the meeting of the Committee held on 14.8.1996, a point was raised 
by a member of the Committee that the provision for budgetary outlays for meeting the 
expenditure of the Delhi Police is being made from August 1, 1996 which implied that for 
the first four months of the current financial year the expenditure would be met by the 
Government of NCT of Delhi. A suggestion was advanced that the expenditure on Delhi 
Police be borne by the Central Government for the entire period of current financial year 
and the Government of NCT be reimbursed the expenditure incurred by it during the first 
four months of the year. 
38. The Committee is given to understand that detailed consultations had preceded 
between the Union Home Ministry and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
at a high level and the decision for sharing the expenditure of Delhi Police by the Central 
Government in its entirety w.e.f. August 1, 1996 was taken on mutually acceptable terms. The 
Committee felt satisfied with the explanation given. 
39. Delhi is the Capital city of India and therefore general law and order situation here 
has to be such as to serve as a model for other States. On the basis of the figures made 
available to the Committee and the constant reports appearing in the media about the spate 
of robberies. murders, rapes and other heinous crimes, the Committee has, however, got a 
feeling that the crime graph of the metropolis does not present a very happy scenario and it 
is not a model police it should be. There are even complaints about non-registration of FIRs 
by the Police, delayed arrival of PCR personnel after incidents of occurrence of crimes are 
reported to them and general harassment of citizens. The Commissioner of Delhi Police in 
the course of his evidence before the Committee inter alia submitted that Delhi has a static 
population of about 11 million besides a floating population of over 5 lakhs andjt has to 
cope with a unique phenomenon in that notorious criminals from neighbouring St:~t es come 
to Delhi, commit heinous crimes and vanish in other States. It becomes diffict. i~ to have 
surveillance or check the movement of floating population. 
40. The Committee in this context noted that crimes against women, in particular, have 
risen sharply in Delhi over the years. As per the details given to the Committee, it was 
submitted that during the year 1994 crime against women in Delhi constituted 8.48% of the 
total crime. In 1995, the percentage rose to 9.49% and in the first half of 1996 this stood at 

12 
7.31% of the total crime. The details of rise and fall in cases registered under various heads 
of crime against women in 1995 over 1994, and in 1996 from 1.1.96 to 30.6.96 over 1995 
from 1.7.95 to 31.12.95 are as under:-
Sl. Crime head "'lo rise/fall in 1995 over % rise/fall in 1996 (1.1.96 to 
No. 1994 30.6.96) over 1995 (1.7 .95 to 
31.12.95) 
1. Dowry death +5.69 -2.77 
2. Rape +17.08 +30.26 
3. Molestation +79.03 +17.05 
4. 406 IPC -65.29 -40.00 
(relating to dowry) 
5. 498-A IPC +5.68 -26.65 
6. Dowry Prohibition Act +15.38 -57.14 
7. Kidnapping! Abduction +26.55 +6.27 
8. Eve-teasing +67.62 -23.30 
41. It is evident from the table that crime against women is showing an upward trend 
under some important heads such as rape, molestation and kidnapping/abduction. Crimes 
relating to dowry deaths, 406 IPC (relating to dowry). 498-A IPC Dowry Prohibition Act 
and Eve-teasing showed rising trend in 1995 over 1994 though the situation has improved a 
little in the .first six months of 1996. Delhi Police has stated that substantial increase in 
population rapid urbanization, changes in social and cultural attitudes of people and 
emphasis on registration of crime are among the reasons for increased incidence of crime in 
general. Further crimes against women are wide ranging · and have socio-economic 
ramifications. They cannot be tackled by laws alone. Help and support of various voluntary 
and non-Government organisations, press and other responsible members of the society is, 
therefore, desirable to influence and educate women to come forward and offer their 
assistance in the matter . 
42. The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that more than Rs. 380 crores are 
being spent on Delhi Police annually but the ordinary citizen of Delhi does not feel safe. The 
women, in particular, are shaken by the rising trend of crimes against them which is far 
above the national average. The Committee also expresses its displeasure over the fact that the 
representation of women in Delhi Police is also abysmally low to the level of 2.69% . The 
Committee was informed that the recruitment drives for women have not evoked desired 
response contributing to the less intake of women in Delhi Police. The Committee feels that 
either adequate publicity has not been given to these drives or Delhi Police has not been able 
to project a good image so as to encourage women to join it in large number. 
43. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to look into this 
problem in right earnest and take remedial action~ What is needed most is that advertisements 
concerning recruitment of women to the police force in Delhi be given fairly .wide publicity, 
not only in Delhi but in other parts of the country as well and special recruitment drives be 
launched at regular intervals to raise the existing level of women in the force. The Committee 
will appreciate if the progress made on this front during the current year as a result of thJ! 

13 
measures suggested is reported to the Committee. The Committee also feels that an image 
building exercise needs to be taken up urgently by Delhi Police so that women and weaker 
sections who have become victims look to them as their saviou rs and not tormentors. 
44. The Committee drew the attent ion of the Commissioner to a lot of complaints from 
public about the behaviour/misconduct of Delhi Police personnel so much so that Jaw 
abiding citizens do not come forward to help it in detection of crime for fear of harassment. 
The rampant corruption among its ranks has also contribut ed to its bad image. 
45. The Committee, therefore, wanted to know, what corrective steps had been taken to 
make Delhi Police an honest and efficient force. The following measures were listed in this 
context: -
(i) Training of Delhi Police personnel, initial as well as in-service, is being carried out as 
per recommendations of the Jain Committee and the Delhi Police Commission. Inputs 
of human rights , communal amity, police-public relations, police attitude towards the 
public in general and weaker sections in particular have also been included in the 
training curricula . Reorientation courses for the Police personnel on these lines are 
also being run in the District s and other units. Delhi Police Officials are regularly 
deputed for various seminars and courses conducted on police subjects in various 
institutions in the country; and 
(ii) During the lust one year i.e. from 1. 7.1995 to 30.6.1996, 200 Delhi Polic e Offi cials 
have been arrested m 160 criminal cases. The rank-wise break-up is as under:-
Ins. Sl ASI HC Constable Class IV Total 
5 22 19 47 106 1 200 
46. To inspire confidence in the objectivity and impartiali ty of the e nquiries conducted 
against Police Offi cials, an independent authority the Police Complaint Authority, is being 
constituted. Besides this, the charter of Special Task Force, being constituted under the 
orders of the Prime Minister, will include investigation of those cases, where corrupt/ 
collusive practice of Police Officials is suspected. 
47. The Committee hopes that the measures initiated by the Delhi Police will yield 
positive results and it will emerge as a public spirited force. Simultaneously, in order to 
inspire public confidence in its working it will have to show the door to the criminals. A strict 
vigil on its personnel and stringent action against those found guilty of corruption will go a 
long way in improving their performance and bringing it closer to the general public in 
mitigating their problems and difficulties . 
48. A detailed Questionnaire on various aspects of organisational set up of Delhi Police 
and various other aspects related to its working was given by the Commitfee to the 
Commissioner of Police to elicit information on the points raised. The Committee went 
through tbe replies submitted by the Delhi Police to its questionnaire and feels that the 
following ones need to be specially mentioned. 
49. The Committee drew the attention of the Commissioner to the existing set up of 
Delhi Police which seems to give an impression as if its administrative structure is highly 
centralised with all powers concentrated in one man and whether in the interest of increased 
level of efficiency and quick decision making, it would not be appropriate to appoint three 
officers of I.G. rank as Special Commissioners who could hold independent position~ in the 

14 
set up and deal with the matters accordingly. The Committee also wanted to know whether 
in view of the heavy responsibilities cast on the Force, it was not imperative to effect certain 
structural changes in the set up such as separating the security and Traffic Departments and 
removing Vigilance from the purview of the Administrative Branch and bringing it under an 
independent branch headed by a Senior Additional Commissioner or an I.G. 
50. It was submitted to the Committee that any disciplined organisation, particularly a 
Police Force, is supposed ·to have a well defined hierarchical structure with a functionary at 
the apex level to provide ieadership, direction and guidance to the Force , and unity of 
Command .is an a~cepted and time tested principle . Each member in the hierarchy has been 
assigned a specific task to perform and contributes in the decision making process. Regular 
meetings are held by the Commissioner with the officers at various levels which enable Delhi 
Police to function as a cohesive and close knit team. 
51. The Committee does not feel convinced that the Delhi Police is presently working as a 
cohesive and close knit teain. The Committee feels that the command structure of the Force 
needs to be reviewed and decentralisation by creating separate Wings such as Traffic, Security 
and Vigilance be effected, and their functions be handled independently by the officers 
incharge of these wings. The Committee was informed that the proposals for posting an 
officer of the rank of I.G . of Police to supervise Security and Training Wings and assigning 
Vigilance functions to an officer of that rank are currently under consideration. The 
Committee feels the implementation of these proposals will definitely bring about some 
improvement from functional and administrative point of view, but it would be better if 
Security, Training and Vigilance Branches are made three separate and distinct Wings/ 
Departments, with each being headed by I.G. rank officer. The Committee has noted that our 
Armed Forces have three separate organs namely Army, ·Navy and Air Force-each headed 
by a separate Chief-and they have worked quite successfully showing high standards of 
discipline and in the view of the Committee there is no reason why a similar set up on these 
lines as suggested by the Committee for carving out separate wings of Training, Security and 
Vigilance etc. can not be brought about. 
52. A related point that was raised by the Committee was concerning different sets of 
officers of Delhi Police talking differently on police matters with the media and there being 
no centralised system where under one officer could be designated as the official spokesman 
at the headquarter s who ·could in turn give briefings to Press on all matters. 
53. The Committee expresses its displeasure that the pointed reference to the 
Commissioner over this issue did not evoke any reply and the response was more of a 
generalised nature. The idea of the Committee in suggesting for a system of an official 
spokesman of Delhi Police at the Headguarters to ensure that no conflicting reports go to the 
media and it is briefed properly. Besides, in the view of the Committee, the publicity drive 
launched by the Delhi Police is misdirected in some respects in that a lot of slogans are seen 
on the hoardings about the police but any publicity to educate the public in meaningful terms 
about the rights enjoined on them to approach the police is seldom discernible. The 
Committee feels that this is an important aspect which needs to be promptly attended to. 
54. In response to the queri~s on the incentives given to the members of the faculty of 
Police Training School, the old Manual being ~till followed by the Special Branch of Delhi 
Pol;ce, degeneration of Crime Branch of Delhi Police and the criteria for obsolecence of 
vehicles, it was submitted . as follows:-
The non-gazetted members of the faculty are given one rank promotion and also a 
special allowance at the rate of 15% of their basic pay. It is also ensured that· on 

15 
successful completion of their tenure, they are, to the extent possible, given 
challenging postings . However, the system of alloting additional points for serving in 
the Police Training School does not exist at present. This aspect needs a careful 
examination . 
55. The Committee feels that in order to attract capable and motivated officers to the 
Training Faculty, more incentives in the form of a package be given so that they willingly 
serve for comparatively long periods and impart better training to the police personnel joining 
such Training Schools. The package should include awarding of additional points to the 
officers serving in Police Training School so that when they come out they have better career 
prospects and challenging assignments to handle. 
(i) The Manual being currently used by the Special Hranch was framed in 1957 and an 
exercise to amend it is currently in hand. The Committee is not aware of the nature 
of amendments proposed to be effected in the Manual and whether any definite 
time-frame has been prescribed to go through the exercise. The Committee would 
appreciate if detailed consultations precede and expert opinion is taken before the 
Manual is amended. 
(ii) As indicated to the Committee, the Crime Branch of the Delhi Police is a highly 
professional investigating unit with several outstanding achievements to its credit. 
Out of 449 sensitive cases assigned to this Branch in 1995 as many as 436 cases were 
successfully investigated. 
The Committee , however , feels that a premier investigating unit like Crime 
Branch has got afflicted with certain problems and it does not have the same 
credibilit y which it used to have earlier. The figures of 1995 as presented to the 
Committ ee no doubt look impressive but that is not enough to prove that all is well 
with the organisation and it is not free from corruption which is in public 
knowledg e. The Committee strongly recommends that urgent steps be taken to rid 
the Crime Branch of the evils, particularly corruption, which have of late overtaken 
this agency of Delhi Police and some kind of institutional mechanism be devised to 
deal stringently with corrupt elements in the agency. 
(iii) Accordin g to the Delhi Police, the criteria for condemnation of HTV is 10 years life 
(4 lakh Kms.), LTVs is 7 years life (2 lakh Kms.) and Motor Cycles is 6 years life 
(1.20 lakh Kms.) and these criteria apply to the staff cars of the Secretariat as well. 
The Delhi Police, however, feels that a different set of criteria for condemnation of 
vehicles used by it, which is a field organisation, needs to be evolved. 
While the Committee appreciates that the criteria for condemnation of vehicles 
cannot be the same for the police as it is in the case of vehicles being used in the 
Secretariat of the Ministries, etc. it feels that it would be more appropriate if the 
Delhi Police works out details of the criteria it wants to be laid down for 
condemnation of vehicles used by the police and takes it up with the appropriate 
authority. 
FENCING/FLOOD LIGHTING ON INDO-PAK BORDER IN JAMMU SECTOR 
56. To check smuggling of contraband, arms, narcotics and prevent infiltration of 
terrorists and saboteurs our International borders have to be made secure by effective 
policing and sealing porcus stretches. In order to achieve this twin objective, the fencing! 
flood lighting of 180 Kms./195.8 Kms of International Border in Jammu Sector was approved by 
the Cabinet in March, 1995 at an estimated cost of Rs. 71.76 crores. The work was started 

16 
but it had to be :-.uspenclcd due to firing from Pakistan side. In an lnter-Ministrial meeting 
held in August. 1995. a decision was taken to resume the work with the help of bullet proof 
screens. Preparations for this purpose were made, but due to Parliamentary elections, a 
decision wa:-. taken to go slow with the work. 
57. As submitted to the Committee by the Ministry , Pakistan appears determined not to 
allow the fencing and flood lighting works to go on as they do not accept the Jammu borders 
as an Int ernational Border and call it is a working boundry. In this situat ion restarting of 
fencing work in this sector may lead to escalation of tension on the Internat ional Border. 
58. The Committee feels that strengthening of country's border with Pakistan, 
particulary in context of the proxy war it is waging in Jammu & Kashmir , is of paramount 
importan ce. It is every country's rights to make its border secure . The firing from Pak side is 
a provocative gesture and a message has, therefore, to go that such brazen interference in the 
affairs of the country must cease. Managing our borders is our sovereign right. The 
Committee is of the view that the issue may be dealt with utmost priority either bilaterally by 
flag meetings of Commanders or diplomatically or else other avenues be explored to complete 
fencing/flood lighting work in Jammu Sector in our larger National interest. 
RECRUITMENT TO PARA MILITARY FORCES 
59. A Force can be effective only if the persons indu cted are highly motivated and 
professional. At present, recruitment to the rank of Assista nt Commandant in BSF, CRPF 
and ITBP , who arc clas~ I Officers is being done thr ough the CPMFs Services Selection 
Board. The Minbtry has sta rted that though the system is working reaso nably well, a need 
has been felt to have recur itment to these posts in CPMFs through UPSC so as to impro ve 
the quality of officer recruit s. A proposal to this effect has already been sent to UPSC and 
the process of recruitment is likely to start soon . 
60. Sub-Inspectors for the CPMFs are recruited through the Staff Selection Commission 
while recruitment to the constabulary is done departmentally at various centres throughout 
the country. The quality at the point of intake at all levels is very good in case of Para 
Military Forces , but aptitude and psychological tests which are very useful for recruitment to 
the Forces and are already being used for selection to Rapid A ction Force, if adopted would 
be very useful for all CPMFs. This would, however , involve considerable outlay of funds for 
creation of infrastructure, development of measurement scales and training of personnel 
involved in selections. 
61. The Committee appreciates that the Government has initiated some action to 
streamline recruitment of Assistant Commandants in Central Para Military Forces and the 
work in this regard is proposed to be transferred to U.P.S.C. The Committee trusts that it 
will ensure qualitative change in the intake of personnel at the senior level and the 
recruitments will be made well in time so that the Para Military Forces do not face any 
shortage of officers. 
62. The Committee also believes that the curricula/rests for recruitment at various levels 
in CPMFs need to be upgraded periodically to keep pace with the work requirements and the 
felt need to prescribe aptitude and psycologicaJ tests is a step in the right direction. Necessary 
funds may, therefore, be made available forthwith to create necessary infrastructure to add 
such tests in the curricula for recruitment to the Forces and if they are of huge proportions 
then the exercise may be undertaken in a phased manner. 

17 
!\lORE BATTALIONS FOR CENTRAL PARA MILITARY FORCES 
63. During his evidence before the Committee the Secretary of the Ministry stated that 
there has bl!en a prl!ssing need for raising more Battalions of the CPMFs due to increasing 
Demands from State Governments particulary from North-East and Jammu and Kashmir for 
internal security duty. There were 200 coys of CPMF deployed on internal security in 1994, 
275 in 1995 and the present level of deployment is about 350 coys. The Secretary submitted 
that provision for raising of two Battalions of CPMFs has been made in the current budget 
but there is still requirement of 3 more battalions which would entail an additional budgetary 
outlay of Rs. 50 crores. 
64. The Committee appreciates that the Para Military Forces are working against heavy 
odds and the pressures on them are too many from different quarters. The demands from 
States particulary those who are facing insurgency or militancy are too heavy to cope with 
and requests from others may in such a situation not be met leading to dangerous situations. 
It is, therefore, imperative that in order to meet security requirement of States and to reduce 
pressure on the existing CPMFs suitable budgetary provision for raising of three additional 
battalions may be made by Government. 
MODERNISATION OF POLICE FORCE 
65. The Central Government has been implementing a non-plan scheme to supplement 
the efforts of the State Governments to modernise their forces since 1969-70. The pattern of 
assistance is 50% loan and 50% grant-in-aid. A provision of Rs. 50 crores has been kept for 
this purpose during 1996-97. The assistance is given to meet the expenditure on six 
prescribed items including mobility, communication, Scientific aids to investigation, crowd 
control, etc. The State-wise allocation of funds is based on weightage attached to Four 
selected criteria viz population of St<tte; ·sanctioned strength of State police, Number of 
police stations and crime per lakh population. 
66. The Committee in its 15th Report on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 
the year 1995-96 had gone into this issue and noted that the assistance by the Central 
Government was not utilised by a number of States as they were not in a position to provide 
matching grant. The Committee in this context had supported the exercise undertaken with a 
view to modifying the scheme to provide the amount exclusively for one or two items as per 
the needs of the State. The Committee had also recommended to review the criteria for 
allocation to various States to make it need based so as to take care of other aspects also 
like strategic location of the State level of modernisation of police in that State, etc. The 
Ministry in its comments, however, stuck to the existing criteria on ground that the amount 
made available to the States was very small. Besides, North-East States.were normally given 
twice their allocation under this scheme, apart from ad-hoc grants released by the Centre 
from time to time to them. 
67. The Committee experesses its dissatisfaction over the fact that in view of the highly 
demanding nature of duties from the police force in the deteriorating law and prder 
environment their modernisation is not taking place at the desired pace as a result of which 
the casualty rate of police personnel has gone up and the terrorists/mHitants maoy times 
strike at will with sophisticated arms. The States are unable to provide matchina IJ'&nt as a 
result of which they can't take full force with latest gadgets and equipment gets relegated. The 
Committee feels that success in a vital area like this can be achieved only if the quantum of 
Central Assistance to _State Governments is substantially increased. The Committee 
accordingly recommends that the level of grant-in-aid by the Central Government to States be 

11-: 
raised to 75%. Coupled with this and with the raising of allocutions suitably under this head 
the scheme would become more meanin~ful and viable. 
PROBLEM AREAS OF CJ>l\1Fs 
68. Th~: Directors G~:ncral of BSF. CRPF. ITBP. CISF and NSG during their 
presentations highlighted a few critical areas which an: enumerated below alongwith the 
views of the Committee therl·on: 
I. BSF 
69. (i) Budgetary constraints have not ullowcd ra1smg of additional buttalions. 
Deploymt.·nt of ;i number of battalions on internal security duty. electi ons etc. has 
· put a severe strain and even reserve battalions have been pressed into service to 
cope with pressing demands from States . 
(ii) With most of the battalions remaining on operational duties training of the 
personnel has suffered tremendously. 
(iii) Housing needs ·of the BSF Personnel arc curn:ntly not met substantially and the 
authorisation level particularly for lower ranks needs to be raised to the kvcl of 
25% as against 14% at present. 
(iv) Need for ugpradation of weaponary including supply of rocket launchers and anti­
tank weapons. 
(v) Better telecommunication und electronic facilities . 
70. The Committee feels that the above issues demand urgent attention and steps be 
taken for their resolution. 
II. ITBP 
71. (i) Additional demands on the Force such as deployment of 5 reserve battalions on 
internal security duty. 48 Companies during the recent Parliamentary elections 
and <mother 28 Companies for elections in the State of Jammu and Kashmir have 
affected in-service training programmes of the Force and have also resulted in 
denial of leave to its personnel. 
(ii) Fairly large number of vacancies in the rank of directly recruited Assistant 
Commandants and Sub-Inspectors currently exist and the efforts to recruit 
officers for the specialised cadres have not been very successuful. The terms of 
recruitment in the officers' cadre have to be made more attractive to get required 
man power. There should be a permanent CPOs Recruitment Board for 
appointment to these cadres. 
(iii} Training allowance for Instructors which has been reduced to 15% from 30% 
needs to be enhunced to 40% to attract quality Instructors. Provision for training 
uids including simulators for drivers and training practice, projection, video films, 
etc. as also for operational equipments including night vision binoculars, psycho­
scanners for scanning vehicles, explosive detectors, gas masks, jamming facilities 
etc. be also made. 
(iv) Ammunition of 7.62 calibre is in shqrt supply from the Ministry of Defence which 
has adversely affected the training personnel and their operational preparedness. 
Feasibility of setting up an CPOs ordanance Factory to meet the demand of 
CPOs and State Police Forces may be examined. 

19 
(v) Need for upgradation of telecom technology. 
(vi) Enhanced financial powers for D.G. 
(vii) Out of 78 border posts where I.T.B .P. personnel arc deployed 45 arc in hostile 
terrain which become inaccessible during winter because of extreme cold conditions. 
Facility of flying hours be raised to 700 hours to facilitate easy movement of 
personnel from these outpos ts so that they may reunite with their families. 
(viii) Reserve battalions be left untouched and if need be permanent battalions be 
sanc tioned to look after internal security dutie s. 
(ix) Suitable mechanism be devised to assess requir ement s of latest weaponary for the 
force and a highly technical expert should be in position to identify requirement and 
facilitate its procurement. 
72. The Committee feels that it is a matter of concern that ITBP is currently faced · with 
shortage of nwnpower particularly at the level of Assistant Commandant s. The Committee trusts 
that when the recruitment is made by UPSC the problem may be substantially overcome. The 
Committee sees no reason why training allowance for instructors for such an important Force has 
bet.>n reduced from 30% to 15% and feels that there is a case for its heing raised to 40% to ensure 
engagement of quality instructors. 
73. Thc Committee has noted that most of the personnel recruit ed to ITBP are required to 
work in high altitude area and with 45 of their 78 border posts becoming inaccessible during 
winter scasun it can well be imagined to what extent they are exposed to the harsh conditions. 
The Committee, therefore, views with sympathy their demand to raise the level of flying hours 
suitably so thnt movement of personnel during winter season is undertaken with larger 
frequencies. 
74. Thc Committee is taken aghast to find that the training of a specialised force like ITBP 
should suffer on account of non-supply of ammunition by the Ministry of Defem:c . It i~ a wry 
serious matter and needs to be looked into urgently. The Committee recomm~ml' :!Jat 
immediate remedial action in this regard may be taken. 
Ill. CISF 
75. ClSF is mainly meant for protection of employees and properties of Public Sector 
Undertakings and other CentraYState Government agencies and meets its expenditure by the 
scrvi<:es it provides to them. All its requirements including arms, vehicles, housing etc. are met 
by the umkrtakings concerned. 
76. During the evidence of the Director-Gen eral , CISF two points in particular were raised 
namely, (i) CISF has no suitable vehicles or equipments to undertake operat ions in critical 
areas; and (ii) there has been spurt in incidents of theft.tpilferage of material from 
establishments served by CISF personnel. 
77. The Committee feels that the dependence of CISF personnel for arms and ammunition 
and vehicles etc. on public sector undertakings to operate in critical and sensitive areas is not a 
healthy situ<~tion und the problem has, therefore, to be looked into seriously to equip them with 
the materials they need. The Committee feels that the point made by the Director-General , CISF 
to vest him "ith magisterial powers to tackle the problem of involvement of CISF personnel in 
theft of mnterhtls from the establishments they serve and to create a legal cell within the 
organisation to suitably deal with cases instituted by such personnel in the courts needs to be 
examined in depth by the Government. 

20 
1\'. NSG 
78. The Committee has observed that NSG personnel are deployed to provide security 
cover to YIPs in selected cases. The Committee feels that NSG has a very premier training 
~entre and personnel from other forces can be trained there to be deployed on VIP duties. 
NSG should be left to perform its designated role. 
v. CRPF 
79. (i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Restricting deployment of force upto 70% of strength and making available 
remaining 30% for training, essential rest and recuperation; 
Planned movement of force by anticipating likely future development on internal 
security scenario; 
Deployment of Force only after required pre-induction training; and 
Adequate family accommodation for separated families. 
80. The Committee hopes that the above issues will receive serious consideration of the 
Ministry 
81. One thing that the Committee has in special noted is that the training of the CPMF 
personnel has taken a back seat on account of their constantly remaining on operational 
duties and the process of recruitment to various cadres of CPMF is very time consuming. 
Diversion of the Forces for non-prescribed duties is fairly on the increase which is not a 
healthy sign and does affect their operational preparedness. The Committee feels that the 
training of Cl'l\1Fs personnel both at recruitment and in-service level is of utmost priority and 
should not suffer on account of their constant deployment. A mechanism has, therefore, to be 
evoloved to halt this trend and keep the process of training ongoing so that they always 
remain in a slate of preparedness. Similarly the phenomenon of deployment of CP1\1Fs on 
non-prescribed duties has to be restricted to the barest minimum. 
BACKLOG OF SOST VACANCIES IN CP1\1Fs 
82. The Committee has noted that vacancies for SCs and STs have accumulated over 
the years in Central Para Military forces. Though the backlog has been reduced, as a result 
of special recruitment drive launched by Government in 1995, yet significant number of 
vacancies still rl!main to be filled up as the following table shows:-
Sl. Name of the Vacancies as Recruited during Balance vacancies 
No. Organisation on 1.6.95 the special drive as on 31.7.96 
sc ST Total sc ST Total sc ST Total 
1. BSf 936 380 1316 633 334 967 303 46 349 
2. CRPf 703 395 1098 703 378 1081 Nil 17 17 
3. IB 16 31 47 6 3 9 10 28 38 
4. CISF 11 5 16 Nil Nil Nil 11 5 16 
83. From the above it is apparent that no headway has been made in so far as CISF is 
concerned and the achievement is meagre in the case of Intelligence Bureau. The Ministry 
proposes to launch another recruitment drive during 1996-97. Detailed instructions in this 
regard have also been issued to the Para Military Forces to ensure clearing of these backlog 
vacancies for SOST candidates during 1996-97. The Committee recommends that in order to 

21 
ensure that the backlog vacancies do not accumulate, periodicity of specia l recruitment drives 
be increased and clear time-frame be specified to fill up such vacancies. 
RECOVERY OF DEPLOYMENT CHARGES 
84. The Committee has noted that as on 31.3.96, a total amount of Rs. 416.78 crores is 
outstanding from the Statestl.JTs on account of deployment charges for Central Para Military 
Forces (CPMfs) in those StatestUTs. The details are as follows:-
(Amount in crores) 
Sl. Name of the State CRPF BSF CISF Total 
No. 
1. Andhra Pradesh 13.98 5.21 0.12 19.31 
2. Assam 19.60 4.94 24.54 
3. Bihar 0.27 0.27 
4. Delhi 43.64 38.05 81.69 
5. Gujarat 0.05 0.05 0.10 
6. Haryana 0.05 0.11 0.16 
7. Kerala 0.05 0.05 
8. Karnataka 0.08 0.08 
9. Orissa 0.05 0.05 
10. Punjab 189.49 28.67 4.36 222.52 
11. Pomlicherry 0.08 0.08 
12. Rajasthan 0.35 0.33 0.68 
13. Tamil Nadu 19.15 19.15 
14. Uttar Pradesh 37.00 0.04 3.95 40.99 
15. We~t Bengal 3.60 3.51 7.11 
326.99 38.96 50.83 416.78 
85. The Ministry has stated that in normal course, recover ies of dues from the State 
Governments are done through adjustments against payments due to the State Governments! 
UT Administrations in respect of Home guards /Civil defen ce charges. However, as the 
outstanding dues from Andhra Pra~esh, Assam , Punjab , Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and 
Delhi are fairly of large proportions the matter of recovery of dues from them has been 
taken up by the 1 lome Secretary with the Chief Secretaries concerned. They have also been 
informed that in case they fail to clear their outstanding due s within the next two or three 
years, the Ministry would have no other option but to reque st the Ministry of Finance to 
adjust their outstand ing dues through Central Appropriation . The matter will be vigorously 
followed up with the State Governments as well as GNCTD. 
86. The Committee expresses its concern over the increasing tendency of State 
GovernmentS"UTs concerned to defer payments for deployment of Para Military Forces which 
places huge financial burden on the Forces and makes the exercise rather more self defeating. 
The Committee feels that the StateS"UT Gover~ents should appreciate that the CPMFs are 
made available to them at a short notice to tackle serious law and order situation and it is in 
their inter est that charges which become due on this account should be promptly settled by 
them. The Committee supports the steps taken by the Ministry and hopes th~t some more 
practical mechanism to ensure timely payments by StatetUTs concerned will be evolved 

22 
whereunder in cases where State'UT Governments default in payment and fail to settle the 
issue within a specified time, recovery will be made from their share in Central allocations. 
DEMAND NO. 45-0THER EXPENDITURE OF MHA 
87. This Demand includes expenditure relating to various relief and rehabilitation 
schemes-programmes, pension and other benefits to freedom fighters, development of North­
Eastern region, modernisation of prison administration, subsidy for Helicopter services in 
North-Eastern region, etc. 
Budget 
(Rs. in crores) 
AE 1994-95 BE 1995-96 RE 1995-96 BE 1996-97 
514.88 578.13 564.11 516.90 
Reasons for variation in BE and RE 1995-96 
Less provision for Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pen~ion Scheme, free railway passes to 
Freedom Fighters and special pension for Ex-Army personnel. 
Reasons for variation in RE 1995-96 and BE 1996-97 
(a) Exclusion of the additional provision from NEC Plan which was provided in 
RE 1995-96 for completion of Inter-State roads in Ncrth-Eastern Region and non-recurring 
expenditure for payment to Government of Mizoram; 
(b) Less provision for Potteru Irrigation Project as per the approval of the Committee 
on Non-Plan Expenditure; and 
(c) Less provision for payment to Ministry of Defence for Civic Action Programme in 
North-Eastern Region. 
POTTERU IRRIGATION PROJECT 
88. Potteru Irrigation Project is a scheme under the Rehabilitation Division of the 
Ministry. The Project is being executed by the State Government of Orissa and funded by 
Government of India to provide irrigation facility to an area of about 1,50,000 acres in 
Malkangiri district in Orissa largely inhabited by the displaced persons and the local tribals. 
89. The Project was sanctioned by the Cabinet in April, 1974 at a cost of Rs. 14.81 
crores. The project has undergone several cost revisions and the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs in August, 1993 approved the revised cost estimates of Rs. 102.39 crores. 
The liability of Government of India was restricted to Rs. 94.83 crores after deducting 
establishment cost incurred by the State Government during idle period (Rs. 5.17 crores) 
and share of the State Government on account of field channels (Rs. 2.39 crores). Of this 
Rs. 90.50 crores have already been reimbursed. 
90. The project was scheduled for completion by the 30th June, 1996. However, the 
State Government of Orissa has sent yet another revised cost estimate of Rs. 198.07 crores. 
The Central Water Commission (CWC), which is the monitoring agency for the project, has 
recommended revised estimates of Rs. 140.07 crores subject to the condition that the project 
authorities would completl! all physical works of the project by June, 1997. In the assessment 
of ewe the entire project V.'Ork would be completed in all respects by October, 1977. The 

23 
anticipated extent of further cost after June, 1996 will thus be to the tune of Rs. 37.68 
crores. 
91. The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over this state of affairs in 
the completion of the project. The non-achievement of physical targets h·as not only resulted in 
gross delay but also cost overruns manifold. The delay has deprived the inhabitants from the 
benefits of the irrigation facility, thereby affecting development of the region. The Committee, 
therefore, impresses upon the Ministry to make all out efforts and pursue hard with the State 
Government of Orissa to complete the project by its revised target of June, 1997 so that the 
benefits of the project reach the inhabitants and additional burden on the Exchequer is 
avoided. 
HELICOPTER SERVICES IN ARUNACHAL PRADESH AND NAGALAND 
92: In view of the limited communication facilities in the North-Eastern region, 
Government has devised plans to introduce Helicopter Service in the States of Arunachal 
Pradesh ami Nagaland. The Ministry of Home Affairs bears the expenditure on the subsidy 
for the operations. 
93-. A provision of Rs. 4.00 crores was made for the purpose in 1995-96 and the 
21llocation has been enhanced to Rs. 8.52 crores in 1996-97. However, it has been observed 
that out of the total provision of Rs. 4.00 crores for 1995-96 only Rs. 1.26 crores was 
utilised. The Ministry has explained that the under-utilisation was due to the late start of 
service to Arunachal Pradesh and the non-introduction of the service to Nagaland owing to 
non-development of necessary infrastructure by the State Government of Nagaland. It is 
expected that the Helicopter Service to Nagaland would started operating during the current 
financial year. The Ministry of Civil Aviation is also working on possibilities of acquiring 
larger Helicopter which would offer greater seat capability. 
94. The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Ministry in bearing the 
financial burden of subsidy on Helicopter Service which will go a long way in promoting 
communication facilities in the North-Eastern region and open up new vistas of tourism 
thereby offering easy access to the places in the region. The Committee trusts that necessary 
infrastructure will be developed by the Nagaland Government expeditiously to facilitate 
introduction of Helicopter Service in the State during the current financial year itself in the 
interest of the travelling public of the region. The Committee also urges upon the Ministry of 
Home Affairs to undertake a feasibility study to extend this service to other Stateslareas in the 
North-Eastern region. 
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT OF FUND FOR HYDRO-ELECTRIC PROJECTS IN 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH AND NAGALAND 
95. As per their revised target dates, two important hydro-electric projects namely, 
Ranganadi Hydro-Electric Project in Arunachal Pradesh and Doyang Hydro-Electrtc Project 
in Nagaland are targeted for completion by 31st March, 1997 and 31st July, 1997, 
respectively. The projects got delayed on account of various reasons. The Committee in its 
15th Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) acknowledged the significance of these 
projects and recommended to the Ministry to ensure completion of these projects by their 
revised target dates. 
96. The Ministry in their notes furnished to the Committee has stated that as against 
the requirement of Rs. 192 crores for the Ranganadi HEP during 1996-97 an allocation of 
Rs. 140 crores has been made. The allocation for Doyang HEP is Rs. 30 crores against the 
requirement of Rs. 100 crores during 1996-97. A proposal to the Planning Commission has 

24 
been ~nt by the Ministry to augment the budgetary support for these projects . The total 
additional budget~ry support required during the current financial year is Rs. 122 crores . 
97. The Committee, in view of the significant role which these power projects are to play 
in the development of the North-Eastern region, reiterates its earlier recommendation for 
timely completion of these projects. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to make all 
out efforts to see that constraint of funds does not hamper their scheduled completion. 
SWATANTRATA SAINIK SAMMAN PENSION 
98. The Freedom Fighters' Pension Scheme has been in operation since 15th August , 
1972 when it was introduced on the occasion of the Silver Jubliee of our Independence. The 
Scheme provides for grant of pension to those who had suffered at least six months of 
imprisonment/detention/externmentlinternment/abscondence etc., while participating in the 
National freedom struggle. The scheme was renamed as "Swatantrata Sainik Samman 
Pension Scheme" in 1980 after liberalisation of certain provisions. The amount of Samman 
Pension hus been increased from time to time. 
99. Issues like delay in· processing the cases for grant of Samman Pension to genuine 
freedom fighters and their widows, bribes to expedite sanction of pension and rejection by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs of a number of cases forwarded by State Governments with 
favourable recommendations have come to the notice of the Comm ittee. 
100. It was submitted before the Committee that claims for grant of freedom fighters 
pension are being processed strictly in accordance with the procedure laid down in the 
Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980 and the policy guidelines issued there­
under from time to time. The pension is granted only in those cases which are covered by 
the provisions of the said Scheme and the policy decisions taken thereunder. The applicants 
are never ·required to pay anything to get their work done. However, if any complaint is 
received against the staff members, it is examined thoroughly and appropriate action is taken 
against the concerned person if found guilty. The Secretary of the Ministry stated that many 
cases received from State Governments are rejected by the Ministry because they lack the 
necessary s upporti ng documents. He expressed his readine ss to set up a Com mittee of non­
officials to review as a one time measure, all the cases, which have been rejected by the 
Ministry for want of supporting documents . 
101. The Committee feels that the Pension Scheme which was launched as a noble 
gesture to the freedom fighters who suffered immensely to liberate the country from foreign 
rule is not allowed to get bogged down in red tapism and bureaucratic delays. The State 
Governments concerned should also ensure that the cases of freedom fighters recommended 
for grant of pension are supported lzy ·necessary documents and delays in decisions do not 
occur on this account. 
102. The Committee appreciates the proposal of the Ministry to reconsider applications 
for Samman Pension rejected earlier on account of their not being supported by documents 
and trusts that the outcome thereof will be placed before it soon. The Committee would also 
like to emphasise that personnel with proven integrity and excellent behaviour are given the 
task of dealing with pension cases with utmost care, caution, swiftness, sympathy and respect. 
DEMAND NO. 46 -TRANSFERS TO UNION TERRITORIES GOVERNMENTS 
103. This Demand covers assistance provided to Union Territories (with legislature ) in 
the form of Grants and loans. There are two such Union Territories, namely, Pondicherry 
and NCT of Delhi . 

Budget 
AE 1994-95 
434.00 
BE 1995-96 
484.29 
25 
RE 1995-96 
491.49 
Reasons for variation in RE 1995-96 and BE 1996-97 
(Rs. in crores) 
BE 1996-97 
461.04 
(a) Reduced Non-Plan assistance to the Union Territory of Pondicherry based on their 
resource gap; and 
(b) Reduced Central Plan assistance to NCf of Delhi due to transfer of this provision to 
meet the Delhi Police Plan expenditure from Demand No. 44 Police. 
DEMAND NUMBERS 97, 98, 99, 100 and 101 UNION TERRITORIES (WITHOUT 
LEGISLATURE) 
Budget 
AE ... 1994-95 
1071.91 
B.E . 1995-96 
1175.98 
R .E . 1995-96 
1231.75 
(Rs. in crores) 
B.E. 1996-97 
1298.85 
104. Demand Nos. 97, 98, 99, 100 and 101 which are given in Volume- II of the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs, relate to Union Territories (without 
Legislature) , namely Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Hav.eli, 
Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep respectively. The entire budget of the Union Territories 
(without Legislature) on the Plan as well as Non-Plan side is reflected in the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry . Though the budget of these Union Territories fomis part of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs , being the nodal Ministry , it, however, does not .dilute the 
responsibilities of the Ministries of the Central Government for scrutinising and sanctioning 
the scheme s under their purview. The factual position regarding budgetary procedure in this 
regard is that the entire budget requirement for Plan and Non-plan revised estimates for 
current year and Non-Plan budget estimates for the ensuing year is discussed by the Ministry 
of Finance in the pre-budget meetings with the representatives of the concerned Union 
Territorie s and Ministry of Home Affairs. An overall ceiling is fixed in respect of each 
Union Territor y. Annual Plan allocations for the ensuing year and decided by the Planning 
Commission. Based on the ceiling fixed by the Ministry of Finance and the Planning 
Commission , the Union Territory Administrations prepare budgetary break-up showing 
budget provisions according to their respective budgetary heads and also showing the 
allocations against Ministries/Departments of the Central Government administratively 
concerned. This budgetary break-up is included in the Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Home Affair s. 
HOME MINISTER'S ADVISORY. COMMITTEES (HMACs) 
105. In the course of the consideration of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs a point was raised about the institution of the Home Minister's Advisory 
Committees(HMACs) for the Union Territories without Legislature/Metropolitan Council 
virtually becoming defunct. It was emphasised that the HMACs were entrusted with the task 

26 
of rendering advice on important matters relating to UTs and they were understood to be 
performing very useful functions. It was submitted to the Committee by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs that the HMCAs are no longer in existence and no demand for constituting 
them has either been received in the recent past. The matter, nevertheless, is being 
examined. 
106. The Committee falls to understand why an instrument like HMACs which was 
devised to serve public interest has become inoperational. The Committee does not feel 
convinced with the answer given by the Ministry that there has been no demand from any 
quarter for their revival. They should have as a matter of fact, been continued, unless there 
were reasons strong enough to do away with them. The Committee recommends to the 
Government to take appropriate action in the matter to ensure that HMACs become 
functional and in case the Government feels that they need to be restructured action may be 
taken accordingly. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th August, 1996, in Committee 
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Put -Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bunarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
6. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
10. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
11. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
12. Shri Vijay Goel · 
13. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
14. Shri Tura Chand Sahu 
15. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
16. Prof. M. Kamson 
17. Shri ldris Ali 
18. Shri Gopal Tandel 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Shri N. Dennis 
21. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
22. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
23. Shri Tomo Riba 
SECRETAUIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the members felicitated the Chairman on his appointment as the 
Chairman of the Committee and wished him a successful tenure. The Chairman reciprocated 
the sentiments expressed by .the members and thanked them for their gesture. He stated that 
with the co-operution of members, most of whom had distinguished themselves in various 
fields, the Committee would be able to fulfil its mandate. 

28 
3. Thereafter he outlined in brief the functions of the Committee for the benefit of the 
new members and informed the members about the detailed schedule of meetings (lf the 
Committee which had been worked out to take up consideration of the Detailed Demands 
for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries coming within its purview. 
4. Some members then raised points and gave suggestions regarding the proposed 
consideration of the Demands for Grants of the related Ministries and the subjects which 
could be taken up by the Committee later. The Chairman of the Committee clarified the 
points raised by the members. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 

II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 8th August, 1996 in Committee 
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
6. S.hrimati Kamla Sinha 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Julaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma 
10. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
11. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
12. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
13. Shri Vijay goel 
14. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
15. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
16. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
17. Prof. M. Kamson 
18. Shri N. Dennis 
19. Shri Kanwar Sarvraj Singh 
20. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
21. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
22. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
1. Shri Som Pal 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri K. Padmanabhaiah, Secretary 
2. Shri N.N. Singh, Special Secretary (FFR) 
3. Shri R.D. Kapur, AS(H} 
4. Shri H.H . Tyabji, AS(J) 
5. Shri Pranab Ray, FA(H) 
29 
-Chairman 

30 
6. Shri V.K. Malhotra, JS(CS) 
7. Shri P.K. Jalali, JS(UT) 
8. Shri Anurag Goel, JS(P) 
9. Shri B.N. Jha, JS(NE) 
10. Shri S. Prakash, JS(IS.I & II) 
• • 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and the Secretary of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and his team of officials. Thereafter, making some general 
observations about the genesis .of the system of Department-Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees and the functions they were to carry out, the Chairman asked ;the Secretary of 
the Ministry to make a presentation on the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of his Ministry 
with particular reference to the major thrust areas, especially the internal security scenario in 
the country and the significant variations, if any as had occurred in projected allocations vis­
a-vis the allocations during the previous year. 
3. The Secretary accordingly made a detailed presentation dwelling at length bn the 
aspects related to internal security such as phenomenon of terrorism, infiltration/influx of 
militants/secessionist elements aided and abetted by certain foreign powers, smuggling of -: 
arms and ammunition by such eiements from across the borders, problems encountered by 
security/Para Military Forces and the need for diplomatic initiative to build up a healthy 
environment with friendly/neighbouring countries to check external interference and prevent 
material support to the secessionist element. He particularly emphasized the need for 
additional allocation of Rs. 200 crores during the current year to meet the requirements of 
housing for Central Para Military Forces, modernisation of these forces, raising of three 
additional battalions and purchasing sophisticated equipments/arms for them. The members 
raised various points on these issues and sought necessary clarifications from him which were 
partly covered. The Committees directed him to submit notes on certain other points/issues 
and furnish written replies to the questionnaires as well as issueslpojnts raised by the 
members. 
4. • • * 
5. A verbatim record of tpe evidence was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 
9th August, 1996. 
•••Relates to other matters. 

IV 
•FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 5.15' P.M. on Monday, the 12th August , 1996 in COmmittee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
7. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri Raj Babbar 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shri Jugatvir Singh Orona 
11. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
12. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
13. Shri Mangat Ram Shanna 
14. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
15. Prof. M. Kamson 
16. Shri Khelsai Singh 
17. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
18. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
1. Shri Som Pal 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri K. Padmanabhaiah, Secretary 
2. Shri N.N. Singh, Special SS(FFR) 
3. Shri V.S. Mathur, SS{ISP) 
4. Shri R.D. Kapur, AS(H) 
5. Shri H.H. Tyabji, AS{J) 
6. Shri Prunab Ray, F A{H) 
7. Shri V.K. Malhotra, JS(CS) 
8. Shri P.K. Jalali, JS(UT) 
9. Shri Anurag Goel, JS{P) 
-Chairman 
•Minutes of third meeting of the Committee relates to some other matter discussed by the Committee 
31 

32 
10. Shri B.N. Jha, JS(NE) 
11. Shri S. Prakash, JS(IS. I & II) 
12. Shri U.K. Sinha, JS (S) 
2. - • 
3. The Committee thereafter took up further consideration of the Demands for Grants 
(1996-97) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Chairman, while thanking the Secretary of 
the Ministry for promptly furnishing the written replies/information in response to the 
queries/points raised by the Members in the Meeting of the Committee held on August 8, 
1996, invited the Members to seek further clarifications, if any, on the basis of the answers 
provided by the Ministry and make any additional queries. The questions were asked on 
underutilization of plan allocations for implementations of various schemes of Department of 
official language, inordinate delay and malpractices in dealing with cases of pensions to 
freedom fighters, use of photo identity cards, crime against women, use of arms captured by 
security forces during operations against the militants/insurgents, fencing/flood lighting in 
Jammu sector, relief and rehabilitation of migrants from J & K, and failure of intelligence 
agency, etc. Necessary replies were given by the Secretary to the points raised by the 
Members and as regards some of the other points he was directed to furnish detailed written 
notes. 
4. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 7.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 
the 14th August, 1996. 
•• • Relates to other matter. 

v 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 14th August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
l\1El\fBERS J>RESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
4. Shri R~1m Nath Kovmd 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABIIA 
6. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
7. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8. Shri Jagatvir Sing Orona 
9. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
10. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
11. Shri Vijay Gocl 
12. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
13. Shri M.O.H . Farooq 
14. Shri Khelsai Singh 
15. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
16. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
17. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
Border Security Force 
1. Shri Arun Bhagat, Director General 
2. Shri Vijay Shankar, I.G. (Admn.) 
3. Shri P. Ram Mohan, l.G. 
4. Shri N.S. Sandhu, I.G. (Hqs.) 
5. Shri Shcr Singh, I.G. 
6. Smt. lndu Liberhan, F.A. 
7. Shri G.S. Shekhawat, A.D. (Coord.) 
•••Relates tu olhCJ matter. 
* * 
33 

8. Shri B.S . Chawla, D .O. (Comm.) 
Central Reserve Police Force 
1. Shri Arun Bhagat , Director General 
2. Shri A .V. Liddle , A.D.G. (Hqrs .) 
3. Shri Suresh Roy , I.G. (Hqr s.) 
4. Smt. R.S . Khan, F.A. 
34 
5. Shri Y.N. Kashyap, Dy. Director (Admn. ) 
Delhi Police 
1. Shri Nikhil Kum ar, Commi ssioner of Police 
2. Shri V.N. Singh , Sr. Addl. Commissioner (Admn .) 
3. Shri Ranjit Narayan, Addl. Commissioner (Crime) 
4. Shri Q . Ahmed , Deputy Commi ssioner (Crime) 
5. Shri T .N. Moh an, Deputy Commissioner (HQ) 
2. • • 
3. 
4. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
5. The meeting then adjourned for lunch at 1.30 P.M. and rea~sembled at 3.00 P.M. to 
hear the Directors General, BSF and CRPF and the Commissioner of Delhi Police on the 
Dema nds for Grants of their respect ive Forces . 
Border Security Force 
6. The Director General BSF briefly explained the history of the Force, the tasks being 
performed by it. the difficulties being currently faced by it and the nature of allocations as 
proposed in the Demands for Grants of the current year. He, in particular, referred to the 
lack of resources for raising additional battalions to meet pressures• of Internal Security 
deployment and touched upon aspects such as housing, training, upgradation of weaponary 
and better telecommunication and electronic facilities. The Members put certain questions 
on various issues. The Director General was directed to send written comments in response 
to the points raised by the Members. 
Central Reser ~ Police Force 
7. The Director General, CRPF in his presentation gave a background of the raising of 
the Force, its present strength, its role, nature of budgetary outlays, problems of training, 
deployment and housing etc. Members raised certain points and put some queries to him. 
The Director General was asked to submit replies in writing to the points/queries raised by 
the Memb~rs. 
Delhi Police 
8. The Commissioner of Delhi Police made an audio-visual presentation through which 
he gave an overview of the diverse law and order situations which the Police Force was 
required to deal with, changing crime graph of the metropolis and measures being taken to 
improve the law and order situation and the pattern of budgetary allocations for the Force 
which were proposed to be borne by the Central Government w.e.J. August 1, 1996. The 
Members, thereafter, asked various questions on budgetary aspects related to his Force, 
deteriorating law and order situation in the city, lesser representation of women in the 
•••Relates to other matter. 

35 
Force, mounting corruption, involvement of Police Personnel themselves in crimes and 
general complaints from the public about non-registration of their complaints and lack of 
cooperation from the Police. The Police Commissioner gave replies to some of the 
questions/points raised by the Members. He was directed to give written comments on the 
other points of the Members as also to the questionnaires given to him. 
9. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 7.40 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 
the 19th August, 1996. 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 19th August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PUESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri Jalaludin Ansari . 
LOK SABIIA 
7. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
9. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
10. Shri Yijay Goel 
11. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
12. Shri Khelsai Singh 
13. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
14. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
15. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
Indo-Tibetan Border Police (I.T.B.P.) 
1. Shri R.K. Sharma, Director General 
2. Shri Yijay Raman, D.I.G. (Admn.) 
Central Industrial Security Force (C.I.S.F.) 
1. Shri A.K. Tandon, Director General 
36 

37 
2. Shri B.L. Vohra, I.G. (Hqrs.) 
3. Shri Resham Singh, D.I.G. (Pers.) 
4. Shri Yashvant Malhotra, D.I.G. (Admn.) 
National Security Guards (N.S.G.) 
1. Shri A.K . Tandon, Director General 
2. Shri Y .N. Srivastava, I. G. (Admn.) 
3. Shri A.K. Sarvadhikary, D.I.G . 
4. Shri R.S. Khan, Director (I.F.) 
2. The Committee took up consideration of the detailed Demands for Grants (1996-97) 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs and heard the Directors-General of Indo- Tibetan Border 
Police (ITBP), Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) and National Security Guards 
(NSG) on the Demands for Grants of their respective Forces. The Chainnan welcomed them 
one by one and asked them to make presentations on the subject. 
ITBP 
3. The Director-General ITBP in his presentation briefly explained the background · of 
the raising of the Force, its present strength, its recruitment procedure, role and budget. He 
particularly dwelt on the problems relating to deployment of his Force on internal security 
duty, delay in recruitment of personnel in the rank of Assistant Commandant, slashing down 
of training allowance for Instructors, erratic supply of ammunition of 7.62 calibre to his 
Force by the Army and the need for upgradation of telecom technology and raising of flying 
hours to facilitate to and fro movement of personnel deployed to high attitude border areas. 
The Members then sought clarifications from him on various points which were partly 
covered. The D.G. w.as asked to send written replies to the other points and give notes on 
certain specific issues. 
CISF 
4. The Director-General CISF explained in brief the purpose of raising of the Force, its 
current role, difficulties faced in procurement of equipment and arms/ammunition of its 
choice, delay in payment of its dues by the States/Public Sector Undertakings and the need 
to raise its strength. Reacting to one of the questions about the increasing number of cases 
of thefts/pilferage of materials from the Undertakings where the CISF Personnel were 
deployed, the DG infonned that some cases had come to his notice and some amount of 
stolen goods had been recovered and cases instituted against the personnel involved. He also 
submitted that the problem could be substantially overcome if the magisterial powers were 
conferred on him and a legal cell was created within CISF to pursue the court cases 
instituted by such personnel. The Committee directed him to submit written comments in 
respect of certain other points. 
NSG 
5. The Director-General, NSG in his presentation explained how the NSG was raised an 
anti-terrorist outfit and how successfully it has undertaken anti-terrorist and anti-hijacking 
operations. He also dealt with aspects relating to recruitment, training, pay and allowances 
of NSG Personnel and the problem being faced by it on account . of deployment of its 
personnel on duties other than specified in the Act and obsolete weaponary and 

38 
communication systems. The Members then asked questions and made some other points. 
The Director-General was directed to furnish written replies to the points raised by the 
Members. 
6. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 7.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 
the 20th August, 1996. 

IX 
•NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 27th August, 1996 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
4. Shri- Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
6. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
9. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
10. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
11. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
12. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
13. Shri Idris Ali 
14. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
15. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft 32nd, 33rd and 34th Reports on the 
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries of Home Affairs; Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions; and Law, Justice and Company Affairs and after some discussion 
decided to amend para 12 of the 32nd Report and make some additions in the 34th Report 
as per the discussions on the subject. The Committee then decided to take up the three 
Reports again for its consideration and adoption at its next meeting on August 29, 1996. 
*Minutes or seventh and eighth meetings or the Committee relate to some other matters discussed by the 
Committee. 
39 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 1.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 29th August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma 
7. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
8. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
9. Shri Vijay Goel 
10. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
11. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
12. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
13. Shri ldris Ali 
14. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
15. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up further consideration of its draft Thirty-second, Thirty-thir~ 
and Thirty-fourth Reports on the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries of Home 
Affairs; Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; and Law, Justice and Company Affairs . 
40 

41 
Thirty-second Report 
3. One of the Members of the Committee suggested that Para 38 of the Report could be 
amended to include a recommendation from the Committee to the Government to bear the 
entire expenditure of Delhi Police during the Financial year 1996-97 .and the one which has 
been incurred by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi during the first four 
months of the Financial Year should legitimately be refunded to that Government. The­
Chairman of the Committee explained that as per the information gathered from the 
Ministry of Home Affairs the arrangement whereby Central Government had to bear the 
entire financial outlay of Delhi Police w.e.f. August 1, 1996 had been reached after high 
level talks between the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Government of NCT of Delhi and 
there, therefore, did not appear to be any need for the Committee to go into this issue. 
Some other Members also felt that the status of Delhi still continued to be of a. Union 
Territory with Legislature and it could not draw a parallel with other States in the matter of 
sharing of Central allocations. Central Government was earlier making allocations to the 
Government of NCT of Delhi for Delhi Police and the only difference from August, 1996 
will be that Central Government will be making allocations to the Ministry of Home Affairs 
instead of NCT Government, and the former will be administering that expenditure of Delhi 
Poli~e. Even otherwise under the arrangement worked out currently the financial 
requirements of NCT of Delhi are by and large substantially met by the Central Government 
and Government of NCT of Delhi should not have any apprehensions on that account. 
4. Some other points about the functioning of North-Eastern Council, role of Assam 
Rifles, India Reserve Battalions and pegging of the current financial outlay of Union 
Territory of Chandigarh at the level of the previous year were also raised. The Chairman, on 
the basis of information provided by the Ministry of Home Affairs, clarified that the plan 
discussions for the current year had yet not been him materialised and the outlay had been 
retained at the level of Rs. 100 crores at the behest of Planning Commission as against Rs. 
102 crores which was the revised figure at RE stage during 1995-96. He, however, felt that 
the matters regarding NEC, Assam Rifles, India Reserve Battalions and even the question 
of reimbursement of expenditure of Delhi Police incurred by Qovernment of NCT of Delhi 
from April to July, 1996, if need be, could be taken up by the Committee later when it took 
up examination of Annual Report of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
5. The Committee thereafter adopted its Thirty-second Report on the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs, without any amendment. 
6. • • • 
7. • • • 
8. The Committee decided to present/lay all these three Reports in the Rajya Sabha/ 
Lok Sabha on the 30th August, 1996 and authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri 
Pranab Mukherjee to present .the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri M.O.H. Farooq and 
in his absence Shri Satya Pal Jain to lay them on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
*Relate to other matters. 

42 
9. The Committee also decided that three copies of the evidence tendered before it i 
connection with the consideration of Demands for Grants of the aforesaid Ministries be ker 
in the Library for reference purposes. 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 2.42 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on the 23J 
September, 1996. 