PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2025/Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
251 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON  ‘PRISON – 
CONDITIONS, INFRASTRUCTURE AND REFORMS’  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 10TH MARCH, 2025)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10th MARCH, 2025) 

Hindi version of this publication is also available         
P
ARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ‘PRISON – 
CONDITIONS, INFRASTRUCTURE AND REFORMS’  
(P
RESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 10TH MARCH, 2025)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10TH MARCH, 2025) 
R
ajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2025/Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2. INTRODUCTION ii 
3. ACRONYM iii - iv 
4. REPORT     
Chapter   -   I 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
2-18
Chapter   -   II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
19-32
Chapter   -   III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
33 
Chapter   -   IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government have not been received 
34-39
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE- 
AT A GLANCE 
40-42
7. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
6. ANNEXURE 46-80
43-45

i 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 RAJYA SABHA
1. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal - Chairman
2. Shri Haris  Beeran
3. Shri Samik Bhattacharya
4. Shri Ajay Makan
5. Shri Derek O'Brien
6. Shri Nabam Rebia
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri Kapil Sibal
9. Shri G.K.Vasan
10. Shri Sanjay Yadav   
 LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai
13. Shri Ashish Dubey
14. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam
15. Shri Naveen Jindal
16. Shri Saumitra Khan†
17. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato
18. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane
19. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shrimati Delkar Kalaben Mohanbhai
21. Shri Jai Parkash
22. Shri B Y Raghavendra
23. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
24. Shrimati Mala Roy
25. Shri Muhammed Hamdullah Sayeed
26. Adv. Chandra Shekhar
27. Shri Kesineni Sivanath
28. Shrimati Supriya Sule
29. Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti
30. Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra
‡
31. S
hri Amrinder Singh Raja Warring
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri. Swarabji B., Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director
4. Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary
†Shri Saumitra Khan, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 29th January,  2025 in place of Shri Sukhjinder Singh 
Randhawa, MP, Lok Sabha. 
‡ Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 29th January, 2025. 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Fifty First Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations Contained in the Two Hundred Forty Fifth  Report of the 
Committee on  ‘Prison – Conditions, Infrastructure, And Reforms’. 
2.  The Two Hundred Forty Fifth  Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok 
Sabha on the 21 st September, 2023. After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies thereof 
were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs  requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the Action 
Taken Notes on the said Report to the Committee on 30th January, 2024 and additional 
information on 15th July, 2024.  
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha by the Ministry. 
 4. The Committee consid ered the draft Two Hundred Fifty First  Report and adopted the 
same at its meeting held on 6th  March, 2025. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
6th  March, 2025 
15 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
New Delhi 
Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal  
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
  

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
APCA : Academy of Prisons and Correctional Administration  
BPR&D: Bureau of Police Research and Development 
CCTNS: Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and System 
CCTV: Closed-Circuit Television 
DEO: Data Entry Operator 
EMCS: Email My Case Status 
FSSAI: Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
FY: Financial Year 
GST: Goods and Services Tax 
HIV: Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
ICJS: Inter-Operable Criminal Justice System 
IGNOU: Indira Gandhi National Open University 
ITI: Industrial Training Institute 
MEPMA: Mission for Elimination of Poverty in Municipal Areas 
MHA: Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIS: Management Information System 
NABARD: National Bank for Agricultural & Rural Development 
NAC: National Academy of Construction 
NCRB: National Crime Records Bureau 
NGO: Non-Governmental Organization  
NIC: National Informatics Centre 
NLJD: Non-Linear Junction Detector 

iv 
 
OST: Opioid Substitute Therapy 
PATTAM: Personality and Attitude Transformation through Therapeutic 
Assistance and Management 
PLV: Para Legal Volunteer 
PMKVY: Pradhan MantriKaushalVikasYojana 
RSETI: Rural Self Employment Training Institute 
SOP: Standard Operating Procedure 
SRIJAN: Sustainable Rehabilitation of Inmates in Jails of Assam (New) 
STD: Sexually Transmitted Disease 
TB: Tuberculosis 
UC : Utilization Certificate  
UT: Union Territory 
VC: Video Conferencing 
VHF: Very High Frequency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
Report 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty Fifth Report of the 
Committee on Prison – Conditions, Infrastructure, and Reforms. The Two Hundre d Forty Fifth 
Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha/laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on 21 st September, 
2023. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty Fifth R eport have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
Chapter I:  The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 2.4.7, 2.4.8, 2.4.9, 2.7.3, 2.8.4, 2.10.3, 2.12.5, 3.2.2, 3.3.5, 3.3.6, 3.3.9, 
3.4.7, 3.4.8, 3.4.9, 3.4.10, 3.5.5, 4.4.6, 4.5.4, 4.6.6, 4.6.11, 4.8.3, 4.10.5, 4.10.6, 4.10.10, 4.10.12  
(of Two Hundred Forty Fifth Report)  Total recommendations - 25  
 
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.3.4, 2.4.3, 2.5.4, 2.6.3, 2.6.4, 2.8.5, 
2.8.6, 2.11.3, 2.12.6, 2.13.3, 2.13.4, 2.13.5, 2.13.6, 3.2.3, 3.3.7, 4.3.3, 4.3.4, 4.3.5, 4.3.6, 4.4.8, 
4.6.5, 4.6.9, 4.6.10, 4.7.2, 4.10.7, 4.10.8, 4.10.11, 4.10.13, 4.10.14, 4.11.2 ( ibid) Total 
recommendations – 30  
 
 
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 4.10.9 (ibid) Total recommendations – 1  
 
 
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observat ions in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 2.4.10, 2.5.3, 2.7.4, 2.10.4, 3.2.4, 3.3.8, 3.5.6, 
4.4.7, 4.10.4 (ibid) Total Recommendations – 9  
 
 
3. The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorization indicated 
above, in the succeeding Chapters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
1.1 Women prisoners 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.1.1 The committee recommends that the babies born in the prison to be allowed to stay with 
mothers until the age of 12 in order to provide a nurturing environment for the children during 
their early years while ensuring their well -being and development. Further, as per guidelines 
issued from time -to-time emphasis should be given towards proper care of children relating to 
food, shelter, medical care, education, and physical growth. Apart from this, sports and 
entertainment facilities are also to be provided to these children.  
 (Para 2.4.7 of 245th Report) 
Action Taken  
1.1.2 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State Governments. 
1.1.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.1.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs has also issued an advisory to al l States and Union 
Territories forwarding the guidelines for the welfare of the children of women inmates. These 
guidelines, inter-alia, provide that the children of prison inmates should be provided access to 
education, recreational facilities, food, shel ter and medical assistance etc. The Model Prison 
Manual 2016 circulated by the Ministry of Home Affairs to all States and Union Territories also 
has a specific chapter on “Women Prisoners‟, which, inter -alia, provides that prison 
administration should ensure holistic development of the children of women inmates. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs had also circulated a report to the States/ Union Territories titled 
“Women in Prisons” prepared by the Ministry of Women and Child Development. The report, 
inter-alia, contains specific recommendations on “children of women prisoners” and “better 
living arrangements” for women inmates and their children, etc. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.1.5 The Committee recommends that keeping in mind, the safety, hygiene, and health of 
women, adequate arrangements for separate toilets and bathrooms with proper water supply and 
more specialist women doctors are to be provided in women jails. The Committee al so notes that 
Ministry of Home Affairs should from time to time, instruct all the State Governments/UTs that 
necessary skill development programmes to be provided to the women prisoners which indeed 

3 
 
will help them to find employment after being released fr om the prison. It is also recommended 
that a study may be conducted on women inmates who have been released from jails to evaluate 
the effectiveness of rehabilitation programs, identify areas of concern and to enhance prison 
rehabilitation policy. 
 (Para 2.4.8  ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.1.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has requested the Bureau of Police Research & 
Development (BPR&D) to undertake a study on women inmates who have been released from 
jails to evaluate the effectiveness of rehabilitation programs and provide its recommendation to 
MHA in a time bound manner.   
1.1.7 BPR&D has informed that there are five types of economic models for rehabilitation  
programmes designed for women inmates which are as follows: 
a. Economic Model 1: Vocational training programmes and educational  
programmes are conducted to empower the women inmates which will help  
them in starting their own activities 
b. Economic Model 2: Vocational training is provided to women inmates with the  
help of verified & reputed NGOs which in turn employ the women inmates after  
their release 
c. Economic Model 3: Discharged Prisoners Aid Societies (Non- govt. Company)  
have been established in some States which give financial loan to released  
prisoners for their employment 
d. Economic Model 4: Women inmates are given training and are off ered 
employment opportunities at the petrol pumps owned by the Prison 
Departments of the States 
e. Economic Model 5: Special Schemes are launched for rehabilitation and  
employment of released women prisoners 
 
1.1.8 BPR&D has further stated there are open prisons for women prisoners in 
some States which gives an employment opportunity to women inmates and prepare  
them for future employment once they are released from prison. It has been  
concluded in the report that the rehabilitation programmes for women inmates are still 
in transit phase and there is no uniform structure/policy in the regard. 
 
1.1.9 BPR&D has also informed that they, in association with Academy of Prisons  
and Correctional Administration (APCA), Vellore, are conducting a study on  
Stigmatization and Victimization of Released Women Prisoners and their Children in  
India and one of the objectives of the study is to “Study the measures, schemes  
available for rehabilitation, reintegration of women prisoners and their children in 
India”. It has been informed that the outcome of the above study will be shared once  
the research is completed. A copy of the study report of the BPR&D on the subject is attached at 
Annexure –A.  

4 
 
1.1.10 MHA has shared the recommendation with all States/UTs and has requested them to 
implement skill development programmes for women prisoners which will help in the 
reformation of inmates.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1.11  The Committee is of view that in spite of laws for the protection of women, it is often 
observed that women are subjected to discrimination in various stages of life, and if a woman is 
on the wrong side of law or being convicted for an offence, her miserie s increased manifold. As 
compared to male prisoners, female prisoners face endless problems. Since the prison 
administration and staff have wide discretion in their hands, the Committee, therefore, 
recommends that measures should be taken that their fundamental and basic human rights are not 
violated and they are being provided with basic necessities and respect available to a prisoner. 
Women only prison and women only staff should be the motto for all the State Governments to 
adopt. The Central Government may formulate necessary infrastructure development 
programmes in that direction.  
 (Para 2.4.9 ibid) 
Action Taken  
  
1.1.12 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
1.1.13 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take urgent necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.1.14 The Ministry of Home Affairs has been issuing advisories to the States/UTs in this regard 
from time to time.  
1.2 Prison staff 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.2.1  The Committee has noted that across all categories of jail staff like -  jail cadre staff, 
warders, correctional staff and medical officers etc., the percentage of vacancies are very, high. It 
has become the most neglected part of the prison administration and it makes the management of 
the prisons very difficult. Having limited staff and making ad hoc arrangements to address staff 
shortage will compromise the security. A critical role is played by the Resident Medical Officers, 
Correctional Staff and Warders in the upkeep of the health conditions of the inmates, reformation 
and rehabilitation of the inmates and safety and security of the prison and prisoners. The 
Committee recommends that all posts need to be filled up immediately and no post should 
remain vacant for more than 3 months. 
 (Para  2.7.3  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons 
and prisoners is the primarily responsibility of respective State Governments. 

5 
 
1.2.3  The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.2.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs has also issued advisories to States and UTs, advising them 
to make periodic assessment of the strength of all categories of prison staff and take immediate 
steps to fill up the vacant posts by conducting special recruitment drives. 
1.3 Women staff strength 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3.1 The committee has noted that the States that house most of the prisoners are still below the 
benchmark standard set by BPR&D in the Model Prison Manual, 2016 in respect of staff to 
inmate ratio (1:6). Keeping this in view, the Committee recommends that all the State prison 
Departments should comply with the benchmark standards for the staff to inmate ratio as 
mentioned in the Model Prison manual, 2016. Non- compliance may lead to the compr omise of 
the safety and security of the prison and the prisoners.  
 (Para 2.8.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State Governments. 
1.3.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.3.4  The Ministry of Home Affairs has also issued advisories to States and UTs, advising them 
to make periodic assessment of the strength of all categories of prison staff and take immediate 
steps to fill up the vacant posts by conducting special recruitment drives. 
 
1.4 Training given to the prison staff 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4.1 The Committee observes that training of prison personnel is very essential to enable them 
to have a dignified approach towards the inmates and to bring about reformation in criminals. In 
this regard, the Committee recommends that the training programmes co nducted by the State 
Prison Departments may be parameterized and their performance to be evaluated for providing 
funds. 
 (Para 2.10.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 

6 
 
1.4.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has conveyed the recommendation to the Bureau of Police 
Research & Development (BPR&D) with the request to provide its report in the matter in a time 
bound manner.  
1.4.3 BPR&D has informed that to train the prison personnel, BPR&D has prepared prison 
training modules on the following parameters:  
•  Human Rights in Prison Administration 
•  Needs for Vulnerable Groups 
• Skill Development/Educational Programmes 
• Search Procedures 
• Stress Management 
• Leadership in Prison Administration 
• Managing Prison Industries 
• Gender Sensitisation 
• Dynamic and Static Security in Prisons 
• Classification of Prisoners 
• Use of Technology  
 
1.4.4 BPR&D has prepared 47 prison training manuals and 5 handbook for the capacity  
building of prison staff and on the basis of these training manuals, States and UTs  
have conducted 30 prison training courses. It has been further stated that based on  
the feedback collected from the participants, it can be concluded that the prison  
training programs sponsored by BPR&D and conducted by State Prison Departments  
are effective in achieving the desired goals . A copy of detailed report from BPR&D is attached 
at Annexure –B  
1.5 Sanitation and health care in prisons 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.5.1 The Committee considering the fact that majority of the natural deaths in Indian prisons 
are attributed to heart problems, lung related ailments, Cancer, Tuberculosis, kidney problems, 
liver related ailments, brain hemorrhage , HIV etc., feels that arrangem ents for providing 
treatment to such common ailments be made available in the prisons. The required medical 
experts like urologists, neurologists, oncologists etc. may be requested to visit the prisons on 
payment basis. A study maybe conducted across the S tates and UTs to check whether there is an 
increase in the number of HIV positive patients among prisoners. It may also include how far it 
is on account of unsafe and unhealthy practices of drug use by prisoners since it can have 
alarming effects on the health of prisoners who are involved in drug abuse. 
 (Para 2.12.5) 
Action Taken 

7 
 
1.5.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has conveyed the recommendation to the Bureau of Police 
Research & Development (BPR&D) with the request to provide its report in the matter in a time 
bound manner.  
1.5.3 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” s ubject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons 
and prisoners is primarily the responsibility of respective State Governments. 
1.5.4 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.5.5 BPR&D has reported that on the basis of the data received from States/UTs, it is  
revealed that there is no increase in HIV positive population after entry of inmates in 
prison. Only Rajasthan, Chandigarh and Jammu & Kashmir have shown increase in  
HIV positive cases but it could not be confirmed if the cases increased inside prisons  
or during entry level. It has been further re ported that most of the States/UTs have informed that 
drug usage and contraband have been strictly prohibited in prisons. The compiled data received 
from 20 States/UTs is attached at Annexure- C. 
1.6 Types of prisons 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6.1 The Committee notes that adequate infrastructure can contribute to the overall 
functioning of the prison system and the well -being of those within it. Cells or 
dormitories should provide sufficient space, ventilation, and natural light for inmates. 
Overcrowdin g should be minimized to ensure the comfort and safety of inmates. Proper 
security measures, including secure entry and exit points, surveillance systems, and 
secure barriers, are essential for maintaining order and preventing escapes. Utilization 
of techn ology for communication, education, and management can enhance the 
efficiency and transparency of prison operations .       
(Para 3.2.2  ibid) 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.6.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the responsibility of 
respective State/UT. 
1.6.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.6.4 The Government of India has prepared a Model Prisons Act, 2023 and has forwarded it to 
all States and UTs. The Model Act, inter -alia, has suitable provisions for searching of prisoners 
on admission, exit from prison and development of IT infrastructure etc. in prisons.  

8 
 
1.7         Prison budget 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.7.1 From the replies given by the State and Union Territory Governments, the Committee has 
noted that 12 State Governments and 2 Union Territory Governments did not receive funds from 
their respective Prison Departments. 8 States did not receive any funds from the Central 
Government. The Committee also acknowledges the facts that funds are an indispensable part in 
carrying out any form of prison reforms and in modernizing the prison infrastructure. Keeping 
this in mind, the Committee recommends that MHA should take steps for allocation of Central 
funds to the State Governments that have not received any funds during the last five years in 
order to enable them to carry out prison reforms and infrastructure development works. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs may also undertake field visits to ascertain the quality of work done 
for which the funds were allocated by the Government of India. 
(Para 3.3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.7.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has launched the ‘Modernization of Prisons’ project with a 
financial outlay of Rs. 950 crore from the Financial Year 2021- 22 to Financial Year 2025- 26, 
aimed at modernizing the prison equipments and strengthening the security i nfrastructure in the 
jails of the country.   A view has been taken that funds will be released to only those States and 
UTs who have adopted the Model Prison Manual, 2016 in their jurisdictions. 
 
1.7.3 At present, 19 States and all Union Territories have c onfirmed the adoption of Model 
Prison Manual. MHA has released funds to all 19 States and UTs, who have adopted the Model 
Prison Manual, 2016, under the Modernization of Prisons project. 
1.7.4 MHA is regularly following up the matter with the remaining 9 States for adoption of the 
Manual.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.7.5 The Committee has noted that very low sum of money equal to 1.0% (20.50 
Crores) is spent on prisoner welfare activities and hence recommends that Government 
of India may undertake a study on the optimum budget expenditure required per 
prisoner for the successful reformation and rehabilitation.  
   (Para 3.3.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.7.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs has conveyed the recommendation to the Bureau of Police 
Research & Development (BPR&D) with the request to provide its report in the matter in a time 
bound manner.  
1.7.7 BPR&D has reported that majority of the States have suggested for increasing  
the budget for successful rehabilitation and reformation of the inmates. 
However, no specific budget expenditure requirement per prisoner has been 

9 
 
indicated by States/UTs for the successful reformation and rehabilitation.  
Andhra Pr adesh has submitted that at least 10% of prison budget should be  
spent on welfare activities of the prisoners. Andaman & Nicobar has internally  
adjusted its budgetary allocation to reach optimal reformation and  
rehabilitation of inmate. Kerala has reported that percentage of expense spent  
on rehabilitation and reformation is low and expenditure on prisoners’ welfare  
need to be hiked to at least 7% of total expenditure. Mizoram reported that  
due to lack of funds, reformation and rehabilitation has been hampe red. 
Nagaland suggested 10% budget expenditure is required for the successful  
reformation and rehabilitation of prisoners. The compiled data received from 20 States/UTs is 
attached at Annexure- D. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.7.8  The Committee noted from its interactive sessions with the State/UT 
Governments that the Central funds have been underutilized by some of the States and a 
few other States have not timely submitted the utilization certificates with respect to the 
funds spent. The Committee, theref ore, recommends that all the State/UT Governments 
should fully utilize the Central funds allotted to them and timely submit utilization 
certificates in respect of the funds spent and the same should be regularly monitored by 
MHA.  
 (Para 3.3.9  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.7.9 The recommendation has been noted. The Ministry of Home Affairs takes up the matter 
regarding submission of Utilization Certificate (UC) with States and UTs on a periodic basis.  
 
1.8 Technology and modern equipment usage in prisons 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.8.1 The Committee has observed that the electrical equipment at the disposal of the State 
Prison Departments is not common across the country. To ensure better security of the prison, 
the Committee recommends that MHA may standardize a list of equipment to the extent possible 
for different categories of prisons for the ease of the State Prison Departments. 
 
(Para 3.4.7) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2 The Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) has prepared a compendium 
on the specifications of 96 pieces of equipments used in prisons and has shared it with all States 
and UTs.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 

10 
 
1.8.3 The Committee has noted that many State Prisons Departments have no jammers    
installed. Even in prisons where jammers are installed, they are capable of blocking only 2G and 
3G network signals. The Committee has also been informed that mobile phones are one of the 
major contraband articles that is most frequently smuggled into the prisons. Mobile phones in 
prisons are a potential hazard for maintaining peace and order in prison. They can be used in 
gang activity in prisons. With technological advancement in mobile phones, there are chances of 
advanced mobile phones that operate on 4G and 5G networks being smuggled into prisons. In 
order to curb the usage of mobile phones in prisons, the Committee recommends that 
technologically upgraded jammers that are able to block all signals from 2G to 5G should be 
installed in all prisons. 
   (Para 3.4.8  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.8.4  'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is primarily the 
responsibility of respective State/UT. 
1.8.5  The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.8.6  The Ministry of Home Affairs has also written to the States and UTs advising them that to 
restrict illegal access/use of mobile phones by inmates, effective jamming solutions may be 
ensured.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.8.7  The Committee has observed that the percentage of interviews through VC has 
been low despite the facility being available through e -Mulakat. To increase the 
utilization of this facility, the Committee recommends that NIC may take feedback from 
the prison administrations for its low utiliz ation and take necessary steps to further 
increase its utilization.  
 (Para 3.4.9) 
Action Taken 
1.8.8  The Ministry of Home Affairs has advised National Informatics Centre (NIC) to obtain 
feedback from the States and UTs in this regard. 
1.8.9 MHA has also written to all States and UTs requesting them to engage with concerned 
authorities of the District/ Trial Courts and Registrar of High Courts for maximizing the virtual 
hearing of the cases of prison inmates as such an exercise would not only prove to be c ost 
effective but will also save time and resources and would avoid movement of prisoners, thus 
ensuring their safety and security. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.8.10 The Committee notes that most of the time bail is denied on three counts i.e. the 
undertrial prisoner may influence or intimidate the witness(es); will try to leave country or 

11 
 
commit another crime. The Committee in its meeting was informed about the bracelet/anklet 
tracker by the State Government of Odisha. The Committee is of the view that technology can be 
explored to produce cost effective bracelet or anklet tracker that can be worn by the prisoners 
who have procured bail and are out of prison on bail. Through the use of these kinds of trackers, 
administrative machinery or human resou rces staff involved in keeping track of prisoners who 
are out on bail can be reduced and it could be a cost -effective method for keeping track of such 
prisoner without the involvement of large administrative staff strength. At the same time, it must 
be ensured that to avoid any kind of human rights violation this scheme or method should be 
used on voluntary basis after procuring the consent of inmates. The Committee is of the opinion 
that it can also minimize the problem of overcrowding in prison to some extent. 
(Para 3.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.8.11  'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons 
and prisoners is the responsibility of respective State/UT. 
1.8.12  The  Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.8.13 The Government of India has prepared a Model Prisons Act, 2023 and has forwarde d it 
to all States and UTs. The Model Act, inter -alia, has a provision that for public safety and 
preventing parole -jumping, prisoners may be granted prison leave on the condition of their 
willingness to wear electronic tracking devices for monitoring the movement and activity of such 
prisoners. 
 
1.9  e-Prisons software 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.9.1 Through the background notes, submissions during the meetings and replies to 
Questionnaire, the Committee has ascertained that all the modules under e-Prisons MIS 
have not been activated by all the State Government Prison Departments. In this regard, 
the Committee recommends that MHA may take up the issue with the State 
Governments for activating all the modules under e -Prisons MIS.  
(Para 3.5.5  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 MHA has shared this specific recommendation of the Committee with all States and UTs 
for attention and implementation. 
 
 
1.10 Vocational training and skill development programmes 
 

12 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.10.1 The Committee has observed that only a paltry 0.6% of prison budget (all India 
level) is given for the vocational/educational training of prisoners and only a 7.09% of 
the total prisoners in the country are receiving any kind of skill training in the country. 
The vocational /skill training and educational has a positive impact on the prisoners, in 
their reformation and rehabilitation. Hence, the Committee recommends that given the 
positive impact it has in reforming the criminals, the Central Government may 
undertake a study to analyze the reasons for such a low participation of prisoners in 
skilling/training activities.  
(Para 4.4.6 ibid ) 
Action Taken 
1.10.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has conveyed the recommendation to the Bureau of Police 
Research & Development (BPR&D) with the request to provide its report in the matter in a time 
bound manner.  
1.10.3 BPR&D has stated that most of the skilling/training courses were designed  
only for convicted prisoners and remand/under -trial prisoners are not covered 
in skilling/training activities. It has been stated that the convicts availing  
regular leave (parole) from prison do not show much interest in vocational  
programmes as they fear that they will not be allowed to avail parole till the  
completion of the course. It has been stated that other factors that deter  
participation of prisoners in skilling/training activities include illiteracy, health issues, and lack 
of i nterest to qualify for certain vocational programmes. It  
has been informed that Andhra Pradesh has suggested that short term  
courses may be designed so that undertrial prisoners can also be covered. 
Meghalaya has suggested that education provided in the correctional homes  
should be integrated with the standard education being provided in the society so  
that the prisoners can find employment once they are released. The compiled data received from 
20 States/UTs is attached at Annexure- E. 
 
1.11 Library and recreation 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 1.11.1   The Committee is of the view that setting up of libraries in prison can play an important 
role in the rehabilitation of inmates. Library is a storehouse of vast knowledge and information 
which can provide unlimited opportunities to prisoners not only to ga in and upgrade their 
educational skills but also to provide free access to relevant resources which may be crucial for 
their personal growth and overall wellbeing.   It can be a source of alternate and constructive 
recreational activity for prisoners who are fond of reading. The Committee feels that with limited 
fund resources, setting up a library may be a daunting task for prison administration. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the prison administrations which do not have library 

13 
 
facilities in th eir jails, can start by setting up of small library by receiving second -hand books. 
Gradually, a small allocation of funds for upgrading their libraries may be made on regular basis 
to have a well stalked library. The Committee also feels the efforts taken  by States like Tamil 
Nadu, Kerala, Rajasthan, etc. for library facilities in their prisons needs to be appreciated and 
other States have to follow those practices. At the same time, the Ministry may also highlight the 
importance and utility of library facilities by giving advisory to State/UT prison administration in 
this regard. 
 
(Para 4.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.11.2  The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  
1.11.3 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the responsibility of 
respective State/UT. 
1.11.4 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.11.5 The Model Prison Manual, 2016 prepared by the Ministry of Home Affairs and circulated 
to all States and UTs provides that books in the library should cater to the needs of different 
educational standards, satisfaction of intellectual needs, and development of knowledge of the 
inmates and prisoners should be encouraged to develop reading habits. 
 
1.12 Educational opportunities and legal literacy 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.12.1 The Committee notes that one of the biggest challenges for ex -prisoners is finding 
employment upon release. Education equips them with relevant skills and qualifications, 
significantly improving their job prospects. When prisoners participate in educationa l programs 
and successfully reintegrate into society, it has a positive ripple effect on their families and 
communities. While providing educational opportunities to prisoners involves some initial 
investment, it can ultimately result in cost savings for s ociety.  Lower recidivism rates mean 
reduced expenses related to law enforcement, courts, and incarceration, as well as increased tax 
revenue from productive, employed citizens. The Committee also noted that IGNOU study 
centers are functional in many of th e prisons of various States. The Committee recommends that 
IGNOU study centers may be established as far as possible in all the major prisons of the 
country. 
(Para 4.6.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.12.1 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State/UT. 

14 
 
1.12.2    The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they  have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.12.3    The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has advised the States to establish special study 
centres in prisons and organize workshops to popularise educational programmes offered by 
National Open School, Distance Education Board and Indira Gandhi National Open University 
(IGNOU), etc. for education of inmates. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.12.4   The Committee also recommends that the statistical data regarding the number of 
prisoners trained as PLVs may be obtained by the NCRB from all the State/UT Governments and 
to be included in the subsequent reports of the “Prison Statistics India”. Such data shall be of 
usage to the stakeholders in addressing the issue of lack of legal literacy among the prisoners by 
devising specific schemes/programmes. 
(Para 4.6.11 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.12.5  MHA has forwarded the recommendation to National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) 
with the request to take necessary action in the matter.  
 
1.13 Status of adoption of Model Prison Manual, 2016 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.13.1 Going by the information received from the State/UT Governments, the 
Committee notes that most of the State/UT Governments have their own Jail Manual 
which may be slightly different from the Model Prison Manual, 2016. The picture about 
adoption of Model Prison Manual, 2016 is not very clear with respect to some States. 
Some States have adopted the Manual, some have amended their respective Jail 
Manuals in accordance with the Model Prison Manual, 2016. Some of the States are in 
the process of adopting the Manual. In this regard, the Committee recommends that 
MHA may have more meetings with the State Governments to have a clear picture 
about its adoption. MHA may also advice the States to adopt the Manual as it will 
enable the States/UTs to reform prisons . 
 (Para 4.8.3  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.13.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  

15 
 
1.13.3 At present, 19 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal)and all Union Territories (A 
& N Islands, Chandigarh, D&N Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep and Puducherry have confirmed the adoption of Model Prison Manual.  
1.13.4 MHA is regularly following up the matter with the remaining 9 States for adoption of the 
Model Prison Manual, 2016. 
 
1.14  Measures to control criminal activities in prisons 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.14.1   During its interactive sessions with various State/UT Governments, the 
Committee was informed that ganja and cell phones are the common contraband items 
that are most frequently smuggled into the prisons among others. The Tamil Nadu State 
Government inform ed that throw method using catapult is one of the common 
approaches employed to smuggle the contrabands into the prisons. The Committee 
observes that the articles like cell phones inside the prison are used by the inmates to 
operate criminal activities outside the prison. Possession of cell phones in the hands of 
the prisoners can also stir up gang wars inside jails. Usage of ganja and other narcotics 
in prison compromises the reformation and rehabilitation of the inmates. The 
Committee also observes that e -Mulakat, video conferencing etc., will also help reduce 
the smuggling of the contraband into the prison as prisoners can communicate with 
their families through such facilities. The Committee has also noted that the prison 
staffs are helping the prisoners  to get the contraband inside the prison. Keeping in view 
of the negative impact the contrabands can have on reformation of prisoners, the 
Committee recommends that the frisking standards should be enhanced in all the State 
prisons. MHA should set benchmar k frisking standards to curb the entry of contraband 
articles and in turn prevent gang wars. All the State/UT Governments shall comply with 
such standards. Further, drones should be used in prisons to keep an aerial surveillance 
of the prison premises. Sni ffer Dog Squads may also be used in detecting contrabands.  
 (Para 4.10.5 ibid ) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.2 ‘MHA has requested BPR&D to prepare benchmark frisking standards to curb the entry 
of contraband articles which will prevent gang wars in prisons. 
1.14.3 BPR&D has prepared a SOP to prevent the entry of contrabands into prisons. The  
SOP provides details of the procedure which the prison authorities may follow for  
body search of prisoners during his entry, body cavity search, article search, etc. The SOP als o 
provides procedure for premises search, scanning of prison vehicles, night  
search, pipeline and sewer lines search, narcotics search, night search, etc. It has  
been stated that States/UTs may modify the SOP as per their local conditions and 
requirements. A copy of detailed report is attached at Annexure-F. 

16 
 
1.14.4  The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.14.5   The Government  of India has prepared a Model Prisons Act, 2023 and has forwarded it 
to all States and UTs. The Model Act, inter -alia, has provisions for searching of prisoners on 
admission, exit from prison. The Act also provides that the State/UT shall ensure strengthe ned 
and effective measures for periodic search and detection of contrabands, cell phones, etc. in the 
cells and barracks of high- risk offenders and hardened criminals and deploy advanced jamming 
solutions in such areas, including conduct off frequent surprise checks. The Act also provides the 
Punishment for possessing or using mobile phones and other contraband 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.14.6  The Committee has observed that more than 70% of the prisoners in Indian jails are 
undertrials. They are not being released from the prisons for want of sureties/inability to pay fine 
amounts. The prison administrations are spending lot more money on keeping such prisoners 
inside jails than the bail money required for their release. A fund on the lines of ‘Cheyut ha 
Nidhi’ started by Andhra Pradesh Prison Department for payment of fine amounts for poor 
prisoners should be created in all the States/UTs. 
 
(Para 4.10.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.14.7 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons and 
prisoners is primarily the responsibility of respective State/UT. 
1.14.8 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
1.14.9 MHA has formulated a scheme namely “Support to Poor Prisoners” which aims to 
provide financial assistance to poor, indigent, marginalized and economically backward 
prisoners who are unable to afford the penalty or the bail amount, through the respective 
States/UTs. Detailed guidelines for implementation of the Scheme have been shared with the 
States and UTs. The Ministry of Home Affairs is regularly following up the matter with the States 
and UTs through Video Conference (VC) meetings. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.14.10 The Delhi Prisons Department has pointed out that less importance is 
given to prisons in city planning and there is no standard design/architecture for 
prisons. The Committee has noted these issues and recommends that MHA should issue 
advisories to all the State/UT Town Planning Divisions to consider providing space for 
prisons whenever they make town/city plans. MHA could also take steps to come up 
with a standard design/architecture for prisons and share it with all the State/UT 
Governments.  
(Para 4.10.10 ibid) 

17 
 
Action Taken 
1.14.11 MHA has written to States and UTs and have requested them that this matter be  
taken up with the Town Planning Divisions to consider providing space for prisons during 
town/city planning.  
1.14.12 MHA had also prepared a Model Prison Manual, 2016 and circulated it to all 
States and UTs. The Manual has a specific chapter on “Institut ional Framework” which 
provides details about standard prison architecture.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.14.13 The Committee recommends that surveillance technology should be used 
in prison on drug detection at each and every entry point of the prison. By making all 
the staff, inmates, visitors, delivery items to be searched before entry into the prison, 
entry of c ontraband item in prison can be controlled to an extant. In addition, 
technology should also be used to address the challenges of smuggling of drugs in 
prisons as prison staff cannot fully contain this menace and they need the assistance of 
technological intervention to address this issue. The Committee also recommends that a 
multilayered approach such as physical search, use of X -ray scanners, other devices that 
can detect drugs, and rehabilitation programmes for prisoners afflicted with drug 
addiction should also be put in place as it can significantly reduce the entry of drugs 
within correctional facilities/jails. The States/UTs may consider planning programmes 
like Opioid Substitute Therapy (OST) as in the case of Assam to de - addict and wean 
away such p risoners, in the jails.      
 (Para 4.10.12 ibid ) 
Action Taken 
1.14.14 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State/UT. 
1.14.15  The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have 
been requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the 
Report.  
1.14.16 The Ministry of Home Affairs has launched the ‘Modernization of Prisons’ 
project with a financial outlay of Rs. 950 crore from the Financial Year 2021- 22 to Financial 
Year 2025- 26, aimed at modernizing the prison equipments and strengthening the security 
infrastructure in the jails of the country.  Funds have been released to States and UTs for 
procurement of Door Frame/ Metal Detectors/ Baggage Scanners/ Frisking/ Search solutions, 
etc.  
1.14.17  The Government of India has prepared a Model Prisons Act, 2023 and has 
forwarded it to all States and UTs. The Model Act provides that the State/UT shall ensure 
strengthened and effective measures for periodic search and detection of contrabands, cell 

18 
 
phones, etc. in the cells and barracks of high -risk offenders and hardened criminals and deploy 
advanced jamming solutions in such areas, including conduct of frequent surprise checks. The 
Act also provides the Punishment for possessing or using mobile phones and other contraband. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the 
matter in view of the Government’s reply 
 
2.1 Overcrowding 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.1.1 The Committee notes that the issue of overcrowding and delayed justice has become a 
pressing concern, leading to a series of consequences for both the prisoners and the criminal 
justice system as a whole. The Committee recommends that prisoners from overcr owded jails 
may be transferred to other jails with vacant cells in the same State or other States by signing 
MoUs to that effect. This kind of an arrangement can be mutual in nature between the States 
signing the MoU.  
(Para 2.3.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State Governments  
2.1.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
2.2 Women prisoners 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.2.1 The Committee recommends that special attention is to be given to the pregnant women 
on the line of the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of R.D. Upadhyaya 
vs. State of Andhra Pradesh wherein it was observed that a jail must have adequate facilities for 
prenatal and post -natal care for female prisoners as well as their children. Gynaecological 
examination for female prisons shall be performed in the District Government Hospital. Proper 
prenatal and post natal care shall be provided to the prisoner as per medical advice. Pregnant 
women in jail should be able to give birth outside the prison. Children should be given adequate 
care with respect to food, shelter, vaccination, education, recreational space and physical growth. 
     (Para 2.4.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.2.2 Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject as per the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution of India. Management of prisons and prisoners is primarily the responsibility 
of respective State Governments. 
2.2.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  

20 
 
2.3 Young Offenders 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee has noted that not all the State/UT Governments have Borstal schools in 
their jurisdictions. Tamil Nadu and 7 other States namely, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan & Telangana have borstal schools in their jurisdictions. Taking 
notice o f this fact, the Committee recommends that at least 1 to 2 Borstal schools should be 
opened in States, where, it is non-existent, on need basis. 
(Para 2.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry  4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons 
and prisoners is primarily the responsibility of respective State Governments. 
2.3.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UT s and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the specific recommendation of the Committee.  
 
2.4 Transgenders in the prison 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.1 Transgender prisoners are to be provided the same standards of health care available to 
other inmates and should have access to necessary health-care services without discrimination on 
the grounds of their gender identity. The Committee recommends that a doctor of their choice, 
rather than the prison officials, should examine them before lodging them in appropriate prison 
so that they may not be misgendered. There should be provisions made in prisons to have 
medical and health care experts to provide appropriate care to transgender inmates, if it is not 
feasible to have in house health experts, they may be referred to doctors/ professionals who 
specialize in this area of health care. 
 (Para  2.6.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.2 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is 
primarily the responsibility of respective State Governments. 
2.4.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
2.4.4 Incidentally, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has also issued a detailed advisory to 
the States and Union Territories (UTs) on 10.1.2022, inter -alia, advising them that the search of 
a transgender person may be conducted by a person of their preferred gender or by a trained 
medical professional. States/UTs have also been advised that transgender prisoners should enjoy 

21 
 
same standards of healthcare available to other inmates and should have access to necessary 
health-care services without discrimination on the grounds of their gender identity. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.5 The Committee recommends there should be separate infrastructure facilities for 
transgender prisoners. Separate barracks or ward may be ensured for transmen and transwomen. 
To preserve their right to privacy and dignity, there should also be provision for sepa rate toilets 
and bathing facilities for such prisoners. 
(Para  2.6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4.6 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Management of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State Governments. 
2.4.7 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
2.4.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has also issued a detailed advisory to the States and 
Union Territories (UTs) on 10.1.2022, inter -alia, advising them that appropriate arrangements 
for providing suitable accommodation and facilities in accordance w ith the gender identity of 
transgender persons may be made in the prisons.  
 
2.5 Women staff strength 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5.1 The Committee has noted that the representation of women in prison related jobs is 
generally low and recommends that advi sories may be issued to State Governments to enhance 
their representation especially in the Correctional Staff category which suites their natural role as 
care givers. 
   (Para 2.8.5) 
Action Taken 
2.5.2 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Management of prisons and prisoners is 
primarily the responsibility of respective State Governments. 
2.5.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
Recommendation/Observation 

22 
 
2.5.4 The Committee was informed that Ministry of Home Affairs regularly provides guidance 
and support to the States and Union Territories on diverse issues relating to prison administration, 
including measures for effective prison management and filling up of vacancies of prison officers 
and staff in jails. However, the recruitment of Welfare and Law Officers in prisons in the 
States/UTs is very meagre.  The  recruitment of those officials is very much needed to improve 
the conditions of prisons. During the meetings of the Committee with the States, it has been noted 
that either those posts are not filled or some temporary arrangements are being made by the 
States. Considering the situations, the Committee recommends that no temporary arrangements to 
be made, instead the posts of Welfare Officers and Law Officers needs to be filled permanently 
by recruitments. After recruiting the officials proper training should be given to them in order to 
have a better understanding of their roles. Overcrowded prisoners may be given additional staff in 
accordance with the proportion of overcrowding. 
 
(Para 2.8.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.5 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
primarily responsibility of respective State Governments. 
2.5.6 The Report of the Committee containing this specific recommendation has been 
forwarded to all States/UTs and they have been advised to take appropriate steps to comply with 
the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
2.6 Rotational transfer of prison staff 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6.1 The Committee recommends that the Government of India shall create an all-India Jail-
Cadre of Union Territories and the jail staffs belonging to the UTs needs to be transferred 
rotationally from one jail of UT to the other. From the replies of the State/UT Governments, the 
Committee has noted that there is no exclusive transfer policy in the State Prison Departments 
and recommends that the Government of India may issue periodic advisories to State 
Governments to have an exclusive transfer policy for their respective Prison Departments which 
is in compliance with the Model Prison Manual 2016. Intra-State transfer of prison officials will 
help them to understand various ecosystems of prisons. This will also minimize nexus with local 
criminals 
 
                                                                                                                           (Para 2.11.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
2.7 Sanitation and health care in prisons 
Recommendation/Observation 

23 
 
2.7.1  The Committee recommends that there should be sufficient number of toilets and 
that should be maintained in a clean and decent state. Both men and women prisoners shall 
be provided with sufficient water and toilet articles necessary for maintaining health and 
cleanliness. Clothing and linen provided to women should include undergarments, towels 
and socks in cold climates. Adequate quantity of toilet and washing soap should be 
provided to all the prisoners. Periodic feedbacks should be taken from all the pri soners 
regarding the sanitation conditions of the prison, sanitary items provided to them.  
(Para 2.12.6)  
Action Taken 
2.7.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State/UT.  
2.7.3 The Report of the Committee  has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
2.8 Food provided to prisoners 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.8.1  The Committee observed that along with pris on reforms availability of quality 
and nutrient rich diet is also essential for the well- being of prisoners. Lack Of 
nutritious food can reduce their ability to contribute and reintegrate back into the 
society after their release from the prison. The Committee was informed by many of 
the State Governments that inmates are being involved in various agricultural 
activities within the prison compounds for production of good quality agricultural 
produce. The  Committee recommends that with the availability of sufficient land, 
prison administration of all the States may involve inmates in the production of the 
food via good sustainable agricultural practices and provide for healthy nutritious 
diet to them.   
(Para 2.13.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.8.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons and 
prisoners is primarily the responsibility of respective State/UT.  
 
2.8.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 

24 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.8.4 The Committee further recommends that surprise checks may be conducted by teams 
comprising of nutritional experts, medical dieticians, officials from the Ministries, FSSAI etc., to 
ascertain that the quality and calorific value of food provided to the prisoners is as per the 
benchmark standards set in the Model Prisons Manual 2016.  
(Para 2.13.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.8.5 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State/UT.  
2.8.6 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.8.7 The Committee also recommends that periodic feedbacks should be taken from 
all the prisoners regarding the quality of food and beverage provided to them. 
Necessary improvements shall be made based on the feedbacks received.      
 (Para 2.13.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.8.8 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Management of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State/UT.  
2.8.9 The Report of the Committee has been forwarded to all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.8.10 The State of Tamil Nadu has constituted a ‘Committe e for Change of prisoners 
Diet’ comprising of Deputy Secretary, Home & Finance Department, Prison Officials, 
Nutrition Experts from Rajiv Government general Hospital. The mandate of the 
Committee is to compare the diet pattern of prisoners in Tamil Nadu pr isons with that 
of other States and to review the change in scale and pattern of diet given. The 
Committee has taken note of this arrangement and recommends that other States/UTs 
may also explore constituting such Committees to periodically review and chan ge the 
diet patterns of their prisoners.  
(Para 2.13.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 

25 
2.8.11 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take benefit from the best practices of the State of Tamil Nadu.  
2.9 Types of prisons  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.9.1  The Committee has noted that the satisfactory rate in respect of staff quarters is 
very low in some States. The State Prison Departments of Madhya Pradesh and Tamil 
Nadu have informed the Committee that only about 54% and 37% of the prison staff got 
Government staff accommodation in those States respectively. In view of this, the 
Committee recommends that all the works related to renovation of old staff quarters 
should be completed at the earliest. New staff quarters should be constructed wherever 
required. Care may be taken to make sure that the staff quarters are situated near the 
prison and amenities like schools, colleges and hospitals etc., are also available nearby.      
 (Para 3.2.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.9.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Management of prisons and prisoners is 
primarily the responsibility of respective State/UT. 
2.9.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all Stat es/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
2.10
 Prison budget 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.10.1  The Committee was informed by the State Government of Gujarat and Andhra 
Pradesh that there are a few colonial era jails in the country which are more than 
hundred years old which are in a dilapidated condition. The Committee appreciates the 
proposals of the Government of Gujarat to make Ahmedabad Jail Bhajiya House - cum-
Restaurant -cum -historical gallery, a heritage structure depicting the "life and times" of 
Mahatma Gandhi, Sardar Patel, Kasturba, Bala Gangadhar Tilak, Zaverch  and Meghani, 
who were all inm ates of Sabarmati Jail. The Committee recommends that other States 
should also come up with similar plans/proposals to renovate the colonial era prisons to 
preserve their heritage and earn revenue by encouraging tourism.  
 (Para 3.3.7 ibid) 
A
ction Taken 

26 
 
2.10.2 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take advantage of the best practices of the Government of Gujarat and Andhra 
Pradesh.   
 
2.11 Welfare activities for prisoners 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.11.1 The Committee appreciates the scheme “PATTAM” of the Tamil Nadu Prison 
Department aimed at reforming the first-time young offenders through counseling and the similar 
scheme “UNNATI” of the Telangana Prison Department. The Committee recommends that  such 
programmes aimed at reforming the first- time offenders through the joint effort of police, prison 
and judiciary need to be replicated in all the States/UTs to enable the first- time offenders to 
correct themselves and become a responsible member of th e society. Such schemes will reduce 
the rate of recidivism. Moreover, steps should be taken by State Prison Departments to identify 
the different types of trades traditionally practiced in their jurisdiction and accordingly come up 
with vocational/skill training courses. This will make it easy for the prisoner to pick a course of 
his interest. 
(Para 4.3.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.11.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution of India. Management of prisons and prisoners is the responsibility of 
respective State/UT. 
2.11.3  The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to make use of the best practices of the Govt. of Tamil Nadu and Telangana.  
Recommendation/Observation   
2.11.4 The Committee has also taken note of the health -oriented programmes like 
'Health ATMs' of Uttar Pradesh, 'Reformation Assistant' of Tamil Nadu, 'Samarth' of 
Gujarat, and ‘SwasthyaRakshale' as in case of Chhattisgarh and recommends that other 
States/UTs may adopt similar such schemes to benefit the prisoners in the upkeep of 
their physical and mental wellbeing.  
(Para 4.3.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.11.5 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take benefit from the best practices of the Government of Uttar Pradesh Tamil 
Nadu, Gujarat and Chhattisgarh. 
Recommendation/Observation 

27 
 
 
2.11.6 Under the SRIJAN Initiative, the Assam Prison Department has been aiming to transform 
jails into correctional homes for rehabilitation of prisoners by providing financial assistance & 
training for post release settlement and livelihood. The Committee appreciates this initiative and 
recommends that all the other States/UTs may also  strive to bring in such initiatives to change 
the prisons from being institutions of punishment into institutions of reformation and 
rehabilitation. 
(Para 4.3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.11.7 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to make use of the best practices of the Government of Assam. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.11.8 The Committee has noted that the jail inmates are deprived of contact with their 
family and friends for an indefinite period. Such separation makes them feel isolated/  
lonely which can be stressful for them. To address this issue, the Committee 
recommends implementing programmes like Ashirvad Anusthan' of Assam where the 
children of convicts meet them to take blessings for their class  10th exams, "Sparsh' of 
Delhi to provide financial assistance to prisoners with no family, 'touch and feel' of 
Tamil Nadu where the prisoners are allowed to meet and touch their family members; 
would enable the inmates to cope up with their loneliness and stress.  
 (Para 4.3.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.11.9 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take advantage of the best practices of the Government of Assam, Delhi and Tamil 
Nadu. 
 
2.12 Vocational training and skill development programmes 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.12.1 The Committee notes that almost all the prisons in various State and UTs are providing 
skill based vocational training to their inmates for their rehabilitation and future source of 
livelihood. Prisoners are being imparted training in various trades/industries like welding, 
masonry, furniture, leather items, garments, bakeries etc. The Committee recommends that the 
products made by the inmates needs to be marketed through e -marketing platfo rm so that the 
products can be sold at wider scale. It feels that online selling of these products can create a 
larger market and give the opportunity to convicts to earn all through the year. NGOs or activists 
can be involved for marketing their products. At initial level, they can tie up with government 
offices, institutions, hospitals, schools etc. to sell their products.  
 

28 
 
(Para 4.4.8 ibid ) 
Action Taken 
2.12.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons 
and prisoners is the responsibility of respective State/UT. 
2.12.3 The Report of the Committee containing this specific recommendation has been shared 
with all States/UTs and they have been advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the 
recommendations made in the Report.  
2.13 Educational opportunities and legal literacy 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.13.1 The statistical table above shows that about 65% of the prisoners in the jails 
across the country are illiterate or who got education below class 10. About 10% of the 
prisoners are having educational levels above graduation. From these statistical 
data/facts it may be presumed that the tendencies of committing a crime are higher in 
case of a person with lower educational levels. In this regard, the Committee suggests 
that all the States need to increase their expenditure on enhancing the educational levels 
of the prisoners. The prison administrations in the country should focus more on the 
prisoner's education by starting more schemes/programmes in that direction. The 
Committee appreciates the efforts of States like Chhattisgarh which are making use of 
educated inmates to teach other prisoners who are illiter ate. Similar arrangements may 
be made by other State Governments also.  
 (Para 4.6.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.13.2 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.13.3 The Committee appreciates the Email My Case Status (EMCS) system implemented in 
Gujarat prisons to enable the inmates to observe the procedure of Hon’ble High Court through its 
You Tube Channel. The Committee also recommends that such systems should be replicated in 
the prisons of other States also as it is a best practice and it helps in imparting legal knowledge to 
the prisoners. 
(Para 4.6.9 ibid) 
 
 
Action Taken 

29 
 
2.13.4 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Management of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State/UT. 
2.13.5 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.13.6 The Committee recommends that more and more inmates  should be motivated/  
encouraged to take up training as Para Legal Volunteers (PLVs) for assisting the Legal Aid 
Clinics established at prisons. This shall help in the spread of legal knowledge among the 
prisoners. This shall also empower the prisoners to be aware of their legal rights in the prisons 
which in turn would facilitate in making the quality of prison administration better.  The 
Governments should strive to impart legal literacy to all the educated prisoners. 
 
(Para 4.6.10 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.13.7 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State/UT. 
2.13.8 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
2.14 Age-group wise percentage of prisoners 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.14.1 The Committee considering the fact that the number of convicts and undertrials above the 
age of 50 years are very less compared with the prisoners of other age groups, recommends that a 
panel comprising of medical officers, officers from prison administration, NGOs, social 
scientists may be constituted to study the possibility of releasing the prisoners who are suffering 
from health issues and are above the age of 75 years as a respite measure or keep them in open 
prisons in cases where release is not possible. 
(Para 4.7.2  ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.14.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State/UT. 

30 
 
2.14.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
2.15 Measures to control criminal activities in prisons 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.15.1 The Committee observes that motivating prison staff is crucial for maintaining a 
positive and effective correctional environment. Working in a prison can be 
challenging, and staff members often deal with high levels of stress and burnout. The 
Committee also appreciates the initiative of the Assam Prisons Department to present 
the "Prerona Bota" award to the employees and staff of jails for their exemplary 
services. The Committee recommends an award program should be conducted for 
acknowledging the prison staff for their dedication and outstanding contributions 
towards maintaining secure and rehabilitative correctional environments. Various 
categories of awards like exceptional performance, teamwork, innovation, and positi ve 
interactions with inmates may be given to the staff. Recognition of their work will 
boost their morale and job satisfaction.  
 (Para 4.10.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.15.2 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
2.15.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs also confers medals on the officers and staff e ngaged in 
Prison Administration for Distinguished and Meritorious Service on Republic Day and 
Independence Day every year. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.15.4 In order to address the problem of inadequate technical assistants/DEOs to implement e -
Prisons, t he Committee recommends that the respective State/UT Governments may recruit 
persons for such posts on regular basis or services of technical assistants/DEOs may be obtained 
by outsourcing the requirement or the under graduate students from courses like 
criminology/forensics may be taken as interns to inter alia provide such services. 
 
  (Para 4.10.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.15.5 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 

31 
 
 
2.15.6 The Committee notes that key reforms that can be considered for addressing the drug 
problem in prisons are - Strengthen security protocols at entry points to prevent drugs from being 
smuggled into prisons; use advanced technologies such as body scanners, drug-sniffing dogs, and 
CCTV surveillance to detect contraband; implement thorough visitor screening procedures to 
ensure that visitors do not bring drugs into the prison; restrict physical contact during visits to 
prevent the transfer of drugs; train prison staff to recognize signs of drug use or traffic king 
among inmates and visitors; educate staff about the dangers of drugs and the importance of 
maintaining a drug -free environment; conduct regular and random searches of cells, common 
areas, and inmates to deter drug smuggling. 
  (Para 4.10.11 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.15.7 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Management of prisons and prisoners is 
primarily the responsibility of respective State/UT. 
2.15.8 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.15.9 The Committee is of the view that sometimes out -dated technological devices 
fail to detect the drugs contraband in jail premises. Therefore, it recommends that 
considering the technological advancement, prison administration should make a 
provision for additional investment to procure adva nced and modern equipment and 
make an effort to control this problem at initial stage itself . 
(Para 4.10.13 ibid ) 
Action Taken 
2.15.10 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List 
II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is 
primarily the responsibility of respective State/UT. 
2.15.11 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have 
been advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
2.15.12 The Ministry of Home Affairs has launched the ‘Modernization of Prisons’ 
project with a financial outlay of Rs. 950 crore from the Financial Year 2021- 22 to Financial 
Year 2025- 26, aimed at modernizing the prison equipments and strengthening the security 
infrastructure in the jails of the country under which funds have been released to States and UTs 
for procurement of security equipments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

32 
2.15.13 The Committee has noted that there are no organized programmes 
available for the aftercare of the inmates. The Committee likes to point to the efforts 
made by the Telangana State Prison Department in making arrangements for employing 
the released prisoners  in petrol pumps and also setting up a placement agency to 
provide jobs to the released prisoners. The Committee recommends that all the 
States/UTS may take necessary steps to set up similar such placement agencies for 
secur ing a job  for the released priso ner. For this purpose, the prison departments may 
associate with NGOs, industries etc. Such measures will also help the prison 
departments to observe and study the social behavior of the released prisoner through 
feedbacks from the employer . 
 (P ara 4.10.14  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.15.14 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have 
been advised to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report. 
2.16
 Best practices of State/UT Prison Departments 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.16.1
 The Committee notes the initiatives taken by various State/UT Governments to 
improve the conditions and infrastructure of prisons. The Committee is of the view that 
the best practices followed in certain States/UTs may be shared among prison 
administrations of other States/UTS to reap the benefits of such practices.  
(Para 4.11.2  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.16.2 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  

33 
 
CHAPTER III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee 
 
3.1 Measures to control criminal activities in prisons 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1.1 The Committee is of the view that online availability of prison made products would 
create awareness among masses about the work done by prisoners and will bring about positive 
outcome for their reforms. In the meetings of  the Committee, some States have pointed out that 
the prison products need to be exempted from GST. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
these products should be kept out of the purview of GST as it will give a competitive edge for 
the prison made products over the similar products manufactured by big business houses and 
help in improving their sales and profitability. 
 
(Para 4.10.9) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2  The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
3.1.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.4 The Committee has noted the reply given by the Ministry. The Committee suggests 
that the Home Ministry should taking the initiative to take up matter with the Ministry of 
Finance to implement the recommendations of the Committee instead of putting the o nus  
on the State Governments.  Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the acti on 
taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to take up the iss ue of exempting prison products 
produced by prisoners from GST with the Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
  

34 
CHAPTER IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of the Government have not 
been received 
4.1 Women prisoners 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.1.1
 The Committee has been informed by the State/UT Governments that there are separate 
wards and prisons to house the women prisoners along with their children who are below the age 
of 6 years. However, it is not clear whether there are separate wards in all the jails which 
modeled in a children friendly manner. The Committee recommends that women prisoners with 
children may be housed in separate wards in all the jails which shall be modeled in a children 
and nursing mother friendly fashion. 
 (Para 2.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.1.2
 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report. 
Further Recommendation 
4.1.3 The Committee has noted the Ministry's reply. Further, the Committee would also 
like to be apprised about the steps taken up by the State Government Prison Departments 
to house women prisoners with children in separate wards in jails.    
4.2 Young offenders 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.2.1 The Committee has noted that the picture of young offenders is not clear across States. In 
view of this, the Committee recommends that a clear definition of ‘young offenders’ should be 
given by MHA along with a common guideline to all State/UT Governments describing the 
procedure to govern them shall be provided for the convenience of the State/UT Governments. 
State Governments may take steps for holistic development of these young offenders by 
providing all of them with education, skill/vocational training, nutrition. Also, the rate of 
recidivism among this category of inmates may be monitored regularly and a study may be 
conducted to understand the social background of such young offenders.  
 (Para 2.5.3  ibid) 
Action Taken 

35 
 
4.2.2 The Model Prison Manual, 2016 prepared by the Ministry of Home Affairs and circulated 
to all States and UTs defines a “Young Offender” as any prisoner who has attained the age of 18 
years but has not attained the age of 21 years. The Manual has  a dedicated chapter on ‘Young 
Offenders” and provides guidance to States and UTs for treatment of ‘Young Offenders’. MHA 
regularly follows up the matter regarding adoption of the Model Prison Manual with all States 
and UTs so that the States and UTs can benefit from the guidance provided in the manual. 
Further Recommendation 
4.2.3 The Committee also advises the Ministry of Home Affairs to provide information 
regarding the studies conducted to understand juvenile offenders' social backgrounds and 
the recidivism rate. The Committee believes that conducting such studies  and taking 
appropriate measures based on the studies  shall help prevent youth from committing 
crimes.    
 
4.3 Prison Staff 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.3.1 The Committee observes that there are likely chances of jail staff colluding with the 
inmates in passing contraband articles into the prisons. Such corrupt practices in prison 
administration compromise the security and discipline in the prison. In order to curb such unholy 
nexus betw een the jail staff and inmates, the Committee recommends that strict 
penalties/disciplinary measures should be set in their conditions of service. 
 (Para  2.7.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.3.2 ‘Prisons’/‘persons detained therein’ is a “State List” subject under Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration of prisons and prisoners is the 
responsibility of respective State Governments. 
4.3.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been  
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
Further Recommendation 
4.3.4  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. Further, the Committee 
would also like to be apprised if the Ministry has issued a ny specific guidelines to the 
State/UT Governments to incorporate strict penalties/disciplinary measures in the service 
conditions of prison staff so that they would not collude with the inmates in passing 
contraband articles into the prison.    
 
4.4 Training given to the prison staff 

36 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.4.1 The Committee also recommends that a dedicated institute common to all the North 
Eastern States to impart correctional training to the prison personnel may be established. Each 
State should endeavor to establish its own training institutions exclusively for training jail staff.  
(Para 2.10.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.4.2 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
Further Recommendation 
4.4.3  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. Further, the Committee has 
also noted that there is no dedicated training institute for imparting training to the prison 
personnel in the North Eastern Region. The States in this re gion are also excessively 
dependent on the Central Government for funds. Hence, the Committee further 
recommends that MHA may explore the possibilities for setting up one such institute in the 
North Eastern Region.    
 
4.5 Types of prisons 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.5.1 The Committee noted that many of the representatives of the State Governments who 
appeared before the Committee submitted that they are undertaking construction of new 
buildings, barracks and new prisons to accommodate the increasing number of prisoners. 
However, the Committee is of the view that these are not enough to address the overcrowding of 
prisons. In some of the States, the prisons are overcrowded to the extent of 185% of its capacity. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends there is a need for the State/UT Governments to 
undertake a comprehensive study covering the population of the region, nature of crimes, rate of 
conviction, crime rate etc., and accordingly come up with a suitable plan to enhance the capacity 
of the prisons and/or other alternative. Adequate fund may be allocated by the Central and State 
Governments for construction of new barracks, buildings and prisons as per the requirement.  
(Para 3.2.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.5.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons 
and prisoners is the responsibility of respective State/UT. 
4.5.3 The Report of the Committee has be en shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  

37 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
4.5.4 The Committee notes the Ministry of Home Affairs’ reply and advises that the 
information about the Central funds provided by MHA to the State Prison Departments 
exclusively for the construction of new prisons/barracks/buildings may be shared with the 
Committee.  
4.6 Prison Budget  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.6.1 The Committee has noted that very low sum of money is spent on prisoner welfare 
activities and 0.6% (₹ 13.16 Crores) on Vocational/Educational training of prisoners. The 
Committee recommends that the State Governments may create a Prison Development Fund. All 
the profits and other incomes accrued from the industrial activity undertaken by the Prison 
Department may go into such developmental fund. The amount in the fund may be used for the 
welfare activities of the prisoners which in turn minimize the dependency on the Budget 
allotment from the Governments. 
  (Para 3.3.8  ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
4.6.2 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
Further Recommendation 
4.6.3 The Committee has noted the Ministry's reply. Further,  the Committee may also be 
apprised about the action taken by the State/UT Governments to create a Prison 
Development Fund in their State/UT, which can be utilized for providing welfare activities 
and vocational training to prison inmates. 
 
4.7  e-Prisons software  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.7.1 Tamil Nadu State informed the Committee in its meeting that the Crime and 
Criminal Tracking Network & Systems (CCTNS) and e -Courts are still not integrated 
with the e -Prisons. In this regard, the Committee recommends that MHA may escalate 
the issue with NIC for faster integration of CCTNS and e -Courts with e - Prisons which 
is going to benefit all the stakeholders like police, prison administration, prosecutors, 
law courts and forensic laboratories. MHA should issue periodic advisories to all the 
States to take steps to integrate all their prisons through e -Prisons software so that they 
can obtain the benefits of ICJS.  
  (Para 3.5.6 ibid ) 

38 
 
Action Taken 
4.7.2 The recommendation has been noted.  
4.7.3 MHA has advised NIC to take immediate necessary action in the matter in coordination 
with National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). 
 
Further Recommendation 
4.7.4 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that integration of e- Prisons with 
CCTNS and e -courts should be expedited. The Ministry should follow up on the matter 
with NIC and NCRB, and a status report in this regard may be apprised to this Committee.  
4.8 Vocational training and skill development programmes 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.8.1 The Committee was informed by various State/UT Governments that the 
prisoners are earning while in prisons by way of producing bakery products, carpet 
weaving, soaps, incense sticks, agricultural products, etc. However, from the 
presentations, it has been found that the wages/earnings which they are getting are very 
less. Hence, the Committee is of the view that it is essential to ensure that the wages 
paid to prisoners  are fair and equitable and that prisoners are not exploited for their 
labor. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the wages of the prisoners needs to 
be increased as this will help to improve the socio -economic conditions of prisoners and 
reduce recid ivism rates.      
(Para 4.4.7 ibid ) 
Action Taken 
4.8.2 'Prisons'/'persons detained therein' is a “State List” subject as per Entry 4 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Administration and management of prisons 
and prisoners is the responsibility of respective State/UT. 
4.8.3 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
requested to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
 
Further Recommendation 
4.8.4 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry and would like to be apprised 
about the steps taken by the State/UT Governments to enhance the prisoners' wages. 
 
4.9 Measures to control criminal activities in prisons 

39 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.9.1 The Committee has noted that overcrowding is one of the major challenges in 
the prison administration and recommends that all the State/UT Governments may take 
necessary actions as early as possible with regard to implementing the 'Support to Poor 
Prisoners' p rogramme announced by the Central Government in the Union Budget 
2023- 24 to benefit the eligible prisoners under this scheme.    
 (Para 4.10.4 ibid ) 
Action Taken 
4.9.2 The Report of the Committee has been shared with all States/UTs and they have been 
advised to take appropriate steps to comply with the recommendations made in the Report.  
4.9.3 MHA has formulated a scheme namely “Support to Poor Prisoners” which aims to 
provide financial assistance to poor, indigent, marginalized and economically backward 
prisoners who are unable to afford the penalty or the bail amount, through the respective 
States/UTs. Detailed guidelines for implementation of the Scheme have been shar ed with the 
States and UTs. The Ministry of Home Affairs is regularly following up the matter with the States 
and UTs through Video Conference (VC) meetings.  
 
Further Recommendation 
4.9.4 The Committee has noted the reply given by the Ministry. The scheme 'Support to 
Poor Prisoners' formulated by the Ministry to benefit the poor, indigent, marginalized and 
economically backward prisoners who are unable to afford the penalty or the bail amount 
is much appreciated by this Committee. In this regard, the Commi ttee further desires to be 
informed about the number of prisoners benefitted under this scheme, State-wise. 
__ 
The Committee has noted the reply given by the Ministry. The Committee suggests that the 
Home Ministry should taking the initiative to take up matter with the Ministry of Finance 
to implement the recommendations of the Committee instead of putting the onus  on the 
State Governments.  Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Home Affairs to take up th e issue of exempting prison products 
produced by prisoners from GST with the Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
 
***** 

40 
 
            RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
Measures to control criminal activities in prisons 
 
The Committee has noted the reply given by the Ministry. The Committee suggests 
that the Home Ministry should taking the initiative to take up matter with the Ministry of 
Finance to implement the recommendations of the Committee instead of putting the onus  
on the State Governments.  Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to take up the issue of exempting prison products 
produced by prisoners from GST with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
(Para 3.1.4) 
 
Women prisoners 
 
The Committee has noted the Ministry's reply. Further, the Committee would also 
like to be apprised about the steps taken up by the State Government Prison Departments 
to house women prisoners with children in separate wards in jails.    
 
   (Para 4.1.3) 
Young offenders 
 
The Committee also advises the Ministry of Home Affairs to provide information 
regarding the studies conducted to understand juvenile offenders' social backgrounds and 
the recidivism rate. The Committee believes that conducting such studies and taking 
appropriate measures based on the studies shall help prevent youth from committing 
crimes.    
   (Para 4.2.3) 
Prison Staff 
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. Further, the Committee 
would also like to be apprised if the Minist ry has issued any specific guidelines to the 
State/UT Governments to incorporate strict penalties/disciplinary measures in the service 
conditions of prison staff so that they would not collude with the inmates in passing 
contraband articles into the prison.    
   (Para 4.3.4) 
 
 
 
 

41 
Training given to the prison staff 
T he Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. Further, the Committee has 
also noted that there is no dedicated training institute for imparting training to the prison 
personnel in the North Eastern Region. The States in this region are also excessiv ely 
dependent on the Central Government for funds. Hence, the Committee further 
recommends that MHA may explore the possibilities for setting up one such institute in the 
North Eastern Region.    
   (Para 4.4.3)
 
T
ypes of prisons 
The Committee notes the Ministry of Home Affairs’ reply and advises that the 
information about the Central funds provided by MHA to the State Prison Departments 
exclusively for the construction of new prisons/barracks/buildings may be shared with the 
Committee.  
   (Para 4.5.4) 
Prison Budget 
The Committee has noted the Ministry's reply. Further, the Committee may also be 
apprised about the action taken by the State/UT Governments to create a Prison 
Development Fund in their State/UT, which can be utilize d for providing welfare activities 
and vocational training to prison inmates. 
   (Para 4.6.3)
 
e-Prisons software
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that integration of e- Prisons with 
CCTNS and e -courts should be expedited. The Ministry should follow up on the matter 
with NIC and NCRB, and a status report in this regard may be apprised to this Committee. 
  (Para 4.7.4) 
Vocational training and skill development programmes 
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry and would like to be apprised 
about the steps taken by the State/UT Governments to enhance the prisoners' wages. 
   (Para 4.8.4) 

42 
Measures to control criminal activities in prisons 
The Committee has noted the reply given by the Ministry. The scheme 'Support to 
Poor Prisoners' formulated by the Ministry to benefit the poor, indigent, marginalized and 
economically backward prisoners w ho are unable to afford the penalty or the bail amount 
is much appreciated by this Committee. In this regard, the Committee further desires to be 
informed about the number of prisoners benefitted under this scheme, State-wise. 
(Para 4.9.4) 
__
 

 MINUTES 
43

44 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs met at 11:30 AM onThursday, the 6 th March, 2025 inCommitteeRoom 
‘2’, PHA-Extension, New Delhi 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal - Chairman
2. Shri Shri Haris Beeran
3. ShriSamik Bhattacharya
4. Shri Ajay Makan
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
6. Shri G.K. Vasan
 LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Shri Saumitra Khan
10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
11. Shri Muhammed Hamdullah Sayeed
12. Adv. Chandra Shekhar
13. Smt. Supriya Sule
14. ShriKrishna Prasad Tenneti
15. Smt. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra
16. Shri Amrinder Singh Raja Warring
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 

45 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  xxx 1  xxx 
xxx  and informed the Members about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to 
consider and adopt the following three draft Reports of the Committee:- 
i. xxx   xxx   xxx  
ii. 252nd Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs; and
iii. xxx xxx xxx 
3. Before the adoption of the Committee reports, some Members of the
Committee gave certain suggestions for inclusion in the recommendations.
The Chairman, after hearing these suggestions, informed the Committee that
he will look into them.
4. xxx xxx xxx 
5. The Committee considered the draft 252 nd Report and adopted it.
6. xxx xxx xxx 
7. Thereafter, the Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any
typographical/factual errors and, if necessary, further vetting in view of the
suggestions received from Members and also to nominate Members for
presentation/laying of the Reports to Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha so that further
necessary action can be initiated on the said Reports.
8. xxx xxx xxx 
9. The meeting, then, adjourned at 12.56 PM.
1xxx   Relates to other matters 

46 
ANNEXURE 

47 
Annexure-A 
B
ureau Of Police Research & Development 
(Research & Correctional Administration Division) 
*
**** 
A study report on Effectiveness of Rehabilitation Programmes for Women 
Inmates who have been released from Jail and identify the areas of concern. 
In compliance of MHA OM No.V-17013/55/2023 -PR, dated 11.12.2023 
regarding Effectiveness  of Rehabilitation Programmes  for Women Inmates who 
have been released from Jail and identify area of concern BPR&D has formed a 
study group comprising pr ison officers from Telangana,  Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Delhi. 
The following outcome are emanated from the discussions among the study 
group: - 
Types of economic models of rehabilitation programmes 
Designed for Women Inmates 
Economic model-I 
In this model Vocational Training Programme and Educational Programme are 
conducted to empower women inmates so that ones they are release, they can start 
their own activities while staying with the families. 
• All Prisons conduct vocational Training Programmes in Tailoring
&Stitching, bakery products, Stitching of Jute Bags, Envelope making,
Agarbatti making, Fast food making ,Beautician skills, Flower an d

48 
garlands making, block painting, boutique, artificial jewellery, Sanitary 
Pads and Napkins, Namkeen and Pickle Making, Mehandi, Handicraft 
Classes, Computer Training, Organic Farming, Sports, Yoga and Library 
management, Creche maintenance etc. These courses empower all women 
inmates to make livelihood after release from prisons. 
• Compulsory Adult Education Programme, Padho Padhao Classes for basic
education and spoken English courses are conducted for women inmates to
empower them.
Economic Model-II 
In this model Prison Administration imparts Vocational Training to women 
inmates with the help of verified, reputed NGOs. These NGOs in turn employ the 
women inmates once they are released from the Prisons. 
In some States Prison Administration has collaborated with State 
Government Skill Development Institute that off er recognised 
certificatethatpavethewayforeffectiveemploymentafterreleasefromthePrison. 
Economic Model-III 
Discharged Prisoners Aid Societies(Non- govt company) are established in 
some States which give financial loan to release Prisoners for their employme nt. 
Eg.-TamilNadu. 
Economic Model-IV 
The Prison Administration has its own petrol pumps throughout the State. 
The women inmates are given training and assigned duties while there in the 
Prison and whoever wants employment after their release from the Prison, are 
offered employment opportunities at the petrol pump owned by the Prison 
Department. 
Economic Model-V 
In this model State Government has special schemes for the rehabilitation 
and employment of the released Prisoners 

46 
Financial Assistance to Ex- Convicts” was launched by the Department of 
Social Justice, Government of Kerala. This scheme is implemented by the 
Department of Social Justice to help those released from jail from poor economic 
conditions to find their livelihood. As part of this scheme, one-time financial 
assistance is provided to those released from jail to find self-employment and start 
some small Industry/Trade as part of social rehabilitation. 
In addition to above economic models the following relevant points are also 
observe during the study. 
After care officer: - An officer of the rank of jailor or Dy. Jailor is 
designated for the looking after the needs of released women inmates and helping 
them in shelter homes and admission in school for their children. 
Open Prisons for women inmates (Maharashtra, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh) 
gives an opportunity to women inmates to employ themselves in gainful activities 
and prepare them for future employment once they are released from the Prison. 
Conclusion: - 
The above study reveals that the rehabilitations programmes for release 
women inmates are still in transit phase. There is no uniform structure and policy 
throughout the country in this regard. 
Some NGOs are doing commendable job to rehabilitate released women 
prisoners and it is also observed that State Government sponsored programmes 
benefit the rehabilitations of released women prisoners. 
This is to inform that BPR&D is conducting a study on Stigmatization and 
Victimization of Released Women Prisoners and the ir Children in India, in 
associations with Academy of Prisons and Correctional Administration, Vellore, 
Tamil Nadu. One of the objectives of above study is “ To study the measures, 
schemes available for rehabilitation, reintegration of women prisoners and 
their children in India.” The outcome of the above study will be shared once the 
research is completed. 

47 
Annexure-B 
Report on Parameterising of Training Programmes conducted by 
State Prison Departments and their performance evaluation 
T
o train the Prison Personnel and enabling them to have a dignified approach 
towards the inmates and to bring about the reforms in inmates, the following 
parameters have been laid down for the training programmes: - 
• Human Rights in Prison Administration : Prison Officers shall ensure that
while administering prison, human rights of prisoners are protected. On the
other hand, human rights of prison administration officers and staff are also
of immense importance. Prison personnel should understand the ways and
means of ensuring human rights protection through prison administration.
The rights of Prisoners shall be ensured according to international covenants.
International Legal instruments as well as judicial precedents of India
through which various rights of prisoners are conferred and ensured.
• N
eeds of Vulnerable Groups : The prison officers shall ensure the needs of
vulnerable groups. Prison officers shall be trained in identification of
vulnerable groups of prisoners and their specific issues and work towards
reducing the existing vulnerabilities by adopting and implementing positive
policy level measures.

48 
• Skill Development/Educational Programmes: Skill development of prison
inm
ates is a crucial activity that weans inmates away from  recidivism.
Theses programme is to explore and understand practical ways in which skill
development and educational courses could be undertaken in prisons.
• Rehabilitation and Correctional Programmes : Prison officers shall be
aware of knowledge and skills related to implementation of rehabilitati on
a
nd correctional programmes for the prisoners.
• S
tress Management: Prison Officers shall have necessary knowledge about
stress, sources, effects, management techniques, etc.,
• S
earch Procedures : Invasive body searches lie at the crosshairs of the
fundamental principle inherent under the human rights framework that the
treatment of prisoners should be humane and respect the inherent rights and
dignity of the person.
• L
eadership in Prison Administration : A variety of leadership
competencies are required in order to develop effective leadership in prisons.
A Prison Leader must be able to lead a team and motivate staff to work for
organizational goals and bring reforms and improvements in the prison
system.
• M
anaging Prison Industries: There have been several developments in the
establishment of new industries and the modernization of existing sectors in
response to market trends. Hence Prison Officers need to be trained on this
subject of managing prison industries develop modern Prison Industries or
m
odernize the existing ones.
• G
ender Sensitization : Gender sensitive prison management policies and
practices should be responsive to the needs of women in a holistic manner.
Gender biases have to be challenged in all decision-making processes. Equal
and equitable treatment and participation of women in the correctional
system helps to promote diversity and inclusiveness and a safe environment.

49 
• E
mergencies in Prison Administration : Emergency preparedness is
crucially important for every correctional institution. Establishing a
comprehensive system of emergency preparation and emergency response
requires budget, time, equipment, inter -agency coordination and long-ter
m
m
anagement attention.
• D
ynamic and Static Security in Prisons : prison officers must hav e
kn
owledge and skill training related to physical, procedural and dynamic
security for effective management of Prisons. There is a need to equip the
prison officers with latest tools and technology to face the new challenges.
• Classification of Prisoners: Categorization and classification of prisoners is
very much essential to prevent indiscipline, riots, strikes, attacks, escapes,
and other security related issues in the Prisons. It is also necessary to ensure
special care of vulnerable groups as well as to ensure correctional services to
facilitate rehabilitation and reintegration of prisoners.
• Technology: It is of vital importance to implement various technological
interventions for the purpose of correctional administration. It provides a
structure plan for monitoring the all- round activities in prisons, related to
prison staff, safe and secure custody of prisoners, record keeping etc. and
provides feedback on the attributes that need training, so that there is an
improvement in their respective performance.
BPR&D has prepared prison training modules based on above mentioned 
parameters. 
BPR&D has prepared 47 prison training manuals and 05 Handbooks for the 
capacity building of prison staff. Consist of following categories: 

50 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Skill Development/Educational
Programmes in Prisons.
• S
pecialized Course for Prison Officers on Correctional Programmes in
Prisons.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Warders on Stress Management.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Human Rights in Priso n
A
dministration.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Warders on Rights of Prisoners- International
Covenants and Supreme Court Judgments.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Engaging with Vulnerable/
Special Needs of Prisoners.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Warders on Custody of Prisoners and Search
Procedures.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Rehabilitation of Prison Inmates-
A Relook.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Leadership in Prison
Administration.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers/Warders on Gender Sensitization.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Managing- Prison Industries.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Warders on Dynamic and Static Security in
Prisons.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Emergencies in Prison
Management.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Categorization, Classification of
Prisoners.
 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers on Rehabilitation and Correctional
Programmes for Prisoners.

51 
• Specialised Course for Prison Officers/Warders on Technology in Prison
Administration.
On the basis of these training manuals States/UTs have conducted 30 prison 
training courses as per the list enclosed at ‘Annexure- B-I’ 
Performance Evaluation: - 
For every course a feedback mechanism is devised through which feedback 
is collected from the participants. Based on the feedbacks from States, it can be 
concluded that the prison training programs sponsored by the BPR&D and 
conducted by the  State Prison Departments are up to the mark and effective in 
fulfilling the learning goals. Training programmes are learning centric and 
comprises learning activities. Course designs are as per the requirement of prison 
services in which all ranks of prison officials are benefited through the topics of 
the courses. It develops an understanding of team dynamics and effective 
communication within the correctional system of India. These courses meet the 
parameters that have been enlisted in the report. Hence the goal of dignified 
approach towards the inmates and bringing about the reforms in inmates is 
achieved. 

52 
‘Annexure – B-I’ 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the course Conducted Duration No. of 
Participants 
1. Managing Prison Industries APCA, 
Vellore 
19-23, June,
2023
31 
2. Human Rights in Prison 
APCA, Industries - I 
APCA, 
Vellore 
11-15, July,
2023
31 
3. Human Rights in Prison 
APCA, Industries - II 
APCA, 
Vellore 
24-28, July,
2023
32 
4. Technology in Prison APCA, 
Administration-I 
APCA, 
Vellore 
21-25,
August, 2023
27 
5. Technology in Prison APCA, 
Administration-II 
APCA, 
Vellore 
12-16,
September,
2023
27 
6. Rehabilitation 
of Prison Inmates: A Re-look 
ICA, 
Chandigarh 
24-28, July,
2023
12 
7. Stress Management ICA, 
Chandigarh 
25-29,
September,
2023
21 
8. Leadership in Prison 
Administration 
ICA, 
Chandigarh 
20-24,
November,
2023
20 
9. Gender Sensitization ICA, 
Chandigarh 
18-22,
December,
2023
21 
10.  Technology in Prison 
Administration 
ICA, 
Chandigarh 
04-08 March,
2024
18 
11.  Emergencies in Prison 
Management  
ICA, 
Chandigarh 
23-27
August, 2023
18 

53 
12. Skill
Development/Educational
Programmes in Prisons
BICA, Bihar 23-27,
September 
2023 
26 
13.  Categorization and  
classification of Prisoners 
BICA, Bihar 09-13,
September
2023
16 
14.  Accountability and 
Transparency in Prison 
Administration 
BICA, Bihar 31 October - 
04 
November, 
2023 
22 
15.  Prison Security- Dynamic and 
Static, Emerging Challenges 
SICA, 
Telangana 
16-20,
October,
2023
25 
16.  Best  Practices in Prison 
Administration 
SICA, 
Telangana 
13-17,
November,
2023
24 
17.  Custody of Prisoners and 
Search Procedures 
SICA, 
Telangana 
11-15,
December,
2023
24 
18.  Dynamic and Static Security 
in Prisons 
SICA, 
Telangana 
08-12,
January,
2024
25 
19.  Human Rights in Prison 
Administration 
Karnataka 
Prisons 
Department 
21-25,
August,
2023
20 
20.  Rights of Prisoners – 
International Covenants and 
Supreme Court Judgements 
Karnataka 
Prisons 
Department 
04-08,
December,
2023
20 
21.  Best Practices in Prison 
Administration 
Karnataka 
Prisons 
Department 
02-06,
January,
2024
20 

54 
22. Dynamic and Static Security
in Prisons
Karnataka 
Prisons 
Department 
05-09,
February,
2024
20 
23. Emergencies in Prison 
Administration 
Karnataka 
Prisons 
Department 
12-16,
February,
2024
20 
24. Technology in Prison 
Administration 
Karnataka 
Prisons 
Department 
30 Jan – 03, 
February, 
2024 
20 
25. Custody of Prisoners and 
Search Procedures 
MP Prisons 
Department 
18-22, Sept,
2023
20 
26. Stress Management MP Prisons 
Department 
20-24,
November,
2023
20 
27. Prison Security – Dynamic 
and Static Emerging 
Challenges 
MP Prisons 
Department 
18-22,
December,
2023
20 
28. Rehabilitation and 
Correctional Programmes for 
Prisoners 
BICA, Bihar 27-31,
January,
2024
39 
29. Transparency as Antidote to 
Corruption in Prison 
Administration in 
BICA, Bihar 24 
30. Technology in Prison 
Administration 
CDTI, 
Ghaziabad 
29Jan – 02, 
Feb, 2024 
23 
Total 686 

55 
Annexure-C 
MHA vide OM No. V-17013/55/2023 -PR dated 19.01.2024 has forwarded the observation/recommendations of Departmental 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee. The compiled data/information received from 20 States/UTs is mentioned as 
below:-  
S. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Undertake a study to check whether there is an increase In the number of HIV positive patients 
among prisoners. The report may also include how far it is on account of unsafe and unhealthy 
practices of drug use by prisoners since it can have alarming effects on the health or prisoners who 
are involved in drug abuse. 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
No increase of HIV positive patients among prisoners in all the jails of Andhra Pradesh State. Further, there 
is no unsafe and unhealthy practice of drug use by prisoners in all the jails of Andhra Pradesh State. 
2. Assam a) No significant increase in the number of HIV positive patients are detected in the prisons of the state
expecting in some prisons they increase on admission of new entrants; however it is not found in the
long-term prisoners. It is also reported from the prisons that HIV positive cases with HIV are detected
prior to admission in jail.
b) Optimum initiatives are taken by the authorities by providing information, education and
communication programmes and awareness to the inmates. Monthly HIV screening cum awareness
camps are held in all the prisons. The ACF camp is held exclusively for HIV twice a month by district
tuberculosis centre in collaboration with the ICTC (integrated counselling and testing c
entre) of the
respective districts.
c) strict vigilance is also maintained by the prison personnel so that no prisoner is involved in drug abuse
inside the premises.
d) Positive cases are being treated through ART (anti retro viral treatment) centre at medical college hospitals.

56 
3. Bihar There has been an increase from 59 cases in 2021 to 78 cases in 2022, followed by  a slight decrease to 75 
cases in 2023 in HIV positive cases among inmates in Bihar Prisons. 
Year No. of inmates Found HIV Positive Total 
Male Female 
2021 (as on 
31.12.2021) 
55 4 59 
2022 (as on 
31.12.2022) 
73 5 78 
2023 (as on 
31.12.2023) 
70 5 75 
T
he existing cases of HIV patients are not solely due to drug use within prisons, as acknowledged by the 
strict regulations enforced by prison authorities to control substance abuse. 
Pre-existing infections among incoming inmates has contributed to the presence of HIV positive patients 
within prisons, indicating a broader array of factors beyond drug use. 
59
78 75
0
20
40
60
80
100
2021 (as on
31.12.2021)
2022 (as on
31.12.2022)
2023 (as on
31.12.2023)
Total No. of Inmates Found HIV Positive 
vs. Year
No. of inmates Found HIV Positive Total

57 
Steps taken by Bihar Prisons to address HIV within prisons are as follows: 
Comprehensive health screening of the incoming inmates (within 48 hours of admission) facilitates the 
early detection of HIV -positive individuals. Subsequent to identification, a process of comprehensive and 
accurate diagnosis ensues, ensuring that appropriate treatment modalities are promptly administered to 
incarcerated individuals requiring medical intervention. 
2. Education and Prevention Programs: Inmates are educated on the importance of adopting preventive
measures and seeking timely medical intervention. Through these educational endeavours, incarcerated
populations are equipped with the requisite knowledge and skills to mitigate the risk of HIV acquisition and
transmission.
3. Continuous Monitoring: In addition to stringent regulations, continuous monitoring and evaluation of
H
IV prevalence rates within correctional institutions are conducted to discern emerging patterns and enact
tailored interventions. This monitoring process encompasses assessments conducted both at the prison level
and centrally at headquarters, ensuring a comprehensive oversight of HIV dynamics within correctional
systems.
4. Collaboration with Health Agencies: Collaboration with health agencies and NGOs like YRG Care and
Plan India under BSACS (Bihar State AIDS Control Society), Bihar, Patna constitutes a concerted effort by
correctional authorities to forge partnerships with external healthcare entities. This facilitates enhanced
access to specialized medical care and comprehensive su pport services tailored to meet the unique needs of
HIV-positive inmates within correctional settings.
4. Chhattisgarh Only those prisoners tested positive in jails who were already infected with HIV even before they entered 
into the jail. There has been no case of any prisoner being HIV positive while being confined in jail for a 
long time. There has been no increase in the number of prisoners being HIV positive in the jails of the state. 
In all the jails of the state, prisoners are tested for HIV infection  at the time of their entry into the jail. If the 
prisoner is found positive, he
/she is registered in the ART Center and tested and treated under the 
supervision of doctors. Bringing narcotics in the jails of the state is strictly prohibited.  Movement of 
employees is a subject of thorough search and regular thorough search is conducted in the barracks. 
Narcotic drugs are not  consumed by the prisoners inside the jail. The offenders who consume narcotic drugs 
and intoxicants, are kept under the supervision of the doctor. By running de-addiction campaigns in prisons, 
prisoners are made aware of the adverse effects of drug abuse. 

58 
5. Gujarat Gujarat state prison department is doing vigorous efforts for the AIDS awareness/ control among the 
inmates of various jails across the state. In last two years, there is' nt any notable increase in the 
amount of number of HIV positive patients.  
Moreover, on the occasion of world AIDS day 2023, the Gujarat state AIDS control society 
commented the work of AIDS control across the state prisons and AIDS awareness and 
screening among the inmates and awarded the Gujarat prison department for its outstanding 
performance in AIDS awareness.  
6. Haryana It is submitted that as per report received from all  the superintendents Jail in Haryana State there is 72, 201 
and 2 prisoners were detected HIV positive in years 2022, 2023 and 2024 respectively. It is also submitted 
that on the admission of all newly lodged prisoners medical examination is conducted to s egregate such 
type of patients of HIV test under supervision of all Jails Medical Officer and if any prisoner after 
conducted complete HIV found positive them proper medicines provided to them rest of other prisoners 
regularly be maintain the proper level.  In most of the cases it has been seen that prisoners who found HIV 
positive are ingestible drug users. Apart from proper treatment regular mental and health exercise practices 
has been conducted on them to boost their immunity. Such prisoners provided reg
ular treatment under 
supervision of Medical Officer and subordinate staff from all concerned general hospital and other Higher 
Hospital. Proper diet and care has been provided to such prisoners maintain their Health. 
7. Himachal 
Pradesh 
No, there is no inc rease in the number of HIV positive patients. However, only 08 inmates are found HIV 
Positive in Himachal Pradesh Prisons. Further, the unsafe and unhealthy practices of drug uses by the 
prisoners are strictly prohibited in Himachal Pradesh Prisons. 
8. Jharkhand Whether there is an increase in the number of HIV positive patients among prisoners. The report may also 
include how far it is on account of unsafe and unhealthy practices of drug use by prisoners since it can have 
alarming effects on the health of prisoners who are involved in drug abuse. 
9. Kerala 
All the prisoners in jails are tested for HIV at regular intervals. There is no increase in HIV positive 
patients in the prison. Inmates who are currently HIV positive are all got the infection of the  HIV, 
before coming to prisons. Most of the HIV infected prisoners claim that they are not using drugs and 

59 
they got infection from other routes. Most of the HIV infected prisoners are not willing to disclose the 
reason of their infection. The No of inmates  with history of unsafe and unhealthy practice of drug use 
in some jails are shown below.  
Year No of inmates with the history of unsafe and unhealthy practice of drug use 
2021 19 
2022 14 
2023 21 
T
he data on the No of inmates, with history of intravenous drug abuse, during last three years, as shown 
above are showing a fall in 2022 compared to 2021.  However the number went up significantly by about 
50% in 2023. None of inmates are affected with HIV while,  they are inside the prison. 
10. Madhya
Pradesh
In Madhya Pradesh, the number of HIV infected prisoners is approximately 306 which is only 0. 5 percent 
of the total number of prisoners. Decrease in the number of these prisoners has been noticed as compared to 
the past. 
11. Manipur As on date ther e is no increase in the number of HIV positive patients among prisoners and no record of 
drug use/ abuse in the prisons of Manipur. 
12. Meghalaya There is no increase in the number of HIV inmates. The few HIV inmates that are lodged in the Prison and 
Correctional Homes in the State are those diagnosed as HIV positive before admission to the Prison. HIV 
infected inmates are also constantly monitored by Medical Officials and Prison authorities. 
13. Mizoram There is no chance of increasing HIV positivity rate amon g prisoners, Use of drugs inside the jail is strictly 
vigil and prohibited, 
14. Nagaland There is no increase in the No of HIV positive patients among prisoners. 
15. Rajasthan
2022 2023 
31.12.2022 - 226 31.12.2023- 293 

60 
2022 2023 
31.12.2022- 1920 31.12.2023 - 1989 
16. Telangana • There is no increase in the number of HIV positive prisoners in the jails of Telangana state.
• There is no menace of drugs in Telangana state prisons and proper care is being taken in creating
awareness among the prisoners
17. Tripura HIV Estimation 
Adult HIV prevalence and PLHIV number by Estimates by State/UTs, 2021 is 0.12 with 3608 PLHIV 
cases. The prevalence of HIV infection in female was 7.53%, while the prevalence was 12.03% in male. 
The gap between female and male was - 4.5% (Source: India HIV Estimates 2021 Fact Sheet) 
T
he district wise distribution of HIV Positive cases among injecting drug users from April, 22 to February, 
23 showing that the positivity is highest in Dhali (49.81%) district followed by Khowai (49.25% ) district 
and Unakoti (45.79%) district. At South district the HIV positivity rate is 8.38%.  
Through the project, 3 Prison Peer Mobilizers (PPM) and 2Lab Technicians provides comprehensive 
healthcare screening and treatment services to the inmates. Beyond HIV, the project screens inmates for 
STIs including Syphilis. Tuberculosis, HCV & HCB and those who have been found positive are linked to 
treatment and care. Also in addition to the above services, post release follow -
up, index testing, and 
linkages to the social benefit & welfare schemes are the add-on services that will be provided by the PPM in 
coordination with local TI, LWS and VIHAAN. 
UTs 
18. A &N 
Islands
As per the guidelines of National Human Commission Right and provisions contained in Prison Manual, the 
Medical examination is being conducted in the Prison by the Chief Medical Officer of the Jail Hospital on 
the day of admission of inmates in Prison and periodically the HIV Test is also conducting by the A&N 
AIDS Control Society (NACO), Port Blair. As per this office record, two foreign national prisoners were 
detected as HIV positive and they were kept separately under the supervision of Chief Medical Officer. 
19. Chandigarh It is stated that at present the number of HIV patients is 18. The number of such prisoners as on 
30.06.2023 was 12. There is increase of 06 prisoners during the last 07 months. These patients 

61 
are under regular treatment from ART centre PGIMER, Chandigarh. It is further submitted that all 
prisoners on admission are screened by the SMO jail, if any prisoner is found to be drug addicts, 
then he is put under treatment by the SMO jail under strict supervision. Clinical psychologists 
and clinical social workers are providing counselling services to such inma tes in the jail. Drug 
de-addiction centre has also been setup in the model jail, Chandigarh for the treatment of drug 
addicts. It is further submitted that some cases of smuggling drugs inside the jail were detected 
where the inmates brought the drugs in t he body cavity. Criminal cases were registered against 
them in the concerned police station under the provision of law. It is important to mention here that 
we have made adequate arrangements for such of inmates in the jail. Every inmate going out for peshi/ 
hospitals or newly admitted prisoners are thoroughly searched at DHEODHI gate. Thorough search 
of barracks and personal search of inmates are also conducted on regular basis to curb such illegal 
activities.  
20. J & K Year wise data regarding HIV cases  is as under  
Date Total HIV 
cases (A) 
Drug users out of 'A' 
31.12.2021 10 2 
31.12.2022 20 10 
31.12.2023 21 16 

62 
Annexure-D 
MH
A vide OM No. V-17013/55/2023 -PR dated 19.01.2024 has forwarded the observation/recommendations of Departmental 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee. The compiled data/information received from 20 States/UTs is mentioned as 
below:-  
S. No. Name of
State 
Undertake a study on the optimum budget expenditure required per prisoner for the successful 
reformation and rehabilitation since very low sum of money equal to 1.0% is spent on prisoner 
welfare activities. 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
It is submitted that, at least 10% of prison budget shall spent on prisoners for their welfare activities and 
they need education, Vocational Training, Skill Development, Psychological counseling and other 
rehabilitation program which are expensive and need budget. 
2. Assam • Two schemes namely, Rehabilitation grant to released life convicts and Financial assistance to
families of life convicts have been implementing with a view to help the long- term prisoners for
proper rehabilitation after release from jail and to provide financ ial assistance to the poor
families of long -term convicts who are in dire need of such relief while their bread earners
are serving long term of imprisonment.
• The skill development training in various trades amongst the jail inmates in all jails across
the state has been going on since a long period with the collaboration of district authority,
district legal aid authority, NGOs and Govt/ Semi Govt institution etc. the cooperative society
has already been formed at central jail Guwahati as pilot project by the name and style of
`SRIJAN multipurpose cooperative society limited' for the financial benefit of convicted
jailinmates who are shareholders of the cooperative society. Further, the aforesaid skill
training has also been given by existing craf t instructors/instresses of jail department.
• A
t present the wages are paid to the prisoners as follows :
Skilled (male prisoner) ....Rs 75/ - (Rupees seventy -five) per day  

63 
Unskilled(male prisoner)....Rs 55/ -( Rupees fifty-five) per day  
Skilled (female prisoner) ....Rs 100/ -( Rupees one hundred ) per day  
Unskilled (female prisoner)....Rs 80/ -Rupees   eighty) per day
A
 rise in daily wage of skilled labour to Rs 150/- per day is taken up with the state Govt for 
welfare of prison inmates.  
3. Bihar 
The concern Home (Prison) Department is trying to formulate a particular scheme for the reformation 
and rehabilitation of the prisoners. 
However, with the help of the various Government agencies, like - RSETI, NABARD, Ministry of 
Textiles (Handicrafts), Government of India, Animal and Fisheries Resource Department, Government 
of Bihar and different NGOs, the various reformation and rehabilitation programmes are implemented 
for the prisons inside the prisons. Through these programmes, the prisoners  are being provided with 
various skill development training which helps to empower them for initiating a self employment work 
and rehabilitation. 
In the mean time, after the formulation of a particular reformation and rehabilitation scheme, the 
optimum budget expenditure can be decided and provided by the state Government. 
4. Chhattisgarh 
For skill development of prisoners, vocational training is being provided to prisoners in various small 
scale industries in the jails of Chhattisgarh, so that they can  become proficient in a trade during their 
sentence and become self -
reliant for their livelihood in the society after the completion of their 
sentence. Keeping in view the need to improve the training infrastructure of small scale industries in 
jails and the establishment of new small scale industries for skill development and rehabilitation of 
prisoners, efforts are being made to make vocational training in accordance with the demand of the 
present time. Along with this, action is being taken to provide ma rket for the materials produced by 
prisoners in the jail premises 
itself. Online platforms are being prepared for the sale of materials. Budget 
allocation for welfare activities for prisoners has also been increased. 

64 
5. Gujarat
As of now Gujarat state prison department have an amount of Rs 7, 41,09,247- 00 in prisoners 
welfare fund which are being used for the various purpose as per the direction in state 
governments notification GG/2002/06/MIS/1099/2087/pt.II/J, dated. 15.01.2002. copy 
enclosed.  
6. Haryana 
There should be an increase in the optimum budget expenditure for successful reformation and 
rehabilitation of prisoners after their completion of sentence. In addition to this more and more number 
of vocational training programmes should be provided according to the need to the prisoners so as to 
help them earn their livelihood after their release. 
7. Himachal 
Pradesh Yes, Optimum budget expenditure is required for the successful reformation and rehabilitation since 
much low amount of money is spent on prisoners' welfare activities. If, there is any provision for 
providing funds, in any Government of India scheme, that should be granted to the Prisons Department 
of Himachal Pradesh SO that reformation and rehabilitation program for the prisoners can be 
accelerated. 
8. Jharkhand 
Optimum budget expenditure required per prisoners for the successful reformation and rehabil itation 
since very low sum of money equal to 1.0% is spent on prisoner welfare activities. 
9. Kerala 
In the prisons the vocational training programmes are given mainly to convicted prisoners as the 
period of stay of other prisoners including Remand and Under Trial are not for a fixed period. There 
are some short-term programmes conducted for RP and UT prisoners also. The convicted prisoners
come only about 40% of the total prison population. Hence the percentage of expense spent on 
prisoners' welfare tend to be low. But still the expense on prisoners' welfare need to be hiked at least 
7% of the total expenditure for the successful reformation and rehabilitation. 
10. Madhya 
Pradesh Earlier, the Government used to provide funds annually for purchasing raw material required for jail 
industries, which was further allocated to jails. Raw material was purchased from the allocated amount 
and after production; the amount received from the s
ale was deposited back in the account of 
Government due to which operations of jail industries were ceased due to non -availability of funds 


65 
throughout the year. 
F
rom the financial year 2021-22, the Government has provided a lump sum support of Rs. 6  crore for 
prison industries. After obtaining the approval of Government, a  bank account was opened at the jail 
circle and jail headquarters level and the amount was withdrawn and deposited in the bank accounts of 
the jails. 
New rules 'Prison Industries (Convic ted Persons' Confinement Employment and Prisoner 
Rehabilitation) Rules 2021' have been framed for the operation of industries. Under these rules, various 
industries are being operated, through which the amount received from the sale is again deposited in t he 
bank account. Prison industries are working smoothly due to the availability of funds, and vocational 
training is being imparted to the prisoners. 
11. Manipur 
Yes, it is. Need to impress upon the Govt to raise the budgetary allocation for prisoner's reformation and 
rehabilitation. 
12. Meghalaya 
Budget expenditure on prisoners should be increased in order to provide qualitative infrastructure for 
the inmates for their successful reformation and rehabilitation. 
13. Mizoram 
Prison department is one of  the oldest and important department in India. At the same time, it seems to 
be neglected department regarding low budget estimate which hampered progression in management 
and administration especially in the way of reformation and rehabilitation. It suggested that Govt should 
take imperative measure to develop department accordingly, 
14. Nagaland 10% budget expenditure required per prisoner for the successful reformation and rehabilitation on 
prisoner welfare activities 
15. Rajasthan 2023- 1324270 
2023- 2613890 

66 
16. Telangana
Budget has been granted by the state Govt. Efforts are being put to provide skill development 
training and other welfare programmes with the help of State Govt Agencies and NGOs. 
As per G.O.Ms. No. 203. Home prisons.(B) dept. dated 06.08.2010 wages as fixed as under 
Skilled- Rs.70/- (nursery) per day 
Semi-skilled- Rs.50/- per day 
Unskilled- Rs.70/-(SOP) per day 
Rs.30/- per day 
T
he prisoners of Semi Open Prison/ Open Air Prison working at My Nation Retail Fuel Outlets are paid 
Rs. 150.00 per day. 
17. Tripura 
The Prison Department of the State of Tripura is working on optimizing budget expenditure per prisoner 
for their successful reformation and rehabilitation. In this connection a financial target had already been 
adopted by this Department. 
UTs 
18. A &N Islands The Andaman & Nicobar - Administration is providing sufficient  funds in the Major Head 2056 (OE)
to 1 meetout the requirement to procure the - various items but as far as Prison - department of this UT 
concern, this department is also utilizing the funds generated from the Prisoner Welfare Canteen for 
organizing the program of reformation and rehabilitation of inmates. 
19. Chandigarh Many welfare activities have been started for the prisoners of model jail, Chandigarh. The 
prisoners are provided skill -based training so that they may be able to earn their livelihood 
after release from the jail. The prisoners are provided training in the following skills: 
• Carpentry
• Polishing
• Welding
• Tailoring ( male and female)


67 
• Painting skills
• Sweet section
• Gulal making
• Candle making
• Art and craft
• Spice grinding
• Cooking
• Music training
Beauty culture for female inmates Apart from this the inmates are provided recreational 
and sports facilities to maintain their health. Gym facilities are also available for inmates. The 
inmates are paid wages on monthly basis. Sufficient funds are available to meet with the 
expenditure on the above skill development and other pr ogrammes.  
20. J & K 
Percentage of budget is as under  
Financial 
year 
Allotment of funds 
under 
(2055- police)SRE 
Budget for relief and rehabilitation  
2020-21 4118.000r 70.00Lakhs 
2021-22 4532.000r 75.00Lakhs 
2022-23 4333.000r 75.00Iakhs 

68 
Annexure-E 
MH
A vide OM No. V-17013/55/2023 -PR dated 19.01.2024 has forwarded the observation/recommendations of Departmental 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee. The compiled data/information received from 20 States/UTs is mentioned as 
below:-  
S. No. Name of
State 
Undertake a study to analyse the reasons for low participation of prisoner in skilling/training 
activities sine only 7.09% of the total prisoners in the country are receiving any kind of skill 
training. 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
It is submitted that, more than 77% of prison population are remand/under trail prisoners and they stay 
in prisons only for a short period. Most of the skilling/training courses designed only for Convict 
prisoners. Due to this, Remand/under trail prisoners are not being c overed in skilling/training activities, 
the skilling/training courses need to be redesigned as short -term courses i.e., weekly or fortnightly for 
covering under trial prisoners also. Further, the A.P. STATE LEGAL SERVICE AUTHORITY is 
planning to conduct skill development courses to the Women Prisoners (Both UTPs/Convicts) who are 
willing for Rehabilitation & Reintegration for Prisoners after release. 
2. Assam A reluctance  among some prisoners to participate in skilling or training activities is observed 
because of illiteracy as well as lack of self -confidence and awareness etc.  
However various skill development trainings along with, awareness and motivation are given 
to th e prisoners and small -scale jail industries are being reviving, in all jails to encourage 
cum increase the participation of prisoners in skilling/ training activities.  
3. Bihar The participation of prisoners in skill training activities in Bihar is treate d as an important pillar in 
rehabilitative prison management & recent initiatives are a testimony to such a positive approach- 
1. Rule 242: According to Rule 242 of the Bihar Prison Manual, 2012, training and rehabilitation

69 
programs are specifically designed for convicts sentenced to three or more years. This rule ensures that 
resources are dedicated to those who have sufficient time to benefit from long -term rehabilitation 
efforts. 
2. E
ngagement Results: Between January 2023 and March 2024, 39% of convic ts eligible under Rule
242 were trained under training programs. Besides this all those under trial inmates who are willing to
take trainings under training program are encouraged to do so. 14% of willing and eligible under trial
inmates were also trained between January 2023 and March 2024.
3. Comprehensive Training, Plan: The state is developing a strategic plan to Eligible offer training to
100% of eligible convict inmates. This initiative indicates a strong commitment to expanding
rehabilitation efforts across the board
4. Mission Vihaan: This initiative has expanded training to include 16% of total inmates, both convicts
a
nd under trials, during the same period. With its regular state - level monitoring, Mission Vihaan aims
to increase the scope and impact of training programs.
These efforts demonstrate a shift towards more inclusive and effective skill development programs in
prisons, enhancing rehabilitation opportunities and improving prospects for successful reintegration into
society.
4. Chhattisgarh The prisoners are provided small scale industries  vocational training such as  carpentry, woodcraft, 
sewing, fabrication, weaving, printing press, bamboo crafts, painting, washing powder manufacturing, 
spice industry etc., all of them are of traditional category. At present, demand has increased in the fields 
of electrical and electronics, whereas due to fall in demand for the traditional small scale industries, 
prisoners' interest in them has also decreased. 
T
he main objective of running small scale industries established in jails is to provide vocational training 
to prisoners along with production of materials as per the requirement of the prisoners so that after 
release they can become self -reliant and earn their living based on the skills they acquired. Therefore, 
keeping in view the need for change in the format of vocational training conducted in jail, arrangements 
are being made to provide skill training to prisoners in new trades such as training in various modern 
trades, computer training and other training under the Chief Minister's Skill Development Scheme so 
that interesting and relevant training can be provided to maximum number of prisoners. 

70 
5. Gujarat State prison department have been engaged in  
various skill/ training activities for the inmates in association with local NGOs so that inmates 
can rehabilitate themselves after being released from jail.  
In year 2023, 13.25% of the total prisoners have received vocational training in various field 
like, basic computer training, two- wheeler repairing, beauty parlour, toy making, sewing 
training,embroidery, painting, bakery, carpentry, bamboo work, safari bag making, AC 
repairing, home appliance field technician, plumbing, sanitary napkin making, organic 
waste composting, diamond polishing, saree stone work, laundry, best from waste, audio 
book recording etc.  
6. Haryana 
The NIOS and IGNOU Centres have been established in major jails like Central Jails Ambala, Hisar -I, 
Hisar-II, District Jails, Rohtak, Karnal, Gurugram, Bhiwani, Sirsa, Sonipat, Jind, Kurukshetra, Narnaul, 
Kaithal, Faridabad, Yamunanagar, Panipat, Jhajjar and Nuh to give education to the male prisoners as 
well as female prisoners. Prison Department Haryana recognizes the significance of s kill/training 
programmes for prisoner in facilitating successful reintegration into society. The prison department 
making every effort to increase of prisoners in the skilling/training activities. They are being motivated 
time and again in this regard. Dif
ferent kinds of skill development programme are in the jails of 
Haryana State such as in operation carpentry, floor mills, oil expeller fual pump, file Making, Tailoring, 
Beauty Parlor Training, Bag Making, Soap and Phenyl making, Chair canning, Niwar Belt  making, 
Computer learning, Motor and fan binding, Electric work, AC and Refrigerator repair, 
Videography/Photography, Plumbing, Motor Cycle repairing training, Pickle Making etc. 
7. Himachal 
Pradesh Presently, weaving, carpentry, bakery, Tailoring, Dairy farming, Pickle making, knitting etc. training is 
being imparted to the prisoners in Himachal Pradesh Prisons. To enhance the skill training program in 
the Prisons of Himachal Pradesh Proper Infrastructure and Prisoners training fund is required. 
8. Jharkhand 
To analyse the reasons for low participation of prisoners in skilling/training activities since only 7.09% 
of the total prisoners in the country are receiving any kind of skill training. 
9. Kerala 
Among the convicts those who are availing regular leave do not show much interest in vocational 
programmes as they fear that they will not be allowed to go for leave till the completion of the 

71 
course. The life time prisoners do not have any idea when they would be released. Hence, they do 
not show much interest to undergo training programmes. The prisoners also do not get skill updation 
regularly after the training hence they think they will not be able to find suitable jobs. The prisoners 
also tend to discourage fellow prisoners who show interest in the courses. This also result in low 
enrolment of the prisoner.  
The indefinite period of sentence and remote date of release, monotonous prison life, stressful state of 
mind and potential lose of wages of prison labour are factors that holds many inmates back from
participating in vocational training. 
10. Madhya 
Pradesh 
In the year 2023 industrial training was provided to 3,006 inmates in various units of the prisons in the 
state with the aim of imparting industrial training along with production.Similarly, training was 
imparted to 98 inmates in the ITIs operating in three prisons of the state (Ujjain, Dhar, and Betul). 
Under vocational training for rehabilitation of women prisoners, 674  women were given training in 
sewing, embroidery, computer, mehndi, beauty parlor, Ganesh idol making, papad making, herbal color 
making, Rakhi making, decorative material making, cow dung based plastic material, art and craft and 
doll making. Apart from this, training is imparted in respect of various sma ll and cottage industries like 
doll making, incense stick making, beauty parlor etc. 
A
t present, 45543  prisoners are lodged in the jails of the state, out of which 22383  are convicted 
prisoners (male and female). The prisoners who are interested in traini ng are imparted with appropriate 
vocational training for the purpose of rehabilitation. During the  financial year 2023-24, vocational 
training regarding rehabilitation have been given to 3778  male and female jail inmates, which is 16. 87  
percent of the average number of convicted prisoners. 
11. Manipur As on date, 37.5% prisoners are receiving skill training in the prisons of Manipur. 
12. Meghalaya The reason for low participation of prisoners in skill training activities is due to lack of diversified 
programmes. Different programmes which aims at providing different opportunities should be 
introduced for the prisoners in order to stimulate their interest and effort towards self improvement. 
Education should be given top priority and separate programmes fo r illiterate and literate prisoners 
should be introduced in order to achieve minimum level of education and advance their educational 
standards. Further, due to wide variation in intelligence and interest of prisoners, well trained teachers 
should be appointed for imparting training on different vocational coursed like plumbing, electrician, 
tailoring, mobile repairing, motor mechanic, barber, beautician, bakery etc to ensure participation of 


72 
more inmates in the skill development training. The education pro vided in the Correctional Homes 
should be integrated with the standard education being provided in the society so that the prisoners can 
find employment once they are released. 
13. Mizoram One of the main reasons for low participation of prisoners in ski lling/ training activities was lack of 
training facilities. Lack of facilities and trainer had made it difficult to implement skill development 
especially in district prison. 
14. Nagaland There is proper participation in skill training activities. 
15. Rajasthan 
2022 2023 
1217 2611 
16. Telangana In Telangana there is no such low participation issue of prisoners in skilling/ training 
activities in the prisons. 
The skill development training is being conducted at all central prisons and district jails. 
The percentage of participation of prisoners undergoing skill training is much higher than 
national average.  
The number of under trials in Telangana is 70% among the remaining 10-20% we are able to 
provide skill development to convicted prisoners. 
The convict prisoners are participating enthusiastically in various traders and receiving their 
training certificates. The Mission for Elimination of Poverty in unicipal Areas (MEPMA) and 
the National Academy of Construction(NAC) the State Govt Organisation provide trainings to 
prisoners to    impart skills in various professional courses like welding, AC mechanism, 
plumbing and electrical wiring refrigerators mechanic work, bar bending, masonry, etc. and 
such trained prisoners are working in various prison industries etc at Central Prisons and 
District Jails. The main objective of prison is reformation and rehabilitation of prisoner. 
The prisoner while learning skilling/ training activities are also earning  incentives (wages) by 
producing certain articles. 
17. Tripura The Prison Department of the State has already taken initiative to involve maximum number of inmates 
in the skilling/training activities in collaboration with the Skill Development Board. 


73 
UTs 
18. A &N Islands As far as Prison department of UT concerned, Prison being a Correctional Administration, this
department is providing main focus on Rehabilitation, Reformation & Re - socialization of prisoners 
apart from Safety & Security of Prison and its inmates. As per record, this department has provided the 
following trainings to the inmates lodged in Prisons. 
(
i) Motor Mechanic training for 20 inmates through ITI, Dollygunj, Port Blair under Pradhan Mantri
Kaushal VikasYojana (PMKVY).
(
ii) Plumber training for 07 inmates through Indian Plumbering Skills Council (Recognized by NCVET)
at Kaushal Kendra.
i
ii) Training in the field of Electrical for 18 inmates through Jan ShikhanSansthan, South Andaman
District (a project of Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship).
(i
v) Training in the field of Yoga & Medication to 15 inmates through AYUSH, Directorate of Health
Services, A&N Administration, Port Blair.
F
urther, as per record large number of inmates lodged in District Prison, Prothrapur are belongs from 
farmer background, therefore this department is providing various trainings to them in the field of 
gardening so that after release from Prison they can earn for their livelihood through the scientific 
method of cultivation. 
19. Chandigarh Every convicted prisoner is required to perform work as per the orders of court as regress 
imprisonment is awarded by the court. The inmates are provided work in the jail, in factory 
and other fields as mentioned above. Inmates have medical issues are not employed on work as 
per the recommendation of medical officer jail: and 
other who are not willing to work. Such 
inmates who are not willing to work are not given the benefits such as wages, remission etc. The 
inmates are also motivated to engage in the different skill development activities in the jail.  

74 
20. J & K Total population as on 31.01.2024 is 5509 and 18% of inmates have been enrolled for skill/ 
training activities  
Reason: Majority of inmates are under trials w hich is a floating population and their 
participation in training/ work is voluntary.  

75 
Annexure-F
BENCHMARK FRISKING STANDARDS FOR CURBING 
CONTRABAND ENTRY TO PREVENT PRISON GANG WARS. 
Introduction: - 
A
ccording to Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act -
2023Prohibited article (contraband) means any item that presents a threat to 
the safety or security of the prisoners, prison staff, prison institution 
oranyobject,substance,ormaterialforbiddenbythePrisonsandCorrectional 
Institutions or the Government from being in a prisoner's possession, like cell 
phone, a communication device, drugs or any thing that can be used as a 
weapon or to aid in escape, such as fire arms or any of its part,  explosives, 
knives, wire, tools, chemicals, razor blades, alcohol, matches, lighters or any 
article, the introduction or removal of which into or out of a prison is 
prohibited by this Act or by the rules framed under the Act or by any other law 
or by any notification of the Government and Article-41 of Model Prisons and 
Correctional Services Act- 2023 Prison in inmates are forbidden from 
possessing or using mobile phones and other electronic communication 
devices in prisons. 
In order to prevent the entry of contrabands into the prisons STANDARD 
OPERATING PROCEDURE (SOP) need to be evolved. 

76 
• The main goal of preparation of benchmark frisking standards is to curb
e
ntry of the contraband items into prison.
• The intention is to prevent the violence, possibility of gang wars and
substance abuse inside the prison through intensive frisking and
searching procedures.
a. Contraband articles: Articles considered as contraband include
anything that is not allowed on prison property such as guns, illegal
gadgets, alcohol, drugs and other goods that could endanger the security
of prison.
b. F
risking: The practice of searching anyone entering or leaving the
prison premises in order to find and cease illicit items.
c. Gang wars: Internal conflicts or acts of violence frequently
occurred by prisoner groups.
SOP for Frisking Procedures 
Category of Frisking/Search 
1. Manual Frisking
2. Technology Aided Search
3. Night Search
M
anual  Frisking/Search 
• 
• Body searches 
• Articles frisking
• Vehicle/trolley search
• Premises searches
Technology  Aided Search 
• Search with Hand Held Metal Detector
• Use of Door Frame Metal Detector
• X-Ray Baggage Machine
• Under Vehicle Search Mirror
• Under Vehicle Surveillance Systems

77 
• Use of Body Scanner(X-Ray based and Milli meter wave)
• Deep Search Metal Detector
• Non leaner Junction Detector
• Narcotics Detection Systems
• Explosive Detector System
Night  Search 
• Hand Held Search Light
• Rotating Search Light
• Night Vision Binocular
• Thermal Imager
C
CTV and Integrated Control Room 
• IPCCTV System
• Cell Phone Jammer System
Standard Operating Procedure(SOP) 
1. Every Prison should have a SOP for all kinds of searches.
2. These SOPs should be approved by the Competent Authority.
3. Copies of the SOPs should be displayed at the appropriate places of
search.
4. Visual depiction of the search, step by step will be displayed on
poster.
5. Beforesearchtheinmatewhoenterstheprisonmustsignthedeclarationf
ormregardingpossessionofthe articles.
6. Allthearticleswhicharecarriedbytheinmatesintotheprisonshouldbep
roperlyrecordedandenteredintheregister.
7. The personal belongings of the inmates will  be kept in a secure
place within the proper custody.
Body Search 
• Body search should be conducted keeping in mind the dignity of the
inmates.
• At the initial stage, pat down searched is conducted in the open
space.
• After that the person will be searched through Hand Held Metal
Detector.
• The inmates will pass through door frame Metal Detector to

78 
identify any kind of metallic objects. 
• In advanced prisons full body scanner is also used for the proper
search of the Human body.
Private Search 
• After the formal search, the inmate is conducted to a cubical where
manual body strip search will be conducted.
• During body strip search the inmate must not be put to
completestripsearchatatime.Firsttheupperbodyclotheswouldberemo
ved, then upper body would be thoroughly searched and the inmate
is allowed to put on the upper body clothes after upper body search.
• Next the inmate’s lower body clothes are removed and the lower
body would be thoroughly checked. After the search the inmate is
allowed to put on the lower body clothes.
• During the search, at least two prison officials should be present.
• Same Sex Prison officials would conduct the search.
• Search cubicle will be covered with curtain.
• For transgender persons search is  conducted by the Prison Official
of their choice.
• The dignity of the inmate is maintained during the search.
Body Cavity Search 
• When there is prior information that the inmate is carrying
contraband material in his/ her body cavity then body cavity search
is conducted.
• Body Cavity Search is conducted in the presence of Medical
Officers.
• During the search same sex prison officials would be present.
• For transgender persons search will be conducted by the prison
official of their choice.
• X-Ray machine will be used wherever it is necessary.
• The dignity of the inmate is maintained during the search.
Article Search 
• All the articles that are carried into prison are properly checked
through Hand Held Metal Detectors and X-ray baggage machine.

79 
Vehicle Scanning System 
• All the vehicles which enter prisons for a specific purpose are
scanned by under vehicle inspection mirror and under vehicle
surveillance system.
Premises Search 
• The entire premise of prison is manually searched for contraband
items. Wherever necessary Deep search Metal Detector is used to
detect metallic objects that are concealed under the ground.
Example- Knife, Screw Driver, Arms and Ammunition.
• Non-Linear Junction Detector is used to detect electronic items like
Mobile phones, SIM Card that is concealed under the ground.
Barrack Search 
• In the barracks, personal search of the inmates and their
belongings is conducted under the supervision of duty officer. Male
inmates are searched by male official, female inmates are searched
by female official and transgender persons are searched by the
Prison Official of their choice.
• Cavities in the barrack walls and toilets are thoroughly searched by
special equipment.
Search of pipeline and sewer lines 
• Pipe Inspection Cameras, Sewer Inspection Cameras which are
equipped with cables are used to search the narrow pipelines and
AC-ducts etc.
Search for Narcotics 
• Narcotics carried on the body  and inside the body cavities are
detected through body search and body cavity search.
• Narcotics concealed in articles are detected through narcotics
detection kits and vapour detection system.
Explosive Detector System 

80 
• Explosives that are used for violence and gang wars in prisons are
detected by Explosive Detector System.
Night Search 
• Night search of the prison premises is conducted with help of Hand
– Held Search Light, Rotating Search Light, Night Vision Binocular
and Thermal Imager.
Surveillance System 
• In addition to manual search, technology aided search, surveillance
through CCTV cameras and integrated control room will ensure
fool-proof contraband detection system.
This SOP may be modified according to the local conditions of the States/UTs 
***** 