ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th March, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the One Hundred Sixty-second Report 
on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the 
Development of North-Eastern Region
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
166
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

C.S.(H.A.)-324
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained
in the One Hundred Sixty-second Report
on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Development of North-Eastern Region
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  1 st March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  4 th March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—30
Chapter – I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government .................................................................................... 2—15
Chapter – II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................. 16—19
Chapter – III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ...... 20—28
Chapter – IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................ 29—30
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE .................... 31—32
6. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................... 33—36

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  — Chairman
^2. Shri D. Raja
*3. Vacant
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
**9. Vacant
10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
16. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
^ Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated w.e.f. 28th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home
Affairs due to the appointment of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet.
* Due to the resignation of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on
Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.
** Due to the appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries.
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Sixty-sixth Report on the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in its One Hundred and Sixty-second Report on Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region.
2. The One Hundred and Sixty-second Report of the Committee was presented to the Rajya
Sabha and Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha  on 7
th May, 2012.
3. The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) furnished the Action Taken
Notes on the One Hundred and Sixty-second Report on 15 th October, 2012. The Minister of
DoNER laid the statement on the status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the
said Report of the Committee on the Table of Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha on 13
th December, 2012 and
11th December, 2012, respectively , pursuant to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s Direction dated
24th September 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft 166 th Report and adopted the same at its meeting held
on 26 th February, 2013.
5. Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
26 February,  2013 Standing Committee on Home Affairs

ACRONYMS
NLCPR Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources
NEC North Eastern Council
DoNER Development Of North-Eastern Region
NER North Eastern Region
BRO Border Road Organisation
NEHHDC Non Plan Loans to North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development
Corporation
B E Budget Estimate
RE Revised Estimate
BRPSE Board of Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises
NERAMAC North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation
IQM Independent Quality Monitors
BTC Bodoland Territorial Council
SLSC State Level Standing Committee
JNNURM Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
IRMA Independent Review and Monitoring Agencies
PMU Project Management Unit
CSC Construction Supervision Consultant
CBI Central Bureau Investigation
CVC Central Vigilance Commission
IMG Inter-Ministerial Group
STC Standing Technical Committee
CEA Central Electric Authority
DPR Detailed Project Report
SMG Special Monitoring Group
PPMP Power Project Monitoring Panel
LBSNAA Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
IIM Indian Institute of Management
ISTM Institute of Secretariat Training and Management
AAI Airport Authority of India
NESRIP North Eastern States Roads Investment Program
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development
NEDFi North Eastern Development Finance Corporation
DoP&T Department of Personnel & Training
NERLP North Eastern Region Livelihood Project
LTC Leave Travel Concession
PIP Project Implementation Plan
FLS Final Location Survey
KSU Khasi Students Union
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and
Sixty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry.  The One
Hundred Sixty-second Report was presented to Rajya Sabha /laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on
the 7
th May 2012.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I:  The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Government: Para Nos. 2.1.3, 2.2.2, 3.2.8, 2.4.11, 2.4.12, 2.5.4, 2.6.14, 2.7.7, 2.8.10,
2.9.5, 2.9.6, 2.10.5, 2.11.5, 2.15.4, 2.16.5, 2.17.5, 2.17.6, 3.3.4, 3.3.5, 3.5.5, 3.6.2,  (of
One Hundred Sixty-second Report) Total recommendations-21
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its twenty one
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter II:  The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.1.6, 2.1.9, 2.12.8, 2.12.9, 2.14.3,
2.17.7, 2.17.10, 3.1.4 ( ibid) Total recommendations-8
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and,
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III:  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is
not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos.  2.3.2, 2.7.8, 2.8.11, 2.9.7, 2.11.7,
2.13.6, 3.2.9, 3.2.15 ( ibid) Total recommendations-8
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish
convincing action taken steps  in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter IV : The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 3.4.11, 3.4.12, 3.4.13, 3.4.14, 3.4.15 ( ibid)
Total recommendations-5
3. In respect of seven recommendations in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished
interim reply or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendation
categorized in Chapter-IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendations.
4. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in various Chapters in the succeeding chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 NON-PLAN SCHEME
RECOMMENDATION
1.1.1 The Committee hopes that earmarked plan outlay would prove sufficient for the purpose
and wherever the plan outlay becomes insufficient at a later stage, requisite amount would be
enhanced at RE stage. The Committee also desires that economy measures would be adhered to as
per Government of India guidelines so far non-plan outlay is concerned. The Committee also notes
that plan allocation in BE 2011-12 was substantially reduced at RE 2011-12 stage. The Committee
takes a serious note of this. The Committee would, however, discuss under each scheme separately.
(Para 2.1.3 of 162
nd Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region scrupulously adheres to the economy
instructions which are issued from time to time for economising non-plan expenditure. It is
constant endeavour of the Ministry to make the budgetary process as realistic as possible.
1.2 COMPARATIVE STUDY OF TENTH AND ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLANS
RECOMMENDATION
1.2.1 The Committee observes that against the total plan allocation made to the tune of
Rs. 5800.00 crore in Tenth Five Year Plan, the actual expenditure was to the tune of Rs. 5767.58
crore; which can be termed satisfactory. However, during the Eleventh Five Year Plan against the
Plan proposals of Rs. 14409.08 crore, the actual allocation has been confined at the level of
Rs. 7705.22 crore. The drastic reductions in respect of NLCPR, NEC, Development of roads in NE
States do not present good picture on the approach of the Government so far as development of
NE States is concerned. This only indicates that either the Ministry of DoNER could not justify
its proposals or after making proposals it was not able to implement the proposals. In both cases,
the looser has been the laggard NE region. The Committee feels that reduction in the plan
allocation in NE region defeated set target of the Government to put the socio-econosmic
development of region on fast track. The Committee would, however, deal each scheme separately
later in the report. (Para 2.2.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.2.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation have requested Airports Authority of India, who are handling the
development of existing airports in the North Eastern Region, to set up a special Cell to monitor
the development activities of the airports in NER.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.2.3 The Committee desires to be informed of the present status of the cell.
2

3
1.3 NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL
RECOMMENDATION
1.3.1 The Committee observes that allocated amount in BE 2012-13 under Major Heads 2552 and
3601 is intended to liquidate the liabilities created during 11 th Five Year Plan and to take up new
Schemes during 12 th Five Year Plan. The Committee hopes that the earmarked allocation would
meet gap areas from the regional economic development perceptive and would achieve desired
results and physical targets. The Committee also hopes that the Ministry of DoNER would act as
a facilitator and co-ordinator between the NE States and central Government and the resilient NEC
Monitoring mechanism would be quite helpful in achieving the financial and physical targets
without any procrastination. (Para 2.4.11 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 As observed by the Standing Committee, Monitoring mechanism in place in North Eastern
Council would be instrumental in achieving the financial and physical targets without any
procrastination.
RECOMMENDATION
1.3.3 The Committee desires that no scheme should suffer for want of fund. The Committee also
recommends that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance to approve projected
demands of NEC during the 12
th Five Year Plans. (Para 2.4.12 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.4 Planning Commission has finalized GBS allocation at current prices totalling Rs. 6,108
crores in respect of NEC for 12th Plan.
1.4 CONSTRUCTION/IMPROVEMENT OF ROADS OF ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
RECOMMENDATION
1.4.1 The Committee understands that economic importance roads are sine-qua-non for overall
progress of the NE region. The Committee, however, wonders that work of construction of
Mahadev-Tolloi-Pfutsero road still remain incomplete for want of takers i.e. denial by State
Government of Manipur for completion of projects. The Committee does not understand why the
State Government of Manipur refused to implement the project. All the States should cooperate to
implement the projects for an even development in NE Region. Now that the Ministry of Defence
has asked BRO to complete the balance work, the Committee hopes that the remaining work of
the undertaken projects would be completed during current financial year for which Rs. 7.00 crore
has been earmarked. (Para 2.5.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.4.2 The balance work has since been commenced by the BRO and is expected to be completed
in two years.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.4.3 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that necessary steps be taken to
avoid cost and time over run of the construction of the road. Efforts should be made to
complete in two years.

4
1.5 NON PLAN LOANS TO NORTH EASTERN HANDICRAFTS AND HANDLOOMS
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NEHHDC)
RECOMMENDATION
1.5.1 The Committee underlines the pioneer role of NEHHDC in promotion and development of
handicrafts and handloom in NER. Therefore, the first and the foremost priority of the Government
in this sector should be higher budgetary provision for implementing the revival plan of the
corporation. A token provision of Non-plan loan to the tune of Rs. 2.00 crore in RE 2011-12 as well
as in BE 2012-13 is certainly not going to serve the intended purpose. The Committee hails the
promotional role of NEHHDC in developing and proclaiming inputs for products and design
developments, upgradation of technology and providing marketing infrastructure of the finished
products which ultimately results in better benefits to weavers and artisans of the region. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should leave no stone
unturned in persuading the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for allocating higher
budgetary provision for revival scheme of the Corporation. The Committee hopes that the Corporation
would get the green signal for revival plan which is presently under active consideration of the Board
of Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). (Para 2.6.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 BRPSE has since recommended a revival plan for NEHHDC. Necessary procedural
formalities are in progress to operationalise the revival plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.5.3 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the revival plan for NHHDC be
operationalised at the earliest.
1.6 LOAN TO NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MARKETING
CORPORATION (NERAMAC)
RECOMMENDATION
1.6.1 The Committee commends the pivotal role of NERAMAC in encouraging food processing
units in NER and providing basic infrastructure for marketing of agricultural and allied products.
The Committee also feels that involvement of NERAMAC in Post-Harvest Technology Mission,
National Horticulture Mission and Bamboo Mission makes it necessary to expand the horizon of
its activities. Although NERAMAC continues to be a profit-making organization with net profit of
Rs. 1.47 crore during 2010-11, but meagre provision of Rs. 2.00 crore in RE 2011-12 and
BE 2012-13 is not sufficient for growth plan of the organization. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of DoNER may pursue for higher budgetary allocation to the
organization for its exponential growth. (Para 2.7.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.2 Ministry of Finance will be told about inadequacy of budget allocations at the time of RE
finalization stage.
1.6.3 The target of turnover as per Memorandum of Understanding vis-à-vis  working capital
received during the financial years 2007-08 to 2011-12 is given below:

5
Financial Year Target of Actual turnover Working
Turnover as Achieved Capital Loan
per MoU Received
(Good Column)
2007-08 14.35 29.55 3.13
2008-09 23.00 36.91 2.00
2009-10 27.00 89.90 2.00
2010-11 50.00 101.47 2.00
2011-12 95.00 100.18 2.00
1.6.4 An analysis of trends in net profit and accumulated losses/profit of NERAMAC reveals that
the accumulated losses will wipe out by 2015-16 and corporation will turn into a profit making
company. However, there is a need to increase working capital loan for faster growth of the
corporation and Ministry is working on it.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.6.5 The Committee is happy to note that the accumulated losses of NERAMAC will be
wiped out by 2015-16. The Committee recommends that the working capital loan
requirements as sought be by the Ministry, may be considered positively by the Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission.
1.7 NORTH EASTERN DEVELOPMENT FINANCE CORPORATION LIMITED (NEDFi)
RECOMMENDATION
1.7.1 The Committee observes that North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Limited
(NEDFi) plays a significant role as lending institution. Since the corporation has been receiving
ever increasing demand for financial assistance for new projects, it has ambitious growth plan to
expand its business to 30 per cent on year to year basis. The Committee notes that the corporation
is projecting internal resource generation of around Rs. 290.00 crore, marketing borrowing of
Rs. 125.00 crore and soft loan of Rs. 30.00 crore from Ministry of DoNER. The Committee also
notes that limited resources at its disposal is posing a big constraint to meet the commitment of
revised disbursement target to the tune of RS. 485.00 crore during the financial year 2012-13. The
Committee recommends that adequate fund may be provided to NEDFi at RE stage to carry out
its activities smoothly. (Para 2.8.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.7.2 Planning Commission has provided Rs. 60.00 crore as interest-free loan to NEDFi  during
2012-13.
1.8 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
RECOMMENDATION
1.8.1 The Committee understands the tremendous role of NLCPR Scheme in developing
infrastructure of NE region to ensure economic sustainability of the region. However, the Committee

6
is constrained to express its displeasure to observe that till 31 st March, 2012 a total of 1337.00
infrastructure projects worth Rs. 10863.29 crore were approved out of which only 645 projects worth
Rs. 3531.00 have been completed which is just 48.24 per cent. The Committee further observes that
several projects taken up since 1998-99 under NLCPR are lagging behind. For example three
projects out of seventy projects on roads and bridges in Arunachal Pradesh; eighty four projects
out of two hundred ten projects on roads and bridges in Assam; one project out of fourteen projects
on health and seventeen projects out of forty six projects on water supply in Manipur; and five
projects out of twenty three projects on education in Meghalaya have been completed. The
performance is not convincing at all. (Para 2.9.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.2 To expedite accelerated completion of projects, Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources
(NLCPR) Committee has since reviewed the progress of projects in all 8 (eight) North Eastern
States with State Government Officers during its 105th, 106th, 107th and 108th meetings held
during 17.05.2012 to 27.08.2012. NLCPR Committee expressed its concern over slow
implementation of projects and advised the States to ensure timely completion of projects. States
have also been advised to give focused attention to delayed projects and timely transfer of funds
to the implementing agencies. State Governments were also advised to plan the projects schedule
in such a way so that maximum utilization of working season could be made.
1.8.2 Hon’ble Minister of State (IC), DoNER has also reviewed progress of projects during his
visits to North Eastern States and stressed the need for expediting the implementation, specially of
delayed projects for faster development of North Eastern Region.
1.8.3 Resultantly, number of completion of projects has increased to 683 nos. The NLCPR
Committee has decided to review the implementation of projects in all eight NE States every year
to ensure timely implementation of projects by states.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.8.4 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to review the progress of
projects and expedite their completion under NLCPR and recommends that proactive
measures be continued to achieve satisfactory completion of all the projects.
RECOMMENDATION
1.8.5 The Committee is not in agreement with the argument put forth for the delay in completion
of projects under NLCPR viz delay in utilization and transfer of funds to implementing agencies
by the State Government, problem being faced in acquisition of land, law and order situation
including insurgency; delay in awarding the work/tender. The Committee is of the considered view
that the Ministry of DoNER, as co-ordinator and facilitator must resolve issues concerning timely
implementation of projects. For this, Ministry of DoNER should review the existing monitoring
mechanism, which appears to be only on papers to ensure it to be more result oriented. The
Ministry should also persuade all the State Governments in NE to co-operate in the implementation
of NLCPR Schemes in the interest of economic development of the region. (Para 2.9.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.6 To further strengthen monitoring mechanism, apart from site visits by officers of Ministry
of DoNER and periodical reports, Ministry is in process of appointment of Independent Quality
Monitors (IQM) for inspection of the projects. The proper follow up on the reports of IQM shall
be ensured for proper and timely implementation of projects.

7
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.8.7 The Committee while appreciating the move of the Ministry recommends that
Independent Quality Monitors of good repute be appointed at the earliest.
1.9 BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCIL (BTC)
RECOMMENDATION
1.9.1 The Committee notes that out of sanctioned amount of Rs. 476.27 crore, an amount of
Rs. 450.77 crore has been released. However, utilization certificates for an amount of Rs. 409.88
crore only have been received. The Committee recommends that BTC/State Government may be
asked to submit utilization certificates in respect of the balance amount at the earliest and the issue
of completion of remaining 16 projects be followed up proactively. The Committee welcomes
additional BTC package of Rs. 250.00 crore and recommends that work on sanctioned 15 projects
be completed at the earliest. The Committee further recommends that the State Government of
Assam may be persuaded to expedite DPRs on the four remaining projects so that work on these
projects could be started soon. (Para 2.10.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.9.2 BTC Package of Rs. 500.00 crore:
State Government has been requested for expediting submission of utilization certificates of
the funds released and timely completion of the project. As on date, State Government has
submitted utilization certificate for Rs.410.65 crore against Rs.450.77 crore released. State
Government has also submitted completion certificates for 27 projects totalling Rs.254.28
crore.
1.9.3 Additional BTC Package of Rs.250.00 crore:
Out of 19 projects retained at an estimated cost of Rs.243.20 crore under this additional
package, 17 projects at approved cost of Rs.209.18 crore have been sanctioned and an
amount of Rs. 97.48 crore have been released so far. DPRs along with recommendations
of State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) only for remaining 2 projects are awaited from
Government of Assam.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.9.4 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the utilization certificates in
respect of remaining amount of about Rs. 40 crores be obtained at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that effective monitoring of implementation of projects under
additional BTC package be ensured and the State Government of Assam may be impressed
upon to submit the two remaining DPRs at the earliest.
1.10 ADVERTISING AND PUBLICITY
RECOMMENDATION
1.10.1 The Committee notes that the outcome budget 2012-13 of the Ministry also mentions that
physical outputs in respect of Advertising and Publicity are not measurable/quantifiable. The
Committee is not convinced with the submission of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that
suitable mechanism may be evolved to ensure that physical outputs could be measurable in every
Plan Scheme not specifically the scheme under reference. (Para 2.11.5 ibid)

8
Action Taken
1.10.2 The observation made by the Committee has been noted. Ministry’s Action Plan under the
Advertising and Publicity Scheme is being finalized soon. This will reflect physical targets like
(i) number of advertisements to be released in print/electronic/outdoor media etc. during the year
(2012-13), (ii) maximum number of business summits/workshops/expos/seminars to be sponsored
and (iii) copies of books to be printed for publicity etc. These would, however, be tentative only
as exact quantitative targets in respect of events mentioned above can not be fixed as sponsorship
depends on (a) receipt of suitable/fit proposals from agencies outside the Ministry and
(b) availability of funds during the financial year. Therefore, a maximum range of action would be
indicated based on previous experiences of the Ministry and allocation of funds for the purpose
under the scheme.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.10.3 The Committee while noting the reply impress upon the Ministry that every effort
be made on continuous basis to achieve the target set in the Ministry’s Action Plan of the
years to come.
1.11 CONSULTANCY, MONITORING, THIRD PARTY EV ALUATION CHARGES ETC.
UNDER NLCPR SCHEME
RECOMMENDATION
1.11.1 The Committee is pleased to note that in pursuance of its recommendation in its 149 th
Report, the Government has come forward with provision in the Budget for taking up Third Party
monitoring of NLCPR projects during 2011-12. The Committee notes with concern that a total of
91 projects were sent to State Governments for taking up third party monitoring which are yet to
be completed. The Committee also recommends that all the projects should be assessed without
further delay and be subjected to monitoring. (Para 2.15.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.11.2 The response of State Governments of North Eastern Region for Third Party Monitoring of
projects by Independent Review and Monitoring Agencies (IRMA) introduced under NLCPR
scheme, in line with JNNURM scheme of Ministry of Urban Development, was poor. Out of 8
States only 2 States i.e. Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram have submitted their proposals, but since
the proposals were incomplete and without proper tendering procedures, they were rejected.
1.11.3 In view of poor response from State Governments, Ministry of DoNER have decided to
appoint third party monitors on its own called as Independent Quality Monitors (IQM). The process
of appointment of IQM has already been initiated. It is expected to further strengthen monitoring
of projects implementation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.11.4 The Committee while appreciating the move of the Ministry recommends that
Independent Quality Monitors of good repute be appointed at the earliest.
1.12 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)- CENTRAL
RECOMMENDATION
1.12.1 The Committee welcomes the introduction of NLCPR-Central Plan Scheme. The Committee

9
notes the justification of the scheme as in the present set up, funding is not sufficient to speed
up the infrastructure development in NER. The Committee hopes that all infrastructure projects
would be completed within stipulated time-frame to further speed up development of NE States.
(Para 2.16.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.12.2 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region will make all out efforts for timely
completion of projects under NLCPR-Central Scheme as it will be implemented by the Central
Ministries.
1.13 NORTH EASTERN STATES ROADS INVESTMENT PROGRAMME
RECOMMENDATION
1.13.1 The Committee notes that Asian Development Bank assisted NERSIP has now taken final
shape to be launched for the benefit of NE States. The Committee hopes that the projects under
the scheme will be implemented in the right earnest with effective monitoring. (Para 2.17.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.13.2 The Ministry is closely monitoring the progress made by the States for implementation of
the scheme. On 9th July 2012, Government of India and Asian Development Bank have signed
agreement for the Tranche 1 loan amount of US $ 74.8 million. Under Tranche 1, a total of 201.8 km
roads in Assam, Meghalaya and Sikkim will be taken up. The scheme has an in-built mechanism
for monitoring in the form of Project Management Unit (PMU) in the Ministry and Construction
Supervision Consultant (CSC) in each of the States to monitor implementation of the projects.
RECOMMENDATION
1.13.3 The Committee, however, expresses its concern that the project readiness activities could not
progress as per the original schedule due to delays in the award of contract  for Construction
Supervision Consultant (CSC) by PIUs of State PWDs which is expected to be completed during
first quarter of 2012-13. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that all such projects and
projects which are to be freshly taken up during 1
st quarter of 2012-13, should be taken up as per
schedule. (Para 2.17.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.13.4 All Tranche 1 States of Assam, Meghalaya and Sikkim have completed recruitment of
Construction Supervision Consultants (CSCs). The Ministry is constantly monitoring the progress
of project readiness activities in respect of Tranche 2 State so as to ensure that the projects are
taken up as per schedule.
1.14 CONNECTIVITY
RECOMMENDATION
1.14.1 The Committee observes that a number of works are to be done for development of existing
and operational airports. Acquisition of land from IAF and State Governments are yet to be done
for development of airports. At some airports certain works are only at planning stage. The
Committee further observes that in some cases, approval of Planning Commission is yet to be

10
obtained, where as in others, approval of Planning Commission has been obtained and construction
work will start soon. The Committee feels that coordination for all these wide ranging activities/
works requires dedicated and focused approach on the part of the Ministry. The Committee in this
context would like to suggest that the Ministry may consider to set up a special cell in the Ministry
to look after these activities till the completion of works/activities. All works need to be taken up
on a fast pace to catch up with the development of the rest of the country. (Para 3.2.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.14.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation have requested Airports Authority of India, who are handling the
development of existing airports in the North Eastern Region, to set up a special Cell to monitor
the development activities of the airports in NER.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.14.3 The Committee desires to be informed of the present status of the cell.
1.15 MONITORING MECHANISM
RECOMMENDATION
1.15.1 The Committee is not happy to note that the matter of creating of a separate wing of CVC
exclusively for NER is still under examination. The Committee also notes that DoP&T has taken
up the proposal for creation of one post of Joint Director in CBI exclusively for NER and the
cabinet had considered the proposal and the minutes of the meeting were awaited. The Committee
in this background reiterates its recommendation made in 145
th Report regarding setting up of a
separate wing of CVC in NER. The Committee further recommends that early action may be taken
in this regard. (Para 3.3.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.15.2 Department of Personnel and Training have intimated that matter regarding creation of
separate wing of CVC exclusively for the NER has again been referred to the Central Vigilance
Commission for latest development. As regards the recommendation of the Committee for creation
of one post of Joint Director in CBI exclusively for NER, they have intimated that one post of
Joint Director in CBI has since been created with the approval of the Cabinet and posting of an
officer is underway.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.15.3 The Committee desires that the posting of Joint Director may be done at the
earliest.
RECOMMENDATION
1.15.4 The Committee also notes that there had been 15 projects for which 2
nd or subsequent
installment had to be stopped for want of physical progress commensurate with the financial
progress. The Committee also notes that in a number of cases, State Governments have been
asked to submit clarification. The State Governments may be requested to expedite their
clarifications. The Committee would also like to suggest that a standard proforma or a format
in this regard may be prepared so as to avoid the chances of seeking clarifications time and
again. Regular meetings may be held with implementing agencies to ensure physical progress in
the works. (Para 3.3.5 ibid)

11
Action Taken
1.15.5 Standard Proforma for submission of utilization certificates and progress reports already
exist and available with States. In NLCPR scheme guidelines it is clearly specified that physical
progress should be in commensurate with financial expenditure for further release of funds. All the
instructions were conveyed to the state governments time and again and also discussed during
review meetings to avoid errors by State Governments.
1.16 HYDROPOWER IN THE NORTH-EAST: POTENTIAL AND HARNESSING
RECOMMENDATION
1.16.1 North East has huge potential for development of hydro-electric power, given its unique
natural advantage. The Committee is disappointed to know that as on March, 2012, 93.06% of the
capacity of the region still remains untapped. Slow progress of civil works, heavy rain, frequent
bandhs etc. are cited as reasons for delay. The Committee, while taking into account the handicaps
faced by the agencies, still believes that they cannot explain gross under utilization of power
potential in the region even after six decades of independence of the country. The policy of
reducing the eligibility to avail mega project benefits from 1000 MW to 700 MW in certain special
category States of J&K, Sikkim and the seven states of North East is a step in right direction. The
Committee would like to recommend that revised National Water Policy be finalized at the earliest.
The Committee also recommends that the issues/constraints identified by the Inter-Ministerial Group
and interventions suggested by it may be examined threadbare and necessary steps may be taken
in this regard. The Committee also feels that there is a need to review the factors hampering the
pace of the work and find solution for the problems. Necessary steps may be taken in this direction.
(Para 3.5.5 ibid)
Action Taken
1.16.2 Action taken by  Ministry of Power with regard to the observations/recommendations made
by the Committee is as under:–
1. Under-utilization of Hydro Power Potential in the NE region
(i) Out of the total identified hydro power potential of 58356 MW in North Eastern (NE)
Region, about 2.06% of the potential (above 25 MW) has been developed in N.E.
region so far, while another about 4.89 % is under various stages of development.
It may be mentioned that with a view to expedite implementation of hydro power
development in NE region, a total of 106 H.E. Schemes (above 25 MW) with an
aggregate capacity of 41279.5 MW (including the schemes cleared or under
examination in CEA) have been allotted by the respective State Governments. in NE
Region to Central and Private Sector for implementation during 12th Plan and beyond.
These projects are yet to be taken up for construction. Summary of these allotted
projects is given below:–
Name of State Central Private Total
No. I.C. (MW) No. I.C. (MW) No. I.C. (MW)
1 234567
Ar. Pradesh 3 4400 89 31872.5 92 36272.5

12
Assam – – – – – –
Manipur 2 1566 – – 2 1566
Meghalaya 1 85 5 974 6 1059
Mizoram 5 2196 – – 5 2196
Nagaland – – 1 186 1  186
T
OTAL (NER): 11 8247 95 33032.5 106 41279.5
2. Revised National Water Policy
The initial draft of National Water Policy was prepared by the Government in Jan., 2012.
Subsequently, based on the comments received, the draft National Water Policy has been
revised, as recommended by National Water Board in June, 2012.
3. Issues/constraints identified and interventions suggested by the Inter-Ministerial
Group (IMG)
The Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) which was constituted under the Chairmanship of
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, had made a number of recommendations. The
present status in respect of the points concerning CEA as identified in the IMG Report is
given below:
Para
No.
1
Recommendations made
in the IMG Report
2
Action Taken
3
7.4 The sub basin wise EIA studies may
be taken up in major tributaries of
Brahmaputra. CWC shall conduct
the studies for Subansiri sub basin
and Siang sub basin in consultation
with CEA and MoEF . Studies in
other basins may also be taken up
subsequently by CWC. The finalized
ToR for such studies will be given
by MoEF .  However, MoEF will not
hold up the Environment clearance
of individual projects for want of
completion of such basin wise
studies.
In line with the recommendations of IMG, EIA
studies for Subansiri and Siang Basins have been
undertaken by CWC in consultation with CEA and
MoEF. The Terms of Reference for the EIA
study were finalized by CWC in consultation with
MoEF.
EIA study for Subansiri and Siang basin have
been entrusted by Central Water Commission
to M/s. IRG System South Asia Ltd . and
M/s. Enviro Link Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
respectively who have prepared and submitted an
Interim Report giving rapid assessment to CWC
which has since been approved, subject to the
condition that the comments and suggestions
offered by the TAC Members would be
incorporated and a corrected Interim Report
would be furnished by the Consultants to MoEF
for mid-term corrections/suggestions, if any. The
corrected Interim Report for Siang basin has been
furnished by the Consultant to MoEF. Draft final
reports are scheduled to be submitted by the
respective Consultant to CWC by 15.10.2012

13
12 3
while the final reports would be prepared within
2 months of the approval of draft final reports by
CWC.
In addition, EIA Studies for Lohit and Bichom
basins, awarded by MoEF to WAPCOS, have
since been carried out and preliminary reports
have been submitted to MoEF.
CEA has put up a proposal to MoP vide ID No.
CEA/E&C/EPD/417/2007/1555 dt. 8.10.09 for
making appropriate additions to the National
Electricity Policy, the Tariff Policy and Standard
Bidding Guidelines and also intimated CERC
accordingly vide D.O. letter No. CEA/E&C/EPD/
417/2007/1582 dt. 12.10.09. The  cost towards
opening of ITIs and other Training Institutes is
being reflected as a part of the project cost in the
concurrence letter issued by CEA .
Consequent to the directions of an Inter-
Ministerial Committee under the Chairmanship of
Member (Energy), Planning Commission, a
Standing Technical Committee (STC) has been
constituted by CEA for examining the desirability
or otherwise of conversion of schemes from
storage to ROR. Whenever, a specific DPR
envisaging conversion of schemes from ‘ Storage
to ROR’  is received, the committee examines
desirability of the same.
Action in this regard is being taken by CEA.
Chairperson, CEA has been holding review
meetings with the developers and other
stakeholders to monitor and sort out the critical
issues of H.E. projects under execution as well as
in respect of future projects to review the status
like preparation of DPR, status of E&F clearance,
likely date of placing of order etc.
All efforts are being made to adhere to the IMG
recommendations in this regard. Since 2010-11,
concurrence has been accorded by CEA in
respect of 16 HE Projects (7032 MW) including
6 HE Projects (3460 MW) in North-East Region.
In addition, DPRs in respect of 19 no. of HE
schemes (12088 MW) including 11 nos. in NER
(8510 MW) are under examination in CEA.
7.7
7.11
7.13
7.14
CEA shall allow the cost towards
opening of ITIs and other training
institutes as project cost and in
respect of projects with capacity of
300 MW and mention specifically in
the concurrence letter issued by
CEA.
CEA shall ensure that storage
projects are taken up wherever
feasible, at the time of techno-
economic appraisal of DPRs of H.E.
Projects.
CEA shall monitor the progress of
S&I works, preparation of DPRs,
concurrence by CEA and imple-
mentation of the projects on
quarterly basis against the set
intermediate timelines.
CEA shall expedite the process of
concurrence to DPRs and set
timelines so as to clear the DPRs
complete in all respect within four
months of submission.

14
12 3
7.16
7.17
As most of planned HE projects are
at the stage of preparation of DPR,
Ministry of Power may consider
extension of amendment in the
existing tariff policy to permit cost
plus tariff for HE Projects in
Private Sector beyond 31st
December, 2010 for 3 more years.
MoP may look into the aspect of
providing level playing field to
PSUs vis-a-vis private sector
developers by allowing them the
Merchant sales in Hydro Power.
The cost plus dispensation available to CPSUs/
SPUs and Private Sector Hydro Projects has now
been extended by the Government by 5 years
viz. upto 31.12.2015 .
All the benefits of Hydro Power Policy, 2008
including merchant power sales have now been
extended by the Government to all the
developers including PSUs.
4. Measures taken by the Government for timely completion/implementation of H.E
Projects
In connection with the Committee’s recommendation to review the factors hampering the
pace of work and find solution for the problems,  the following measures have been taken
by the Government for timely completion/implementation of H.E Projects:
(i) Task Force  under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Power with Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission, Minister of Water Resources, Minister of New and
Renewable Energy, Minister of Environment & Forests and Ministers of Power from
Hydro rich states has been constituted to look into various issues relating to
development of Hydro Power.
(ii) Advisory Group  has been set up under the chairmanship of the Hon’ble Minister of
Power to advice for timely completion of ongoing power generation projects.
(iii) Special Monitoring Group  (SMG) has been constituted under the chairmanship of
Secretary (Power) to discuss and sort out various issues through video conferencing
for J&K and North Eastern Region.
(iv) Power Project Monitoring Panel  (PPMP) has been set up by the Ministry of Power
to independently follow up and monitor the progress of the hydro projects.
v) Project-wise progress is regularly monitored by Central Electricity Authority (CEA)
through site visits, interaction with developers, and critical study of monthly progress
reports.
vi) Review Meetings by Chairperson, CEA with the developers and other stakeholders to
sort out the critical issues.
vii) Review meetings by MOP regularly with CEA, Equipment Manufacturers, State
Utilities/CPSUs/Project developers, etc.
Review meetings by Chairperson, CEA to review status of future hydro projects allotted to
various developers like preparation of DPR, status of E&F clearance, likely date of placing of order
etc.

15
1.17 PROVIDING MORE ATTRACTIVE INCENTIVES TO THE OFFICERS POSTED IN
NORTH EASTERN REGION
RECOMMENDATION
1.17.1 The Committee recommends that an early decision on providing insurance cover and
subsidized loan for housing to officials of All India Services posted in the North-east may be
taken. The Committee feels that much more needs to be done in terms of service conditions so as
to retain good officers in the region. (Para 3.6.2 ibid)
Action Taken
1.17.2 Department of Expenditure have conveyed to Department of Personnel and Training their
concurrence to the proposal relating to Life Insurance Scheme for AIS officers working in the
North Eastern Region on the understanding that the proposal for extension to officers of other
cadres working in the North-East is confined only to AIS officers on inter-cadre deputation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
1.17.3 The Committee also desires that action may also be taken for providing subsidized
loan for housing.

16
16
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
2.1 PLAN SCHEMES
RECOMMENDATION
2.1.1 The Committee, while taking note of the fact that against the projected demand of
Rs. 1846.50 crore, only Rs. 1741.00 crore has been allocated under the plan scheme to the Ministry
of DoNER, recommends that the Ministry of DoNER must impress upon the Planning Commission
and the Ministry of Finance for allocation of Plan outlay as per the requirement to ensure the
implementing of scheme/programme. (Para 2.1.6 ibid )
Action Taken
2.1.2 The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region is in touch with Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance for allocating funds, as projected.
RECOMMENDATION
2.1.3 The Committee notes with appreciation the good financial achievement. However, the
Committee takes into account the substantial reduction to two schemes of NERLP & NESRP at RE
Stage which would have affected these two schemes. (Para 2.1.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.1.4 Reduction at RE stage emanated from partial fructification of these Externally Aided
Projects.
2.2 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CAPACITY BUILDING
RECOMMENDATION
2.2.1 The Committee notes that the demand of Rs 23.00 crore for the scheme has been curtailed
to Rs. 20.00 crore during the year 2012-13. According to the Ministry, the allocation could
suffice the requirement. The Committee recommends that additional fund may be sought, if
required, at RE stage, so that the scheme does not suffer for want of funds. The Committee
would also like to suggest that other institutions such as LBSNAA, Mussourie, IIMs, ISTM, Delhi
may also be approached for imparting training on development of administration and managerial
skills. (Para 2.12.8 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.2 By the present trend, fund allocation of Rs. 20 crore, at BE stage for 2012-13, seems to
be adequate. However, if pace gathers – for which concerted efforts are being made – and we need
additional funds, the requirement would be projected at RE stage.

17
2.2.3 Recommendation for approaching the institutions such as LBSNAA, Mussourie, IIMs and
ISTM, Delhi has been noted and action is being initiated in right earnest.
RECOMMENDATION
2.2.4 The Committee notes with displeasure that despite its recommendation in its One Hundred
and Thirty third, One Hundred Forty First and One Hundred Forty Fifth Reports for early setting
up of Pilot Training Institute at Lilabari, Assam, the project has been dropped after a long
delay. It is extremely unfortunate that the proposal has been dropped without giving substantial
reasons. Now, setting up a Composite Training Facility for ground level staff for navigation and
Aircraft maintenance has been proposed if AAI/MoCA so wishes. The Committee is apprehensive
that the new proposal may also face the same fate as there is a strong likelihood of it being
caught in procedural delays. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should draw
a plan for setting up the training facility in a time bound manner so as to avoid inordinate
delays. (Para 2.12.9 ibid)
Action Taken
2.2.5 A meeting regarding setting up of Aviation Manpower Training Institute at Lilabari was held
on 14th June, 2012 in New Delhi. This meeting was chaired by Secretary, DoNER and participated
by representatives from Planning Commission, Airports Authority of India (AAI) and North Eastern
Council Secretariat, Shillong.
2.2.6 Initially, AAI’s endeavour to lease out its land to prospective entrepreneurs to establish
flying training school did not fructify due to lack of interest from any party. Subsequently, AAI
has clearly indicated that involvement of AAI shall be limited to planning and development of
infrastructure for the Institute subject to (i) Availability of identified Land, (ii) 100% Government
budgetary support, (iii) State Government support towards water supply, power, road-connectivity,
security and law and order.
2.2.7 After due deliberations in the meeting, following points emerged/decisions were taken:–
(i) While AAI has been forthcoming with preparation of Detailed Project Report, inter-
alia, including planning and development of infrastructure required for setting up of
Aviation manpower Training Institute at Lilabari, it has expressed its inability to run
the said Institute and delve into important issues like:–
(a) Availability of sufficient number of students/trainees and trained faculty
members,
(b) Proper accreditation and structured courses etc.
These issues need to be addressed before a decision is taken to go ahead with
construction of  Aviation Manpower Training Institute at Lilabari or any other suitable
location. Otherwise, it may result in setting up of such Institute, at an expense of
around Rs. 76 crore, that may remain under-utilized and may not bring the desired
impact on Aviation Sector in the country including NE Region.
(ii) Capacity Building and Manpower Planning for Aviation Sector is in domain of line
Ministry, viz. Ministry of Civil Aviation, which may take appropriate steps to meet the
demand of pilots, cabin crew and Aircraft Maintenance Engineer/Technicians vis-à-vis
planning of adequate training facilities/institutes in the country including accreditation
provisions etc. through existing or new organizations.

18
(iii) In order to arrive at some prudent decision regarding need to set up Aviation
manpower Training Institute at Lilabari, Assam, NEC Secretariat shall carry out
following baseline activities in coordination with AAI:
(a) Finding details about important Flying Schools, Aviation Manpower Training
Institutes in the country, both in private and public sector, particularly with
regard to training courses, training capacities, accreditation and their running
arrangements.
(b) Letter/discussion with Airline Operators in the NE Region and airport operators
in the country (GYK, GMR, DIAL etc.) to assess possibility of their role in
running such institutes before call for EOI. Suitability and acceptability of
Lilabari as a location for Aviation Manpower Training Institute.
(iv) NEC Secretariat have approached 77 AME training institutes (approved by DGCA) all
over India to indicate and make available the training courses being imparted by them,
training capacity, accreditation, running arrangement and course fees etc. They were
further requested to suggest courses that can be taken up to help equip the youths
for better employment opportunities and also comment on suitability of running an
institute at Lilabari.
2.3 SCHEME UNDER SPECIAL FUND FOR INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADATION IN
NORTH EASTERN REGION
RECOMMENDATION
2.3.1 The Committee notes the submissions of the Ministry of DoNER with regard to timely
completion of the projects, monitoring of the progress thereof as well as steps to ensure non-
siphoning off of funds. The Committee desires that the financial targets should be achieved. All
the projects proposed should take off and there should not be any delay. (Para 2.14.3 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.2 Observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
2.4 NORTH EASTERN STATES ROADS INVESTMENT PROGRAMME
RECOMMENDATION
2.4.1 The Committee also takes note of the inadequacy of the funds for the NERSIP which have
been halved against its projected requirement. The Committee recommends that additional funds
may be provided for the scheme at RE stage, if required. (Para 2.17.7 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.2 Funds for projects under NESRIP are released on the basis of claim submitted by State
Governments for mobilisation advance and re-imbursement of expenditure. Additional funds will be
provided for the scheme if required.
RECOMMENDATION
2.4.3 The Committee feels that the road construction in the region has been unduly delayed either
on account of issues concerning land acquisition or abandoning of work by contractors. These

19
reasons are not very convincing to the Committee. The Committee is irked by the snail’ s pace in
the works. The committee recommends that strong in-built penalty clause should be incorporated in
the contractual agreement. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would meet the various deadlines
as promised. (Para 2.17.10 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.4 Ministry of Road Transport & Highways have intimated that there is a provision of Liquidity
Damage in the contract for delay in completion of work beyond admissible Extension of Time.
Liquidity Damage is recovered from contractor as per provisions contained in General Condition of
Contract. There is also a provision for encashment of performance BG , if required.
2.4.5 National Highway Authority of India is continuously monitoring progress of the projects for
scheduled completion as per various deadlines promised.
2.5 IMPLEMENTATION OF NER PROJECTS
RECOMMENDATION
2.5.1 The Committee notes that under the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR)
scheme, the State Governments have reported completion of total 63 projects of total approval cost
of Rs. 596.75 crore during the financial year 2010-11 and 2011-12. But out of these, only 3
projects were completed without time overrun while in another 4 projects time overrun was less than
one year. It thus means that majority of projects ran behind schedule and there were time and cost
over-runs in execution of projects, which seems to be a normal trend rather than being exceptions.
The Committee observes that despite furnishing of Quarterly Progress Reports, inspection visits and
examination of the Utilization Certificates, very little progress has been made in ensuring timely
execution of projects. The Committee strongly feels that much is required to be done in this regard.
(Para 3.1.4 ibid)
Action Taken
2.5.2 It is a fact that many NLCPR projects in North East Region are behind schedule. However,
under NLCPR scheme, cost overrun due to time overrun is not allowed to avoid such delays.
During review meetings with the State Governments, stress is being given on delayed projects and
State Governments have been advised to give special attention towards such projects for their early
completion. Any cost overrun in such projects has to be borne by the State Governments.

20
20
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED OR IS
NOT SATISFIED WITH THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
3.1 TWELFTH PLAN PROPOSALS
RECOMMENDATION
3.1.1 The Committee strongly believes that the Ministry has made ambitious plans and
recommends the Planning Commission to approve the proposals of 12 th Five Year Plan as forwarded
by the Ministry of DoNER. (Para 2.3.2 ibid)
Action Taken
3.1.2 Planning Commission has finalised GBS allocation at current price in respect of Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region at the level of Rs. 13,621/- crore for the 12 th Five Year Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.1.3 The Committee observes that the Planning Commission has allocated the Ministry of
DoNER to the tune of Rs. 13621.00 crore for the 12 th Five Year Plan against the proposed
out lay of Rs. 19445 crore. The Committee feels that the Ministry of DoNER should again
assess the actual requirement of fund for completing its ambitious plans in the 12
th Five
Year Plan period and take up the matter with the Planning Commission for realistic
allocation with vigorous persuasion.
3.2 LOAN TO NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MARKETING
CORPORATION (NERAMAC)
RECOMMENDATION
3.2.1 The Committee is, however, constrained to express its displeasure to note that despite its
recommendation made in 145
th Report (Demands for Grants 2010-11) for early implementation of
setting up cashew Processing Plant at Mankachar, Assam, modernising and restructuring of Fruit
Juice Concentration Plant at Nalkata; Tripura; setting up of a Multi Fruit Processing Plant at
Silchar; setting up Central Packaging Centre at Chaigaon in Assam under NLCPR Scheme of
Government of India, they are still in the pipeline at different stages. Therefore, the projects should
be completed without further delay. (Para 2.7.8 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.2 These NLCPR projects are located in the state of Assam and Tripura. The present status
of these projects are as under:
(a) Cashew Processing Plant, Mankachar, Assam:
This instant project of 4TPD capacity is under commission at Mankachar, Assam.
More than 90% of civil works has been completed and erection of Plant and

21
Machinery is under progress. Sanction order issued by Government of Assam for
Rs. 38.39 lakh only on 6th September, 2012. Project is expected to be completed by
the end of this fiscal.
(b) Modernizing and Restructuring of Fruit Juice Concentrate Plant, Nalkata,
Tripura:
Fruit Juice Concentration Plant at Nalkata, Tripura is a single line pineapple plant
which has outlived because of technological obsolescence. Management has proposed
suitable diversification plan for a Multi-Fruit Processing Unit at Nalkata under NLCPR.
The DPR of project was examined in Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD).
Process of updating  DPR on the basis of observations of MoUD through Consultant
is underway for resubmission to MoUD for vetting.
(c) Setting up of Multi Fruit Processing Plant at Silchar, Assam:
NERAMAC proposed to set up a Multi Fruit Processing Plant at Silchar with funding
from NLCPR Scheme. The DPR submitted by State Government was examined in
MoUD and they have vetted only civil component of project. The Plant and Machinery
which is major component of project could not be vetted in the absence of its
specifications. State Government has been asked for submission of specifications of
the plant and machinery so that it could be got vetted from the concerned line
Ministry.
(d) Setting up of Quality Assurance and Central Packaging Centre at Chaygaon,
Assam:
Considering the urgent need to provide modern packaging facilities for the already
existing as well as the upcoming fruit processing Units of the north eastern region,
NERAMAC proposed to set up under NLCPR a Quality Assurance and Central
Packaging Centre at Chaygaon near Guwahati. DPR of project submitted by
NERAMAC through Government of Assam is under examination in Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.2.3 The Committee is not happy with the sluggish progress made in regard to all the four
projects. All the projects are under pipeline since long and are going at snail pace. North East
Region cannot progress at the expected pace until and unless the projects undertaken for
development are monitored effectively ensuring timely implementation. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that all the projects must have a set time-frame for their
completion, and necessary steps be taken to complete the same within the schedule.
3.3 NORTH EASTERN DEVELOPMENT FINANCE CORPORATION (NEDFi)
RECOMMENDATION
3.3.1 The Committee is given to understand that the corporation has fund requirement of
Rs. 5184 crore during the 12
th Five Year Plan to meet the projected sanctions of Rs. 6410.00
crore and disbursement of Rs. 4690.00 crore. The corporation has further requested for interest-
free loan to the tune of Rs. 1000.00 crore from the Government during 12
th Five Year Plan.
Keeping in view the pivotal role of NEDFi, the Committee recommends that the Government
should consider interest-free loan to the tune of Rs. 1000.00 crore for ensuring NEDFi to meet
its financial and physical targets during the 12
th Five Year Plan starting from current financial
year. (Para 2.8.11 ibid)

22
Action Taken
3.3.2 A Memorandum of Understanding has been  signed with NEDFi by which it would be
required to set and meet specific physical targets in line with objectives of this Ministry to promote
economic activities in the primary sector viz. agri-horticulture plantation, medicinal plantation,
sericulture plantation, aquaculture, poultry, dairy etc. in the NE states by utilizing the funds
provided by Government of India as interest-free loan in the 12
th Five Year Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.3.3 The Committee is dismayed over the evasive and vague reply. For achieving physical
targets, meeting the financial targets is also required. This aspect may be kept in mind.
3.4 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
RECOMMENDATION
3.4.1 The Committee is given to understand that there are about 729 on-going projects wherein
grant of about Rs. 2309.00 crore is to be released for which higher allocation will be required.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance
should assess the requirement of fund under NLCPR and accordingly accord approval of required
fund. (Para 2.9.7 ibid)
Action Taken
3.4.2 Planning Commission has approved an enhanced allocation of Rs. 6,048.70 crore for the
scheme during 12
th Five Year Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.4.3 The Committee expresses its displeasure on the vague reply of the Ministry and feels
that such replies handicap the Committee to plead strongly the Ministry’s case for enhanced
allocation, as the higher allocation under NLCPR is the key to ensure economic
sustainability of the region.
3.5 ADVERTISING AND PUBLICITY
RECOMMENDATION
3.5.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry has recommended for extension of LTC facility in
lieu of Home Town beyond 1
st May, 2012. The Committee also notes with appreciation that the
facility has further been extended for years. The Committee, however, desires that relaxation in
the matter of performing air journey by any airlines other than Air India, as has been extended
in case of LTC visit to J&K, may also be extended to meet the demand of seats in flights.
(Para 2.11.7 ibid)
Action Taken
3.5.2 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) took up the matter with
Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T), of allowing Government employees to perform air
journey to visit NER on LTC by any airlines other than Air India as in case of visit to J&K on
LTC. Department of Personnel and Training, while conveying their ‘No Objection’ to the proposal
advised this Ministry to take concurrence of Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department of

23
Expenditure. Accordingly, Ministry of DoNER approached Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department
of Expenditure but they have not agreed to the proposal.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.5.3 The Committee is of the view that permission to Government employees to visit
NER on LTC by any airlines other than Air India as in the case of visit to J&K would
attract larger number of Government employees which would generate revenue to NER.
Therefore, Ministry of DoNER should pursue the matter again with the Ministry of Civil
Aviation and Department of Expenditure. The admissible fare on the journeys performed
by airlines, other than Air India, may however be restricted to LTC fare being so charged
by Air India.
3.6 NORTH EASTERN REGION LIVELIHOOD PROJECT (NERLP)-EAP
RECOMMENDATION
3.6.1 The Committee notes the explanation and justification tendered by the Ministry about the
delay in the take off of the scheme. The scheme has been hanging fire for the last few years.
Nevertheless, the Committee hopes that the scheme would be implemented vigorously in the current
financial year. The Committee recommends that fool-proof arrangements for monitoring and
auditing of the scheme should be made, as an in-built mechanism, to plug leakage of funds
earmarked for improving living conditions of the poor. There should be no further delay in the
implementation of the scheme. (Para 2.13.6 ibid)
Action Taken
3.6.2 As per Project Implementation Plan (PIP) of NERLP, Monitoring and Evaluation would be
an inherent activity throughout the project cycle for feed-back on performance of the project
processes and activities. It is an important sub-component of Project Management. This involves
taking timely corrective measures to address the short comings and deviations. Monitoring and
Evaluation (M&E) system would provide realistic, real-time, adequately summarized and easily
interpretable information on various aspects of the project which would be helpful in its proper
implementation.
3.6.3 Objectives of this sub-component are:
1. To track the project input/output based on the project management matrix.
2. Collection and dissemination of information at the various levels for better planning and
implementation.
3.6.4 The Monitoring and Evaluation system of NERLP would cover the following broad activities:
• Progress monitoring of project inputs and outputs.
• Performance monitoring of community institutions, investments and project processes.
• Internal learning, feedback and social accountability measures
• Baseline and impact assessment
3.6.5 This sub-component will support project monitoring and learning activities, including
computerized Web-based MIS, baseline or end-line studies, mid-term review and impact studies.
The M&E system would monitor Processes, Results and Impact of various project initiatives. The

24
impact evaluation study would require rigorous methodology and quality analysis. Two impact
evaluations are planned during the project period. The mid-term evaluation would be commissioned
at the end of 3rd year of project intervention, while the final impact study would be conducted
at the end of the project period.
3.6.6 As per the Bye-Laws of the Society, C&AG shall audit the accounts of the society at least
once a year and annual Audit Report will be submitted to the Registrar of Societies regularly. The
Audit year of the Society shall begin on the first day of April and end on the 31st day of March
next year. The Society shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records as well as
documents comprising of receipt and payment accounts, statement of assets and liabilities and
balance sheet. The accounts of the Society shall be audited by the C&AG .
3.6.7 The nature of the audit to be applied and the detail arrangement to be made in regard to
the account and their maintenance and the presentation of the accounts for audit shall be as per
the Auditing Standards promulgated by the C&AG guidelines. The auditor shall also submit a report
showing the exact state of financial affairs of the Society. The copies of the balance sheet and the
auditor’s report shall be certified by the auditor.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.6.8 The Committee while noting the detailed arrangements for Monitoring and Auditing
of scheme under North Eastern Region livelihood project (NERLP) EAP for ensuring timely
implementation of the scheme. The Committee is of the view that the Project
Implementation Plan (PIP) of NERLP and the Monitoring and Evaluation system should have
provided conducive economic atmosphere for taking off of the scheme and timely
completion of the projects. Moreover, provision of by-laws of the society, C&AG should have
plugged leakages of funds earmarked for improving living conditions of the poor. However,
nothing as such has been reflected in the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry to give the
status of the scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of present status of the
scheme.
3.7 CONNECTIVITY
RECOMMENDATION
3.7.1 The Committee is also disappointed to note that the region has very limited night landing
facilities at airports and as of now there are no takers for night aircraft operations despite night
landing approval given. The Committee does not understand the reasoning given. If the facility is
provided there will definitely be passengers. The Committee recommends that government should
persuade the airline operators to use night landing facility at airports. The Government may
consider providing incentives to them. (Para 3.2.9 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.2 At present, there are night operations at Guwahati, Agartala and Imphal airports. Once the
hangars are commissioned then it is expected that the number of Night Landing Operations will
increase.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.7.3 The Committee is not happy with this vague reply. If hangars are required for Night

25
Landing Operation, then hangers may be provided the other airports also. Early steps may
be taken in this regard.
RECOMMENDATION
3.7.4 The Committee also recommends that steps may be taken for timely completion of all the
projects, particularly the projects which have been declared as National Projects. The Committee
desires that the works may be taken up on a fast track mode so that they are completed in time.
(Para 3.2.15 ibid)
Action Taken
3.7.5 Ministry of Railways are making concerted efforts for expeditious  completion of projects.
Status of various projects in the NE Region are as under:-
1. Jiribam-Tupul-Imphal (98 km.)
Status:
Project was initially sanctioned upto Tupul at a cost of Rs.727 crore in 2008-09, CCEA
approved extension of line upto Imphal with overall length as 125 km. Cost has gone up
substantially, primarily due to level difference between Tupul and Imphal necessitating
regarding of Jiribam-Imphal alignment involving 12.8 km. additional tunnelling. The present
estimated cost of the project is Rs.4444 crore. Final location survey in Tupal-Imphal section
has been completed. Land acquisition, earthwork, minor and major bridges and tunnel work
is in progress in Jiribam-Tupul section. 1089 hect. Out of 1282 hect. Land has been
acquired. 285 lac curn out of 515 lac cum earthwork and 33 out of 110 minor bridges have
been completed. Jiribam-Tupul section involves construction of 35 tunnels out of which
work has been commenced on 18 tunnels with total progress of 1.89 km.
Overall Physical Progress  : 20.73%
Target : Jiribam-Tupul : March, 2014
Tupul-Imphal : March, 2016
2. Rail-Cum-Road Bridge over river Brahmaputra near Bogibeel with linked lines on
North and South Bandh
Status:
The work of construction of Embarkment, Guide Bunds, Major and Minior bridges, station
works and raising and strengthening of Dykes on the North and South bank of bridge has
been completed. Chalkhowa-Moranhat rail link (44 km.) on South Bank completed and
commissioned on 08.12.2009.
On main bridge portion, 30 wall foundations and 14 piers out of 42 have been completed
and work is in progress on 7 walls and 10 piers. Contract for superstructure has been
recently awarded and agency is mobilizing resources. Progress of the project is frequently
disrupted due to militant/anti-social activities in the area, extortion demands by militants/anti-
social elements, disturbances at work sites and security threats to railway officials and
contractor personnel.
Overall Physical Progress : 75.39%
Target : Dec.,15

26
3. Dimapur-Zubza (Kohima) New Line (88 km.)
Status:
Final location Survey has been completed for entire 123 km., length from Dimapur to
Kohima. Geotechnical investigation is in progress (45.0 km. completed).
Alignment between km.4.0 and km.7.0 was shifted on the request of State Government due
to strong protest by the local public, effecting passing of alignment through Zoological Park
boundary.
Nagaland State Government requested to take off new line from Dhansiri, existing station
on Lumding-Dimapur-Tinsukia route (18.57 km. short of Dimapur towards Lumding) which
will meet the original alignment of Dimapur-Kohima at Sukhobi at Ch. 16.45 km.
Accordingly, FLS of Dhansiri – Sukhobi was done but due to involvement of reserve forest,
re-survey has been taken up on the changed alignment.
Target : March, 2015.
4. Tetelia-Byrnihat New Line (21.5 km.)
Status:
Alternative alignment to connect Byrnihat from Tetelia agreed by Assam and Meghalaya
Governments. Final Location Survey (FLS) and geo-tech of Teteliya-Byrnihat completed.
Work started on 3 major bridges. Tender for earthwork and minor bridges awarded. 90.688
hect land acquired out of 160 hect.
Target : March, 2014
5. Bhairabhi-Sairang New Line (51.38 km.)
Status:
Gazette Notification under section 6(1) issued by Government of Mizoram for Kolasib and
Aizwal districts. Preparation of LA estimate for Aizwal district and Kolasib districts is in
progress. Proposal for transfer of forest land under examination with State Forest Deptt.
Target : March, 2015
6. Agartala-Sabroom New Line (110 km.)
Status:
Works are in progress in entire Agartala-Sabroom new line project.
Overall Progress : 34.49%
Target :  (i) Agartala-Udaipura: Dec., 2012
(ii) Udaipura-Sabroom: March, 2014
7. Sivok-Rangpo New line (52.70 km.)
Status:
Work entrusted to M/s IRCON for execution. MoU between NH Railway and IRCON
signed on 07.05.2010. Final alignment has been approved. Project held up for forestly

27
clearance. Proposal sent to National Wildlife Board in March, 2012 MOEF is being followed
up for early clearance
Target :  Dec., 2015
8. Byrnihat-Shillong New Line (108.4 km.)
Status:
Works of Final Location  Survey (FLS) held up due to opposition by Khasi Students Union
(KSU). Meeting held with CM/Meghalaya on 17/09/2011 to sort out the issue.
Target :  March, 2017
9. New Maynaguri-Jogighopa New Line (260 km.)
Status:
Work is planned to be executed in 4 phases. Golakganj to Gauripur completed under
Fakiragram-Dhubri GC work. New Coochbehar-Golakganj (58.0 km.) completed. CRS after
inspection authorised to open the section for passenger traffic on 14.11.2011.
10. Lumding-Silchar-Jiribam, Badarpur-Kumarghat Gauge Conversion (367 km.)
Status:
Progress of earthwork, bridges and tunnels at sites is affected due to activities of militants.
State Government and MHA has been requested to provide adequate security.
Overall Physical Progress  : 73.04%
Target : Dec., 2013
11. Rangiya-Murkongselek with linked figures (Gauge Conversion) (510.30 km.)
Status:
(i) Rangiya-Rangpara North (123.6 km.): Section completed and engine rolled.
(ii) Rangpara North-North Lakhimpur (172 km.) : Most of the earthwork completed. 214
minor bridges out of 216 completed. 19.50 km. track linked out of 172 km.
Target : Dec., 2012
(iii) Balipara-Balukpong (34.47 km.): 2.90 lac cum earthwork completed out of 4.50. 93
minor bridges completed out of 101. Sub-structure of 7 major bridges out of 10
completed.
Target : March, 2013
(iv) North Lakhimpur-Murkongselek (154 km.) : land acquired 45 major bridges out of 69
in sub-structure and 14 in super structure, 38 minor bridges out of 45 completed.
Target : March, 2013
Overall Physical Progress: 73.77%
Note: (1) It is mentioned that regular Coordination Meetings are being held with State
Governments to expedite land acquisition and forest clearance. Also for providing

28
security at site, Railways are in constant interaction with State Governments and
Ministry of Home Affairs.
(2) All out efforts are being made to complete the work as per target.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
3.7.6 The Committee expresses its concern over the slow progress of  Railway Projects in
the North Eastern Region. Jiribam-Tupul-Imphal has achieved only 20.73% of physical
target while 24.61% of work is yet to be completed on Rail-Cum-Road Bridge over river
Brahmaputra near Bogibeel with linked lines on North and South Bandh. While the
Dimapur-Zubza (Kohima) New Line is at geographical survey stage, slow progess is being
observed at Tetlia-Byrnihat New Line and Bhairabhi-Sairang New Line. Only 34.49% of
physical target has been achieved at Agartala-Sabroom New Line. Other Railway Project do
not give encouraging picture. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Railways should analyse the situation and make all out efforts to clean the hurdles and
should not leave any stone unturned for ensuring timely completion of the projects so that
early Rail Linkages are provided to the people of North Eastern Region.

29
29
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 KEY AREAS AND PROJECTS UNDER LOOK EAST POLICY
RECOMMENDATION
4.1.1 Myanmar is an important neighbour which is strategically very crucial for the country, in
general, and North-east India, in particular. Strategic and trade links with Myanmar require
seamless flow of traffic between Myanmar and India. Keeping the Chinese presence in the region
in mind, such projects are of national importance. Besides, they can also be used for people-to-
people contacts in future, after Myanmar returns to full democracy. The Committee notes the
current status of the Kaladan Multi-model project and desires that the project may be completed
on schedule by July, 2013. The Committee recommends that the DPR to be prepared by the IRCON
for the entire road segment of project in Myanmar side be prepared as per schedule. The Committee
also recommends that the Government of Myanmar may be persuaded to construct the road as per
national highway standards. (Para 3.4.11 ibid)
4.1.2 Construction of Rhi-Tiddim and Rhi-Falam Roads are a case of improper handling. The
Committee is dismayed to note that the project of construction of Rhi-Tidim road had to be
revisited and the project was proposed to be assigned to IRCON along with updation of DPR, while
the project was earlier decided to be assigned to the Ministry of Construction of Myanmar, who
agreed to build two lane highway at the same cost, which was estimated by Border Road
Organization for a single lane highway. The Committee desires to know the reasons for this wide
difference in the costs quoted by both sides. The Committee during discussions on Demands for
Grant( 2010-11) was informed that the project would span over a period of three years i.e. till
2013. Now, in the present circumstances it is highly unlikely that the project will meet its deadline.
The Committee is extremely disappointed by the procedural delays, which reflect very poorly on the
seriousness with which the development of the region is taken by different Ministries/Departments.
(Para 3.4.12 ibid)
4.1.3 The committee hopes that the Government of Bangladesh will accept India’ s offer of
assistance for development of Ashuganj(Bangladesh) as port of call for the mutual benefit of both
countries. (Para 3.4.13 ibid)
4.1.4 The Committee is of the view that direct bus service between Kolkata and Dhaka will
benefit people of both the countries. The Committee recommends that all further necessary
diplomatic steps may be taken for early start of the bus service. (Para 3.4.14 ibid)
4.1.5 The Committee notes the typical bureaucratic style so far as dealing with the project on tri-
lateral highway connecting Moreh to Maesot (Thailand) is concerned in the light of the fact that
Thailand and Myanmar have started work on their parts of the project with their own resources,
while India is yet to take up the work. The Committee recommends that the Government may take
immediate steps in this regard. (Para 3.4.15 ibid)

30
Action Taken
4.1.6 Recommendations and concerns raised by the Committee have been conveyed to Ministry
of External Affairs, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Ministry of Home Affairs for
Action Taken Notes. Response of these Ministries are awaited.

31
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee desires to be informed of the present status of the cell. (1.2.3)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that necessary steps be taken to
avoid cost and time over run of the construction of the road. Efforts should be made to
complete in two years. (1.4.3)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the revival plan for NHHDC be
operationalised at the earliest. (1.5.3)
The Committee is happy to note that the accumulated losses of NERAMAC will be
wiped out by 2015-16. The Committee recommends that the working capital loan
requirements as sought be by the Ministry, may be considered positively by the Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission. (1.6.5)
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to review the progress of
projects and expedite their completion under NLCPR and recommends that proactive
measures be continued to achieve satisfactory completion of all the projects. (1.8.4)
The Committee while appreciating the move of the Ministry recommends that
Independent Quality Monitors of good repute be appointed at the earliest. (1.8.7)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the utilization certificates in
respect of remaining amount of about Rs. 40 crores be obtained at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that effective monitoring of implementation of projects under
additional BTC package be ensured and the State Government of Assam may be impressed
upon to submit the two remaining DPRs at the earliest. (1.9.4)
The Committee while noting the reply impress upon the Ministry that every effort
be made on continuous basis to achieve the target set in the Ministry’s Action Plan of the
years to come. (1.10.3)
The Committee while appreciating the move of the Ministry recommends that
Independent Quality Monitors of good repute be appointed at the earliest. (1.11.4)
The Committee desires to be informed of the present status of the cell. (1.14.3)
The Committee desires that the posting of Joint Director may be done at the
earliest. (1.15.3)
The Committee also desires that action may also be taken for providing subsidized
loan for housing. (1.17.3)
The Committee observes that the Planning Commission has allocated the Ministry of
DoNER to the tune of Rs. 13621.00 crore for the Twelfth Five Year Plan against the
proposed out lay of Rs. 19445 crore. The Committee feels that the Ministry of DoNER
should again assess the actual requirement of fund for completing its ambitious plans in the
Twelfth Five Year Plan period and take up the matter with the Planning Commission for
realistic allocation with vigorous persuasion. (3.1.3)
31

32
The Committee is not happy with the sluggish progress made in regard to all the
four projects. All the projects are under pipeline since long and are going at snail pace.
North East Region cannot progress at the expected pace until and unless the projects
undertaken for development are monitored effectively ensuring timely implementation. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all the projects must have a set time
frame for their completion, and necessary steps be taken to complete the same within the
schedule. (3.2.3)
The Committee expresses its displeasure on the vague reply of the Ministry and feels
that such replies handicap the Committee to plead strongly the Ministry’s case for enhanced
allocation, as the higher allocation under NLCPR is the key to ensure economic
sustainability of the region. (3.4.3)
The Committee is of the view that permission to Government employees to visit NER
on LTC by any airlines other than Air India as in the case of visit to J&K would attract
larger number of Government employees which would generate revenue to NER. Therefore,
Ministry of DoNER should pursue the matter again with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and
Department of Expenditure. The admissible fare on the journeys performed by airlines,
other than Air India, may however be restricted to LTC fare being so charged by Air India.
(3.5.3)
The Committee while noting the detailed arrangements for Monitoring and Auditing
of scheme under North Eastern Region Livelihood Project (NERLP) EAP for ensuring timely
implementation of the scheme. The Committee is of the view that the Project
Implementation Plan (PIP) of NERLP and the Monitoring and Evaluation system should have
provided. (3.6.8)
The Committee is not happy with this vague reply. If hangars are required for Night
Landing Operation, then hangers may be provided the other airports also. Early steps may
be taken in this regard. (3.7.3)
The Committee expresses its concern over the slow progress of  Railway Projects in
the North Eastern Region. Jiribam -Tupul-Imphal has achieved only 20.73% of physical
target while 24.61% of work is yet to be completed on Rail-Cum-Road Bridge over river
Brahmaputra near Bogibeel with linked lines on North and South Bandh. While the
Dimapur-Zubza (Kohima ) New Line is at geographical survey stage,  slow progess is being
observed at Tetlia-Byrnihat New Line and Bhairabhi-Sairang New Line. Only 34.49% of
physical target has been achieved at Agartala-Sabroom New Line. Other Railway Project do
not give encouraging picture. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Railways should analyse the situation and make all out efforts to clean the hurdles and
should not leave any stone unturned for ensuring timely completion of the projects so that
early Rail Linkages are provided to the people of North Eastern Region. (3.7.6)

33
MINUTES

34

35
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 26 th February, 2013 in Committee Room
“C”, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri D. Raja
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shrimati Kanimozhi
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Adsul
9. Shri L.K. Advani
10. Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Ramen Deka
13. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
14. Shri Naveen Jindal
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
***
35
*** Relates to other matters.

36
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them the agenda of the day i.e. consideration and adoption of 165 th and 166 th Action Taken
Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations of the Committee
contained in 161
st and 162 nd Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of DoNER respectively, 167 th Report on Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 and 168 th Report on the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012. The Chairman proposed that  in the first instance, the Committee
could adopt the 165
th, 166 th and 168 th Reports of the Committee and  invited Members to give this
suggestions on these Reports. The Committee then adopted the above mentioned Reports with some
minor modifications.
3.0-6.2 * * *
6.3 The Committee authorised the Chairman to cause presentation of the Reports to
Parliament on a suitable date and also to decide the names of Members for presentation.
7.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept and also to decide the
names of Members for presentations.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.