ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
(
( aid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st July, 2015)
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st July, 2015)
L
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the 178th Report on
 Disaster Management in the Country
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
188
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS


88
C.S.(H.A.)-366
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in 178th Report on
Disaster Management in the Country
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  31 st July, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  31 st July, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv) —(viii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—68
Chapter-I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government ................................................................................... 3—18
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .. ............. 19—23
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee. ... 24—52
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies of
the Government are still awaited .......................................................... 53—68
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE........................... 69—78
6. M INUTES .......................................................................................................................... 79—86

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st September, 2014)
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
*5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
**6. Shri Vijay Goel
7. Shri Derek O’Brien
8. Shri Baishnab Parida
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13. Shri Selvakumara Chinayan S.
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
20. Shri Kaushal Kishore
21. Shri Ashwini Kumar
22. Shri Harish Meena
23. Shri Nagarajan P.
24. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
25. Shri Dilip Patel
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu
(i)
* Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 29 th January, 2015 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting
  of Shri Satish Chandra Misra, MP, RS to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 9th January 2015.
**Shri Vijay Goel, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated  w.e.f. 19th December, 2014 to fill the vacancy caused by the appointment
  of Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi as MOS w.e.f. 9 th November 2014.

SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Eighth Report on the Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in its One Hundred Seventy-Eighth Report on
Disaster Management in the Country pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The One Hundred Seventy-Eighth Report of the Committee was presented to the Rajya
Sabha and Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014. After presentation of
the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to
furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report.
The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee on 3 rd
December, 2014.
3. The Minister of Home Affairs laid the Statement on the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee on the Table of Rajya Sabha/
Lok Sabha on 4th and 3rd March, 2015, respectively, pursuant to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s
Direction dated 24th September 2004.
4. The Ministry of Home Affairs vide  its background note on the Natural Disasters caused
by devastating unseasonal rains, hailstorm and thunderstorm followed by earthquake in various
parts of the country and ongoing rescue, relief and rehabilitation operations in the affected
States meant for Committee’s meeting held on 7 th May, 2015 apprised the Committee about the
financial mechanism as recommended by the 14th Finance Commission to mitigate the damage
caused by the natural disaster. The relevant portion has been incorporated in the Report.
5. The Committee in its sitting held on 11th June, 2015 considered and adopted the draft
Report.
P. BHATTACHARYA
Chairman,
NEW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
11th June , 2015 Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Ashadha 20, 1937 (Saka)                                                Rajya Sabha

(iv)
ACRONYMS
APSDMP : Andhra Pradesh State Disaster Management Plan
AEP : Airport Emergency Plan
AWS : Automatic Weather Stations
ACA : Additional Central Assistance
A TI : Administrative Training Institute
APSDRF : Andhra Pradesh State Disaster Response Force
BSNL : Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
BRO : Border Road Organisation
BMTPC : Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council
CRF : Calamity Relief Fund
CSS : Centrally Sponsored Schemes
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force
C&AG : Controller & Auditor General
CNE : Committee on Non-Plan Expenditure
CWCS : Cyclone Warning Dissemination System
CERTI : Central Emergency Relief Training Institute
CBDM : Community Based Disaster Management
CRO : Complex & Central Reservation Office
CPMF : Central Para Military Forces
CD : Civil Defence
CPCL : Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited
CEO : Chief Executive Officer
CBDM : Capacity Building in Disaster Management
CGI : Corrugated Galvanized Iron
CLRI : Central Leather Research Institute
CPRO : Chief Public Relation Officers
CAR : Civil Aviation Requirements
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CBRN : Chemical Biological Radiological and Nuclear

(v)
DGCA : Director General Civil Aviation
DIAL : Delhi Intern ational Airports (P) Ltd.
DAEP : Delhi Airport Emergency Plan
DDMA : District Disaster Management Authority
DMI : Disaster Management Institute
DDWS : Digital Disaster Warning System
DMS : Disaster Management Support
DDMP : District Disaster Management Plan
DPR : Detailed Project Report
DM : Disaster Management
DMSAR : Disaster Management Synthetic Aperture Radar
DAC : Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
DG : Director General
DRR : Disaster Risk Reduction
EOC : Emergency Operation Centre
ETRP : Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project
ENS : Earthquake Notification System
EPZ : Emergency Planning Zone
EMS : Environmental Management System
ECC : Emergency Communication Centre
EOC : Emergency Operation Centre
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
FFC : Fourteenth Finance Commission
FFTPs : Face to Face Training Programs
FLC : Fishing Landing Centres
FLEWS : Flood Early Warning System
GOI : Government of India
GSDMA : Gujarat State Disaster Management Authority
GSI : Geological Survey of India
HR : Human Resource
HR V A : Hazard Risk and Vulnerability Analysis
HLC : High Level Committee
HSC : Hazard Safety Cell

ISRO : Indian Space Research Organization
IMG : Inter Ministerial Group
IMCT : Inter-Ministerial Central Team
IGIA : Indira Gandhi International Airport
ICAO : International Civil Aviation Organization
IIPA : Indian Institute of Public Administration
ITBP : Indo-Tibetan Border Police
IDMC : India Drought Management Centre
IDNDR : International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction
IGNOU : Indira Gandhi National Open University
IOCI : Indian Oil Corporation of India
KSDMA : Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority
KSNDMC : Karnataka State Natural Disaster Management Centre
MoEF : Ministry of Environment and Forest
MDP : Major Development Plan
MNRE : Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
MRDS : Mobile Radiation Detection System
MCP : Manual Call Point
MAPS : Madras Atomic Power Station
MFL : Madras Fertilisers Limited
MOP : Manual of Officer Procedure
MoRT&H : Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
MNREGA : Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Guarantee Act
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MCGM : Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai
NPP : Nuclear Power Plants
NEC : National Executive Committee
NIDM : National Institute of Disaster Management
NRSC : National Remote Sensing Centre
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NCMC : National Crisis Management Committee
NDMP : National Disaster Management Plan
NSSP : National School Safety Project
(vi)

NDEM : National Database for Emergency Management
NPCIL : Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited
NSS : National Service Scheme
NPDRR : National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
NCDC : National Civil Defence College
NFSC : National Fire Service College
NCCF : National Calamity Contingency Fund
NCRMP : National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
NCC : National Cadet Corps
NCRF : National Calamity Relief Fund
NoK : Next of Kin
OED : Off-site Emergency Director
OHSMS : Occupational Health and Safety Management System
OEC : Off-site Emergency Committee
OHS : Occupational Health Services
PMC : Project Management Consultant
PIU : Project Implementation Unit
PSHA : Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Map of India
SWOT : S trength Weakness Opportunity Threat
SED : Site Emergency Director
SCE : Shift Charge Engineer
SPIU : State Project Implementing Unit
SDSC : Satish Dhawan Space Centre
SEC : State Executive Committee
SCMC : State Crisis Management Committee
SFC : Standing Finance Committee
SPA : Special Plan Assistance
SFDR : State Fund for Disaster Response
SOP : Standard of Procedure
SDRF : State Disaster Response Force
TF : Task Force
TOR : Terms of Reference
(vii)

TPL : Tamil Nadu Petro-products Limited
TRP : Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme
TPQA : Third Party Quality Auditor
ULB : Urban Local Bodies
UNDP : United Nation Development Programme
UNICEF : United Nations Children’s Fund
UTs : Union Territories
USAID : United States Agency for International Development
VPN : Virtual Private Network
WBSDMA : W est Bengal State Disaster Management Authority
W ANO : World Association of Nuclear Operators
(viii)

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Seventy Eighth
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on the
Disaster Management. Report of the Committee was presented to the Parliament on 19th
February, 2015.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of
the observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Seventy Eighth Report
have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I : The observations/recommendations, which have been accepted by
the Government: Paras: 2.12.3, 2.13.4, 2.14.4, 2.23.8, 2.23.9, 2.24.6, 2.25.3,
2.26.3, 4.2.5, 4.4.3, 4.4.5, 4.6.4, 4.6.5, 4.6.6, 4.9.7, 4.10.5, 4.11.9, 4.12.3,
4.19.8, 4.21.8, 5.2.8, 6.11.7, 6.11.14, 7.10.5, 7.13.2, 7.14.2, 7.15.10, 8.7.2,
8.7.3, 8.7.4, 8.7.7 (of the One Hundred Seventy Eighth Report) Total
Recommendations-31;
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted thirty one of
its recommendations as mentioned in Chapter - I of the Report.
Chapter II  : The observations/recommendations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: - Paras: 2.15.3, 2.16.5,
2.17.4, 2.17.6, 2.18.2, 2.19.6, 6.11.6, 7.15.3, 7.15.4 and 7.15.7 ( ibid ) Total
Recommendations- 10;
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and,
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III  : The observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committe: Paras: 2.3.7, 2.4.3,
2.8.6, 2.10.4, 2.11.4, 2.22.2, 2.23.6, 3.6.2, 2.3.11, 2.7.3, 2.9.4, 2.20.7, 2.27.3,
3.6.3, 3.6.4, 4.2.4, 4.4.4, 4.8.8, 4.13.5, 4.13.7, 4.13.8, 4.13.6, 4.22.6, 4.25.3,
4.26.2, 6.6.4, 6.6.6, 6.10.4, 6.10.20, 6.11.3, 6.11.4, 6.11.9, 6.11.12, 6.11.13,
7.9.5., 7.10.4, 7.10.5, 8.7.5 and 8.7.5 ( ibid ) Total Recommendations- 39
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of thirty-nine
of its recommendations contained in Chapter-III  and desires that the Ministry
should take further necessary action and furnish convincing replies in respect
of those recommendations within a time frame of three months after
presentation of the Report.
1

2
Chapter-IV  : The observations/recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited: Para: 2.5.4, 2.6.3, 2.20.6, 2.21.3,
2.23.7, 3.6.5, 3.6.6, 4.3.6, 4.5.5, 4.5.6, 4.5.7, 4.7.6, 4.8.9, 4.8.10, 4.18.4,
4.20.4, 4.20.5, 4.21.9, 4.23.3, 4.24, 5.5.5, 5.6.6, 5.11.7, 5.11.8, 6.10.11,
6.10.14, 6.10.16, 6.11.5, 6.11.8, 6.11.10, 6.11.11, 7.9.6, 8.7.8, 8.7.9 and 8.7.10
(ibid) Total Recommendations- 35. .
In respect of the thirty-five recommendations placed in Chapter-
IV, the Committee feels that the Ministry has either furnished interim replies or
couched its response in vague terms. The Committee desires that the Ministry
should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect
of the  recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point,
as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee within
three months.
The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation
indicated above, in the succeeding Chapters.

CHAPTER- I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
1.1 The Committee desires that whenever NDMA  appoints experts/consultants, the Terms
of Reference (TOR) of consultants should be clearly indicated which inter-alia include precise
statement of objectives, tasks to be carried out, schedule for completion of tasks and final
outputs. (para 2.12.3)
Action Taken
1.1.1 The Term of Reference for engagement of Consultants have been already fixed by the
NDMA in respect of Plan Scheme Expertise for Planning Process which inter-alia includes
Precise Statement of Objectives, Outline of the tasks to be carried out, Schedule for
completion of Tasks, the support or inputs to be provided by the National Disaster Management
Authority to facilitate the Consultancy, the final outputs / deliverables that will be required from
the Consultant at the end of the consultancy period.
Recommendation
1.2 The Committee feels that NDMA should be prompt in monitoring the execution of its
programs/projects to avoid time and cost overrun. The training material so developed should
be effectively utilized for future training programmes. (para 2.13.4)
Action Taken
1.2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide  its letter dated 13th Nov. 2014 has advised NDMA
to monitor their programme / projects regularly to avoid time and cost overrun and utilize the
training material developed for such programmes for their future trainings.
Recommendation
1.3 The Committee understands that the NEC is responsible for monitoring the
implementation of NDMA guidelines. Keeping in view the observation of C&AG on the non-
implementation of National Guidelines on Drought Management as issued in 2010 by NDMA,
the Committee recommends that the responsibility of ensuring implementation of guidelines as
issued by NDMA must lie with NDMA. The Committee is of the view that NDMA should even
otherwise undertake review exercise to assess and ensure the implementation of its National
Disaster Management Guidelines. (para 2.14.4)
3

4
Action Taken
1.3.1 The guidelines of NDMA are not mandatory in nature and depend on the decisions of
the concerned State Government on whether to follow these guidelines or make their own
policies or programmes as per the availability of resources and the feasibility of their
implementation. This is consistent with the existing State laws and the framework of
governance. This is an ongoing process. However, the States would continue to be encouraged
to adopt guidelines framed by the NDMA. As stated earlier on the recommendation of the Task
Force, the Government is considering to assign the task of monitoring the implementation of
the guidelines to NDMA.
Further Observation
1.3.2 The Committee strongly recommends that the Central Government must
continue to encourage all the stakeholders to adopt National Disaster Management
Guidelines framed by the NDMA and the task of monitoring and even the review
exercise to assess implementation of the guidelines must be entrusted to NDMA without
delay.
Recommendation
1.4 Capacity building should not be limited to professionals and personnel involved in
disaster management but should also focus on building the knowledge, attitude and skills
of a community to cope with the effects of disasters. Capacity building for effective
disaster management therefore needs linked to the community and local level responders on
the one hand and also to the institutional mechanism of the State and the Nation on the
other. The Committee desires that all out efforts should be made to warn communities in
any part of the country about extreme weather conditions substantially well in advance to
enable them to save the lives and property. Satellite imagery has become an important tool
for decision makers in getting alerts for disasters and in assessing the situation pre and
post disaster. These capabilities need further refinement and intensification to enable
functionaries at the district level to take appropriate and timely decisions. Therefore, the
concerned departments viz ., Science & Technology, Earth Sciences and Space and the
organizations under them need to be strengthened to provide advance and effective
information on disasters. It is also necessary to create a national platform for sharing,
using and disseminating the data. (para 2.23.8)
Action Taken
1.4.1 Capacity Building and Capacity Enhancement is a continuous process. Government of
India with the assistance from United Nation Development Programme (UNDP), United States
Agency for International Development (USAID) and European Union had already implemented
programmes in 176 most hazard prone districts in 17 States on Disaster Risk Management.
These Programmes aimed at putting in place sustainable initiatives with the involvement of local
self-government institutions and communities. The States were assisted to draw up State,
District, Block level, and Village level disaster management Plans in conjunction with
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). Disaster Management Teams consisting of village volunteers

5
were trained in preparedness and response functions such as search and rescue, first-aid, relief
coordination, shelter management plans etc. The State and District level multi-hazard resistant
Emergency Operation Centres (EOCs) were also set up under this programme including
provision of equipment for EOCs.
1.4.2 The Government of India vide  its resolution dated 26 th February, 2013 has already
constituted a multi stakeholders National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction (NPDRR) where
all the stakeholders in the field of Disaster Management and people representing different
interests in the area share their experiences. The first session of NPDRR was held during
13-14, May 2013.
1.4.3 NDMA, NIDM and NCDC are conducting various awareness programmes for school
children and local population. They also conduct mock drills and workshops for the common
people at various locations across the country.
Recommendation
1.5 The Committee feels that the Human Resources Development has to be made
systematic. Mere training alone is not enough to develop the capacities. The trainers and
trainees have to be selected systematically and there should be provisionls for refresher
training and utilization of the trained personnel. In addition there should be an enabling
environment to facilitate the mainstreaming of DRR and tools and methodologies
developed. (para 2.23.9)
Action Taken
1.5.1 The institutes which are providing training in the field of disaster management have
been advised by Ministry of Home Affairs vide  letter dated 2 nd December, 2014 to make
modules for refreshers training courses and also to develop modules, tools and methodologies
for facilitating the mainstreaming of DRR.
Recommendation
1.6 The Committee underlines the significant role of Civil Defence in the case of
occurrence of any disaster in the Country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
all efforts should be made for strengthening and revitalization of Civil Defence in the
Country and the Government should allocate adequate fund as contingent amount for the
purpose. (para 2.24.6)
Action Taken
1.6.1 Considering the significant role of Civil Defence in the case of occurrence of any
disaster in the Country, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme at an outlay of `100 crore was
launched for Revamping of Civil Defence Setup in the Country in April, 2009 during the 11 th
Plan Period with the objective to strengthen and revitalize the Civil Defence in the Country so
as to playa significant role in Disaster Management. Under this scheme, major activities
undertaken were strengthening of the physical infrastructure of the existing State Training
Institutes, creation of new Training Institutes in some States, creation of physical

6
infrastructure in certain Multi-Hazard Districts and training of Master Trainers and CD
volunteers etc. The scheme was completed in March, 2013.
1.6.2 W ith a view to give a further boost to the Civil Defence in the Country, another
Centrally Sponsored Scheme at an outlay of ` 290 crore has been approved in the 12 th Five
Year Plan Period to Mainstream Civil Defence in Disaster Risk Reduction so as to become an
effective tool for disaster management and also to keep the Civil Defence in forefront in the
Disaster Management strategy of the Country.
Recommendation
1.7 The Committee recognizes the role of National Civil Defence College (NCDC) in
disaster relief and management training. The Committee is of the view that while deciding the
officers for undergoing training at the centre, due care must be taken that nomination for
training must come from all States/UTs. (Para 2.25.3)
Action Taken
1.7.1 A table indicating the Utilization of Training facilities of NCDC by various organizations
is as under:-
(i) State Civil Defence / Home Guards/ Fire & – 53%
Emergency Services
(ii) Public Sector Industries – 8%
(iii) Central Para Military Organisations – 14%
(iv) Defence (NCC Directorate/Army/Air – 10%
Force & Navy)
(v) Organisations (Municipal Corporations/NGO’s etc.) – 05%
1.7.2 It may be noted that the States are utilizing these training facilities by nominating
candidates in good strength.
Recommendation
1.8 In recent years, the country has witnessed many incidents of fire causing huge loss of
lives and property. Therefore the role of National Fire Service College (NFSC) becomes more
important in imparting training to personnel of State Fire Services and brigades in all spheres
of fire engineering. The Committee recommends that NFSC should get benefits of the
experience and expertise of institutions of other leading countries where the occurrence of fire
incidents take place frequently and incorporate the same in its curriculum. The Committee also
feels that there is need of a Plan for Fire Services at National and State level. The experience
of developed countries may be looked into in this regard. (para 2.26.3)
Action Taken
1.8.1 The Fire service in India is a municipal function and comes under the XII th Schedule
of the Constitution under the provisions of Article 243 W of the Constitution.

7
1.8.2 Presently, the fire services are organized by the concerned States, Union Territories
(UTs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). Over the period, the role of the fire services has
changed and now the fire services respond to all emergent situations such as terrorist attacks,
hazardous material incidents, urban rescue, collapse operations, underwater rescue etc. in
addition to the conventional role of fire-fighting. Considering the importance of Fire Services,
the Government has approved the following schemes:
(i) Up-gradation of National Fire Service College (NFSC) for `205 crore to
enhance the capacity of NFSC to meet the requirements of specialized
professional training in all aspects namely fire prevention, fire protection
and firefighting, rescue, specialized emergency response in the event of
disaster.
(ii) A Plan Scheme for Strengthening of Fire and Emergency Services in the
Country at an outlay of `200 crore was launched in 28 States during the 11 th
Plan period with the objective to strengthen the fire services in the country and
transforming it into multi hazard response force capable of acting in all types
of emergencies. The Scheme was completed in March, 2013.
(iii) With a view to modernize the Fire and Emergency Service in the Country,
another centrally sponsored scheme at an outlay of `75 crore for the financial
year 2014-15 has been approved and is under implementation.
Further Observation
1.8.3 The Committee desires that allocation of `205 crore for up-gradation of National
Fire Service College (NFSC) would ensure to meet the requirement of specialized
professional training in all aspects and the plan scheme of `200 crore meant for
strengthening of fire and emergency service in the country, which has been completed
in March, 2013 would have injected professional proficiency in combating all types of
emergencies. The Committee would further like to know the activities to be undertaken
in centrally sponsored scheme with an outlay of `75 crore for 2015.
Recommendation
1.9 The Committee observes that community based Disaster Management is the need of
the hour. (para 4.2.5)
Action Taken
1.9.1 The Government of India’s focus on Community Based Disaster Preparedness (CBDP)
approach promotes community involvement and strengthening of their capacities for
vulnerability reduction through decentralized planning. Towards effective building of community
resilience, India has put in place a legal and institutional framework for disaster management
such as enactment of The Disaster Management (DM) Act 2005, DM policy 2009, setting up
of disaster management authorities at various levels, institutions for capacity development,
financial mechanism for disaster response and earmarking of 10% of funds in all development
schemes for disaster mitigation, restoration and innovation.

8
1.9.2 Looking at the importance of creating community resilience, Government of India has
initiated some dedicated schemes related to fire services, civil defence, school safety, flood
management, earthquake and cyclone Risk mitigation and early warning systems ensuring
participation of the communities in risk reduction activities. Some of the major Social
Protection Programmes by the Government of India where mainstreaming of DRR has been
initiated are Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MNREGS), Indira
Awas Yojana (IAY), National Health Mission (NHM), Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Mid day
Meal etc. for food security, health and hygiene promotion, housing, drinking water and
education for poorer sections of the society, which not only are contributing to risk reduction
but also enhancing the inbuilt capacity of the community to minimize the risk and manage the
adverse impact of any disaster.
Recommendation
1.10 The Committee observes that mainstreaming disaster risk reduction into development
planning, must be a priority concern for the State Government. The ultimate objective of
mainstreaming disaster risk reduction should be to ensure that risks emanating from natural
hazards are factored into development policy and planning and considered as a matter of
course in the design of all development projects and programs in hazard-prone areas. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable course of Action should be chalked out for the
purpose. (para 4.4.3)
Action Taken
1.10.1 Government of India has made it mandatory that each project (plan and non-plan) in
a natural hazard prone area will have to include disaster prevention/mitigation as a pre-condition
and the project document has to address those conditions. Also, adoption of structural and
non-structural mitigation measures through various ongoing programmes such as National
School Safety Programme, National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project and Gol-UNDP DRR
project are being promoted.
Recommendation
1.11 The Committee observes that there is need for effective implementation of techno-legal
regime and redirecting the development towards creation of less vulnerable infrastructure and
improvement of response mechanism in emergency situation. The Committee feels that Gujarat
Institute of Disaster Management (GIDM) must be recognized as a Knowledge hub for training
and research in the field of Disaster Management. (para 4.4.5)
Action Taken
1.11.1 The need for effective implementation of techno-legal regime and redirecting the
development towards creation of less vulnerable infrastructure and improvement of response
mechanism in emergency situation cannot be denied. The Ministry of Home Affairs had been
pursuing with the Ministry of Urban Development for bringing in amendments in building bye-
laws, land use zoning regulations, development controlled regulations, Town and Country
Planning Acts in various States to ensure structural safety against natural hazards and to

9
strengthen the mechanisms for their compliance. As a result, most of the States have amended
the building bye-laws. During the First session of the National Platform for Disaster Risk
Reduction held in May, 2013 there was a session on Making Our City Safe which emphasized
the need for enforcing techno-legal regime.
1.11.2 All the ATIs including GIDM are functioning as training and knowledge centres.
Recommendations
1.12 The Committee is in agreement with the comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on
the suggestions of the State and desires that suitable action should be taken to complete all the
tasks. (para 4.6.4)
1.12.1 The Committee also takes note of the following suggestions of the State Government
for strengthening Disaster Management set up:-
(i) Inclusion of Climate Change into the Disaster Management Department portfolio
Convergence of Civil Defence with in Disaster Management Department and
Convergence of NCC, NSS, NYK within Disaster Management department to
create cadre of V olunteers.
(ii) Mainstreaming of Disaster management into the departmental plan of line
departments and Advocacy with International Donors/NGOs/Civil Societies to
come up with State specific Disaster Management Policies followed by
recognition to the State Inter Agency Group for collective Disaster Management
at State. (para 4.6.5)
1.12.2 The Committee recommends that suitable strategy may be chalked out to achieve the
above objectives. (para 4.6.6)
Action Taken
1.12.3 The recommendation of the Committee is about Jharkhand and has been communicated
to the State Government. The State Government has informed that it has included Climate
Change Adaptation (CCA) into the Disaster Management Department portfolio. All the disaster
plans are being updated covering CCA. Mainstreaming of the Disaster Management is being
done in various departments of the State.
Recommendation
1.13 The Committee agrees that structural and non-structural measures should be integral
part of both the overall development process and relief and recovery activities and steps should
be taken in this direction. The Ministry of Home Affairs has stated that the State has to prepare
State and District DM plans. If so, the Committee recommends that the plans may be prepared
at the earliest. (para 4.9.7)
Action Taken
1.13.1 The recommendations of the Committee is about Odisha. The State Government of
Odisha has notified its State Disaster Management Plan in May, 2014. The State Government

10
has informed that the District Disaster Management Plans have been prepared by 28 of the 30
districts in the State. The Plans of remaining 2 districts are under preparation.
Recommendation
1.14 The Committee took note of weaknesses of disaster management set up in the State
which inter-alia  includes sharing of international border of 1040 km with Pakistan, scarcity of
water (197 blocks are in dark zone), extreme weather conditions, non-availability of mitigation
funds, need to update IDRN Web Portal, and absence of concrete early warning system. The
Committee, therefore, feels that there is need to strengthen the Disaster Management set-up in
the State by appointment of requisite staff and officers in SDMA, SEC and DDMAs and setting
up of National, State and District Disaster Mitigation Fund, Preparation of Disaster
Management Plans at sub-division and village level to be, accompanied by participation and
training of CBOs and continuation of DRR & URR projects. The Hazard Risk Vulnerability
Analysis for select district which is at planning stage, should be completed at the earliest and
as suggested by the State Government cold wave and heat wave may be categorized as natural
calamity. (Para 4.10.5)
Action Taken
1.14.1 The Proposal for creation of National Disaster Mitigation Fund as per Section 47 of the
Disaster Management Act, 2005 was under consideration in consultation with NDMA. However,
since provision of 10% Flexi fund within the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) to be utilized
inter alia  for mitigation/restoration activities in the event of natural calamities in the Sectors
covered by Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) has been made, a separate Mitigation Fund
may not be required.
1.14.2 The State Government of Rajasthan has informed that IDRN Web Portal is being
regularly updated. Dopplar Radar has been established in the State. Disaster Management &
Relief Department is functioning as Secretariat of SDMA and District Collector / Addl. District
Collector etc. are looking after DDMA. State Disaster Management Plan has been prepared. DM
Plans of all districts have been prepared and being updated. DM Plans of tehsil & village level
are under preparation. DM Plans are being updated with Hazard Risk Vulnerability Analysis
(HRV A) concept. Cold wave & frost have been declared as natural calamity.
Further Recommendation
1.14.3 The Committee desires that as suggested by the State Government of Rajasthan
heat wave may also be declared as natural calamity.
Recommendation
1.15 The Committee feels that concerted efforts should be made for training and capacity
building on Disaster Risk reduction, creation of pool of community volunteers on search and
rescue, identifying 3-4 departments at the State level. and develop joint action plan for
mainstreaming DRR into the ongoing development programs and plans to strengthen last mile
connectivity for early warning system for floods and cyclone. There is further need to
establish DM Training Institute under Department of Disaster Management for continuous

11
capacity building of DM officers at all level and to raise one full-fledged battalion of State
Search and Rescue Force. The Committee also suggests that WBSDMA may be made
functional if not made so far. Disaster Management may be mainstreamed into fire and
emergency and civil defence activities. (para 4.11.9)
Action Taken
1.15.1 The recommendation is about West Bengal. As per Disaster Management Act every
State is required to set up SDMA and make it operational. The State Government from time
to time is being impressed upon to take necessary steps in this regard. As far as Central
Government is concerned, the Centre for Disaster Management, LBSNAA, Mussoorie has been
imparting modules on disaster management to IAS and other Central Services Officers at entry
and senior levels.
1.15.2 NDMA in collaboration with IGNOU has implemented a pilot project on capacity
building on disaster management of Government officials, representatives of Panchayati Raj
Institutions and Urban Local Bodies by imparting them Face to Face Training Programmes at
432 centres in hazard prone 54 districts of 11 States. Besides this, NIDM is also imparting
training to the State Government officers.
Recommendation
1.16 The Committee observes that there is urgent need for strengthening and streamlining
institutions of disaster management set up in the State of Arunachal Pradesh in view of its
terrain and topography. The Committee observes that there is lack of proper awareness/
knowledge on disaster among the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends for
suitable action in that direction. The Committee also desires that Disaster Management
components need to be incorporated in the day to day activities as well as workplace and
proper coordination and cooperation of various government departments, Administration and the
community is also required. (para 4.12.3)
Action Taken
1.16.1 The recommendation is about Arunachal Pradesh. The State Government has informed
that the Department of Disaster Management was given an Amount of `25.0 lakhs for the
year 2010-11, `30.0 lakhs for 2011-12. `40 lakhs for 2012-13 and `45 lakhs for 2013-14
under Plan Head by the State Government. These funds have been utilized at State
Level.Funds were also allocated to the Deputy Commissioners/ADC’s for organizing
Awareness campaign Training/ Sensitization programmes for all the Stakeholders in the
districts.
1.16.2 Under the 13th FC, the grants for Capacity Building for Disaster Response @ `1.00
crore per year have been utilized for the periods 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13. At State
level, the fund is used for organizing Mock Drills/ Trainings/ Workshops, Awareness
Generation and Sensitization activities. The fund is also allocated to all the DCs for
conducting various trainings/workshops / awareness generation activities at State / District/
Block Community level.

12
Recommendation
1.17 The Committee observes that the Disaster Management set up in the State can be
strengthened by enhancement of capacity building of all stakeholders and community, better
and effective functioning of all the Emergency Operation Centre by improving the
functioning of the disaster management institutional frameworks such as SDMA, DDMAs
and Disaster Management Training Institutes. The functioning of the SDMA can be made
more effective by providing experts and professionals in disaster management, well
equipped libraries and exposure visits of the stakeholders to other States where disaster
management institutions are functioning effectively. Awareness generation must be made up
to the grass root level and providing vertical and horizontal linkages in disaster management
planning. (para 4.19.8)
Action Taken
1.17.1 As per the requirement of the Disaster Management Act, it is for State Governments
to facilitate better disaster management planning, training awareness generation and improving
response mechanism.
1.17.2 The State Government of Meghalaya has informed that the Government has made
Meghalaya Disaster Management Rules, 2010. These rules have the provisions for :
composition of the State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) & District Disaster
Management Authorities (DDMAs) and State Executive Committee (SEC), meetings of the
SDMA & DDMAs, officers and staff for SDMA & DDMAs, constitution of State, District &
Other Advisory Committees, procedures to be followed by the SDMA & DDMAs and SEC etc.
Recommendation
1.18 The Committee observes that the State is striving to integrate disaster management
components into development planning and processes but it would be effective and result oriented
only if suitable guidelines are prepared for State Government/Ministries, etc. for incorporating
specific disaster management components into specific planning and develop process. The
Committee in this background recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may consider and
examine the suggestions of State Government of Tripura. (para 4.21.8)
Action Taken
1.18.1 This Recommendation is about State of Tripura. In this connection it may be mentioned
that the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), since its inception, from time to
time, has issued a total of 18 different guidelines and 11 reports on diverse issues of disaster
management, which can be availed from their website www.ndma.gov.in. The Government of
Tripura has been advised to make ‘use of these guidelines/reports for incorporating specific
disaster management components into specific planning and develop process. For any specific
assistance in this regard, they can approach NDMA or MHA in this regard.
Recommendation
1.19 The Committee notes the disaster management arrangements as well as preparedness
at Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi and Rajiv Gandhi International Airport,

13
Hyderabad. The Committee is of the view that both the airports have the most modern
system in place. The Committee desires that other airports in the country should also have
similar and modern disaster management arrangements. In all the airports, there should be
regular Disaster Management rehearsal and the arrangements should be reviewed from time
to time. (para 5.2.8)
Action Taken
1.19.1 The Airport Authority of India has already approved Disaster Management Plan for the
Airports and their Fire Directorate has prepared the guidelines and circulated to all metro I
non-metro Airports of the country for local preparation of the Disaster Management Plan with
given guidelines.
Recommendation
1.20 The Committee understands that the entire western Himalayan region, including
Uttarakhand, are prone to disasters and requires better preparedness measures including
installation of effective and timely early warning systems for predicting various hydro-
meteorological disasters well in advance with high degree of spatial accuracy. Moreover, a
robust and fool-proof safe disaster dissemination system is required to be accompanied by
a long term full-fledged preparedness and mitigation programme. The Committee
understands that financial requirement involving all these projects is beyond the capability
and competence of the State Government and Government of India has to take initiative in
this regard. (para 6.11.7)
Action Taken
1.20.1 Indian Meteorological Department has proposed an Integrated Himalayan Meteorology
Programme to provide effective and user specific mountain meteorological services in holistic
manner in following two parts:-
(i) Integrated Himalayan Meteorology Programme for Western & Central Himalayas
covering four States namely J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Sub
Himalayan West Bengal has been approved by the Government in August, 2014
at an estimated cost of `117.17 crores to be implemented in the l2th Five Year
Plan (2014-17).
(ii) Similarly, another proposal “Integrated Meteorological Services for North
Eastern Region”, covering States namely Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya,
Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and Sikkim has been submitted to the
M/o Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) for in principle approval
and funding. IMD has also made a presentation to the M/o DoNER in Oct.
2013. Approval is awaited from the M/o DoNER for further processing of the
proposal.
1.20.2 Once this programme is implemented, it could be possible to make precise prediction
about Hydro Meteorological Disasters well in advance.

14
Recommendation
1.21 The Committee also notes that some sections in the media attributed this disaster as a
manmade disaster due to extensive human intervention in the fragile Himalayan eco-system. While
it is obvious that calamity of this level could not have been averted totally, but environmentalists
kept saying that the exploitation has been very large with the neglect of environmental concerns
which have been expressed by them over a period of time. The Committee feels that development
and environment should go hand in hand. (para 6.11.14)
Action Taken
1.21.1 In this connection, it is worth mentioning that as per the Ministry of Finance
guidelines, a self-certification is required from all the project authorities to confirm before the
approval of the scheme that all the Disaster Management concerns including environmental
issues have been adequately addressed. However, MHA on 3rd December, 2014 has advised all
the States and Central Ministries / Departments that while preparing / approving / clearing any
developmental projects, the recommendation of the Committee that development and
environment should go hand in hand may be kept in mind.
Recommendation
1.22 The Committee desires that Planning Commission must respond quickly to the needs of
the Central Ministries/Departments/States in matters relating to the plan for meeting situations
arising out of natural disasters, by enabling adjustment of schemes to meet the requirements
as far as possible. A mechanism should be evolved to take expeditious decisions on proposals
which involve transfer of funds from one scheme to another, or any other change which
involves departure from the existing schemes/pattern of assistance, new schemes and relaxation
in procedures, etc. in the case of natural disasters. (para 7.10.5)
Action Taken
1.22.1 Recently, Government has introduced flexi funds within the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme (CSS) to undertake mitigation / restoration activities in case of natural calamities. With
this mechanism for situations arising out of natural disasters, an enabling provision for
adjustment of the schemes to meet the requirements has been made.
Recommendation
1.23 The Committee feels that capacity building is an important aspect for Disaster
Management. State Government should take necessary steps in taking up the activities. Under
utilisation of funds should not be resorted to. Action plans as requiredfor utilizingfunds may
be prepared. (para 7.13.2)
Action Taken
1.23.1 The Grant in Aid for Capacity Building is given to the State as per recommendation of
13th FC. The issue of under-utilisation of the fund was flagged with the States and they were
advised to use it and give the utilization certificates for release of next instalments.

15
Recommendation
1.24 The Committee understands that strengthening of fire and emergency services is a
significant scheme. The Committee however, observes that Fire Services are in an archaic
condition in the country. There should be total modernization and overhauling of the Fire
Services. If more funds are required for this purpose, it may be considered. The Committee
recommends that all municipal corporations should put in place fire hazard response and
mitigation plan. (para 7.14.2)
Action Taken
1.24.1 The Fire service in India is a municipal function and comes under the Twelfth Schedule
of the Constitution under the provisions of Article 243 W of the Constitution.
1.24.2 Presently, the fire services are organized by the concerned States, Union Territories
(UTs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). Over the period, the role of the fire services has
changed and now the fire services respond to all emergent situations such as terrorist attacks,
hazardous material incidents, urban rescue, collapse operations, underwater rescue etc., in
addition to the conventional role of fire-fighting. Considering the importance of Fire Services,
the Government has approved the following schemes:-
(i) Up-gradation of National Fire Service College (NFSC) for `205 crore to
enhance the capacity of NFSC to meet the requirements of specialized
professional training in all aspects namely fire prevention, fire protection
and firefighting, rescue, specialized emergency response in the event of
disaster.
(ii) A Plan Scheme for Strengthening of Fire and Emergency Services in the
Country at an outlay of ` 200 crore was launched in 28 States during the 11
th
Plan period with the objective to strengthen the fire services in the country and
transforming it into multi hazard response force capable of acting in all types
of emergencies. The Scheme was completed in March, 2013.
(iii) With a view to modernize the Fire and Emergency Service in the Country,
another centrally sponsored scheme at an outlay of `75 crore for the financial
year 2014-15 has been approved and is under implementation.
Recommendation
1.25 The Committee is in agreement with the observation of the Task Force regarding the
nomenclature of the response fund and recommends that necessary action be taken in this
direction. (Para 7.15.10)
Action Taken
1.25.1 Since the NDRF is generally used for ‘Response Force’ and people are more
familiar with this, it has been decided to use the word NDR Fund for National Disaster
Response Fund.

16
Further Observation
1.25.2 The Committee agrees with the decision of the Government.
Recommendation
1.26 The Committee takes note of the policy/ guidelines and rules governing the disaster
management in the country. The Committee is of the opinion that policy/ guidelines and rules
will remain on the paper unless implemented on the ground level. The Committee feels that the
follow up action expected from the nodal agencies in preparing plans to address these aspects
of strengthening preparedness, prevention, mitigation, emergency response and recovery efforts
in these critical sectors remains to be initiated. The National Disaster Management Guidelines
on the management of various disasters should be followed by all stakeholder groups to ensure
that the paradigm shift envisaged in the National Policy for Disaster Management does not
remain an aspiration. (para 8.7.2)
Action Taken
1.26.1 The guidelines of NDMA are not mandatory in nature and depend on the decisions of
the concerned State Government on whether to follow these guidelines or make their own
policies or programmes as per the availability of resources and the feasibility of its
implementation. This is consistent with the existing State laws and the framework of
governance. This is an ongoing process. NDMA, however, has held discussions with Central
Government /Organizations and States for, inter-alia , compliance with Disaster Management
Guidelines released by NDMA.
1.26.2 The Ministries/Departments/Organizations reviewed by the Authority are:-
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairy
& Fishery, Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation,
Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Housing & Poverty Alleviation, Ministry of
Mines, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Chemical & Petrochemicals,
` Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of Environment & Forests, Department
of Pharmaceuticals, Department of Agricultural Research & Education, Department of
Fertilizers, Ministry of Panchayti Raj, Department of Land, Department of Rural
Development, Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Telecom, Ministry of Earth
Sciences., Department of Space, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Department of Atomic Energy.
1.26.3 Discussion with the State Governments of Nagaland, West Bengal, Manipur, Mizoram
and Himachal Pradesh have been held. Discussions with other States have been planned in the
near future.
Recommendation
1.27 The Committee firmly believes that there should be monitoring mechanism to ensure
implementation of the guidelines and rules. The Committee, in this connection, recommends
that the Ministry of Home Af fairs/NDMA should act as nodal agencies. The Ministry of Home
Affairs should interact with the concerned Ministries related to DM activities, which either

17
have come out with their own policy, plans and regulatory mechanisms for management of
disasters pertaining to their domain or are at different stages of its formulations. The
Committee hopes that the concerned Ministries, States and the stakeholders would also work
in tandem with NDMA and Union Ministry of Home Affairs and come up with effective and
implementable plans at their level. (para 8.7.3)
Action Plan
1.27.1 As per Disaster Management Act, the National Executive Committee (NEC) is a body
to act as the coordinating and monitoring body for Disaster Management and also to monitor
the implementation of guidelines laid down by the National Authority for integrating the
measures for prevention of disaster and mitigation by the Ministries or Departments in their
development plans and projects. The NEC review the status of preparedness in its meeting
chaired by Home Secretary. So far 20 meeting of NEC have been held.
1.27.2 The Disaster Management Act envisages that each Central Ministry / Department will
work in a cohesive manner to implement the various provisions of the Act for effective
management of disasters and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Government
once again resolves to follow holistic approach for disaster management.
Further Observation
1.27.3 The Committee notes the submission of the Government. It however feels that
a lot is still required to make the country more disaster resilient with a motto of having
the approach towards ‘Zero loss of life and minimum loss of property’ along with fast
pace of rehabilitation and compensation. The Committee in this context appreciate the
aim of the Odisha Government which has adopted the principle of Zero loss of life.
Recommendation
1.28 The Committee underscores the fact that since the DM Act provides provision for
preparation of Disaster Management plan at National, State and District level, integrated and
coordinated approach would be the first and foremost requirement. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that every effort should be made to ensure that different types and
levels of disaster management plans are consistent with each other. The Committee also
recommends that plans at the National and State level must be prepared on realistic and
relevant grounds by taking into account various features and needs of smaller geographical
units. (para 8.7.4)
Action Taken
1.28.1 The National Plan on the Disaster Management has been prepared by the NEC in
consultation with various Ministries / Departments and submitted to NDMA for their approval.
On the basis of this plan, each Ministries / Department will be preparing their sectoral plan
which ensures an integrated and coordinated approach. State Plan and District Plan will also
be prepared on the same line once the National Plan is approved. Presently, SDMAs prepare

18
their State Disaster Management Plans on the basis of NDMA’s guidelines issued in 2007 on
preparation of State Disaster Management Plans which also contain model outlines for the State
Plans.
Recommendation
1.29 The Committee views that the role and functions of the NDMA should cover policies,
plans, guidelines and regulations relating to prevention, mitigation and preparedness. It should
coordinate with the agencies concerned and ensure that all activities relating to prevention,
mitigation and preparedness envisaged by the Act are implemented on the ground level.
(para 8.7.7)
Action Taken
1.29.1 This is one of the recommendations of the Task Force which is under consideration
of the Government.

19
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation
2.1 The Committee is of the view that provision of HLC may be made in the DM Act
because HLC plays a pivotal role in determining the assistance to be given to the States from
NDRF keeping into account the recommendation of Inter Ministerial Group (IMG). Since, the
recommendation of Inter-ministerial Central Team (IMCT) is taken into account in deciding the
quantum of assistance to be given to the State and at present NDMA has no representative in
IMCT, it would be appropriate that there is a provision for nominating a representative of
NDMA as a member of IMCT in the Act to have a linkage in the overall system. The Ministry
may look into this. (para 2.15.3)
Action Taken
2.1.1 The Guidelines for constitution and administration of National Disaster Response Fund
(NDRF) includes (i) visit of IMCT to the State, (ii) examination of the IMCT report by the
sub-committee of NEC and (iii) approval of the High Level Committee (HLC) based on
recommendation of the sub-Committee of NEC in confirmation with the norms approved by the
Government of India, IMCT report and extant norms. The representatives of IMCT are drawn
from the concerned administrative Ministries, which are directly concerned with disaster
affected sectors. As NDMA’s  basic objective is to bring out disaster related policies/guidelines
etc., therefore, it is not considered useful to include a representative of NDMA in the IMCT.
Moreover, the Vice Chairman of NDMA is a member of the HLC (the approving body for
NDRF assistance) as a special invitee and any views/comments of NDMA are always
considered by the HLC.
2.1.2 Moreover, Section 9 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 empowers the NEC to
constitute one or more sub-committees for efficient discharge of its functions. Recently, NEC
has constituted two sub-committees replacing the IMG. One of the sub-committees is headed
by Home Secretary to consider the IMCT reports pertaining to cyclone, fire, floods,
earthquake, landslide, avalanche, tsunami and cloud burst on behalf of the NEC. The second
sub-committee is headed by Secretary, Agriculture & Cooperation to consider the IMCT reports
pertaining to drought, hailstorm, pest attack and cold wave & frost on behalf of the NEC. As
IMG has been already replaced by these two sub-committees of NEC, there is no need to
incorporate IMG in the Act. The Secretary (NDMA) is special invitee of the NEC.
2.1.3 In view of above, the HLC need not be incorporated in the DM Act, 2005.
19

20
Recommendation
2.2 The Committee takes note of the observation of NDMA that National Crisis
Management Committee (NCMC) chaired by the Cabinet Secretary has multifarious tasks in
addition to natural disasters and entrusting all the functions of NEC to NCMC would detract
NCMC. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should have
brainstorming session involving all the stakeholders before taking any final decision in the
matter. (para 2.16.5)
Action Taken
2.2.1 The NCMC which is chaired by Cabinet Secretary, has heavy responsibilities and its
functional jurisdiction encompasses such other emergencies including those requiring close
involvement of the security forces and or intelligence agencies such as terrorism, law and
order situations, serial bomb blasts, high-jacking, air accident, CBRN weapon systems, mine
disasters, port and harbor emergencies, forest fires, oil field fires, oil spills etc. Therefore, it
is not considered necessary to bring NCMC under the preview of DM Act. The NCMC may
continue to take charge of response operations by giving overall directions, leaving it to the
NEC to carryout day to day response activities.
Recommendation
2.3 The Committee is of the view that SDMAs need to be strengthened so that assigned
functions could be effectively performed. The Committee, however, feels that since the
recommendation of the Task Force has far reaching implications, final decision in the matter
may be taken by Government in consultation with State Governments. (para 2.17.4)
2.3.1 Committee is of the view that in case the Government takes the decision to assign the
functions of SEC to SDMA, all efforts should be taken to restructure SDMA as per the
recommendation of the Task Force. The NDMA management agreed to the recommendations
of the Task Force. However, the final decision in the matter may be taken only after consulting
the State Governments. (para 2.17.6)
Action Taken
2.3.2 The Task Force has made its recommendations after having discussions at the regional,
local and national levels including with the State Governments. Moreover, the recommendations
of the Task Force have been forwarded to all stakeholders including the State Governments for
their views and suggestions. Only a few States have responded. Suggestions/responses of the
States will be kept in mind while taking final decision.
Recommendation
2.4 The Committee observes that the recommendation of the Task Force for discontinuing
SEC and assigning its task to State Crisis Management Committee (SCMC) and SDMA are on
similar line as adopted for NCMC, NEC and NDMA. The Committee recommends that it will
be appropriate if the proposal to assign the functions of SEC to SCMC is deliberated threadbare
with the State Governments and necessary amendments are accordingly made in the Act
thereafter. (para 2.18.2)

21
Action Taken
2.4.1 As stated in response to para 2.17.6, it is not proposed to make NCMC as a statutory
organization and it may continue to take charge of response operations by giving overall
directions, leaving it to the NEC to carryout day to day response activities. Similarly, the
existing arrangement may continue in the States.
Recommendation
2.5 The Committee is of the considered view that the Government must give due
consideration to strengthen the Disaster Management set up at the district level so that the
district authority must be in a position to act as the first and foremost effective responder
of the disaster in its locality. There should be mechanism of sustained and continuous work
especially for preparedness and mitigation. The Committee also views that Disaster Risk
Reduction Programme must be implemented at the grass root level keeping in view that the
District Collector administers MNREGA and other land related programs. District Disaster
Management Authorities (DDMAs) should try to fill up vacancies on a regular basis. The
Committee agrees that there is a need for organizational structure at the district level to
address disaster management in a holistic manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Government should not delay in considering the observation of the Task Force.
However, before arriving at final decision, the Government should consult all the
stakeholders. ( para 2.19.6)
Action Taken
2.5.1 As stated in response to para 2.17.4 & 2.17.6, the Task Force has made its
recommendations after having discussion at regional, local and national levels including the
State Governments. Moreover, the recommendations of the Task Force have been forwarded
to all stakeholders including the State Governments for their views and suggestions. In view
of this, consulting the all stakeholders again would further delay the implementation of the Task
Force report. However, while taking any final decision on the strengthening of SDMAs and
their functions. The suggestions/response of the State Governments would also be kept in
mind.
Recommendation
2.6 The Committee would like to pin-point the case of coastal region of Andhra Pradesh
where large number of cyclones has struck for the last few years and if there is a warning,
the entire district administration one day before convert itself into disaster management unit.
All concerned Departments remain ready with plans, evacuations and relief operations which
immediately swing into action. The underline motive of the Committee is to highlight the
necessity of keeping disaster preparedness all the time in operational mode to combat any
eventualities by gaining the benefits of experience of other States. The Committee hopes that
one State should share the information with the other States on all critical issues pertaining to
Disaster Management which would go a long way in strengthening the Disaster Management
set up in the State. (para 6.11.6)

22
Action Taken
2.6.1 Andhra Pradesh Government has been advised to share their experiences about
combating eventualities with all the other States on all critical issues pertaining to Disaster
Management.
Recommendation
2.7 The Committee observes that Government is making arrangements for laying cables
which is all the more necessary due to variety of reasons. The recent cyclone ‘Helen’ affected
Andhra Pradesh adversely. Some towns and villages around Amalapuram had no electricity for
four days and there was no drinking water because of lack of power supply. That being the
case, the Committee believes that scheme for providing underground cabling would be of
immense utility in the long run in the affected areas, particularly, the coastal districts of both
Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the project should be
taken on priority and completed as per schedule. Other cyclone prone States should also be
covered under the project. (para 7.15.3)
Action Taken
2.7.1 There is no doubt that the underground cabling would be of immense utility in the long
run in the affected areas. The Ministry of Power has expressed their concern about possibility
of reactive power due to underground cabling. However, State Government of Odisha has
sought an external assistance of US $ 70 Million for rehabilitating the damaged power sector
infrastructure in the State.
Recommendation
2.8 The Committee was given to understand that the post disaster relief and reconstruction
is resource intensive and the Government is making efforts to ensure availability of established
financial mechanisms both at the State and Central level to address the resource requirements.
The present scheme of State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and National Disaster Response
Fund (NDRF) are based on the recommendations of 13th Finance Commission operated from
1st April 2010 to 31st March 2015 must be reviewed annually. For disasters needing Central
support over and above the SDRF, the processing of the request of the State Governments for
support from the Central Government must be taken into account and processed by Ministry
of Home Affairs timely while the budgetary provisions for the relief funds must be provided
by the Ministry of Finance as per the actual assessment. The Committee recommends that
adequate funds should be allocated for strengthening of Disaster Management Institutions,
Capacity Development of stakeholder’s, prevention and mitigation and the response mechanism.
The Committee also recommends that efforts must be made in the right earnest to ensure that
the mitigation and prevention of disaster are given adequate importance by utilizing these funds
so that the impact of the disasters is minimized. (para 7.15.4)
Action Taken
2.8.1 The SDRF and NDRF are based on the award of the Thirteenth Finance Commission
which was set up under Article 281 of the Constitution. The award is for the period of 5 years, as

23
such it is difficult to change it. Recently, Government has introduced flexi funds within the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) to undertake mitigation/restoration activities in case of
natural calamities.
Recommendation
2.9 The Committee feels that the National Disaster Mitigation Fund should be created
without any delay. The Committee is of the opinion that the source of Fund and its linkage
with the respective State Fund should be specified in the Act or Rules explicitly. The
Committee further recommends that the guidelines with respect to utilization of National and
State Mitigation Funds and identification of projects therein be prepared by the NDMA in
consultation with the Planning Commission. The Committee is, however, in agreement with the
observation of Task Force that as regards district level Funds, the State Government should
decide whether to have response and mitigation funds or to put in place a separate mechanism
for timely access to financial resources by district authorities. (para 7.15.7)
Action Taken
2.9.1 The Proposal for creation of National Disaster Mitigation Fund as per Section 47 of the
National Disaster Management Authority Act, 2005 was under consideration in consultation with
NDMA. However, since provision of 10% Flexi fund within the Centrally Sponsored Schemes
(CSS) to be utilized inter alia  for mitigation/restoration activities in the event of natural
calamities in the Sectors covered by Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) has been made, a
separate Mitigation Fund may not be required.

CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTEDTHE COMMITTEE
Recommendation
3.1 The Committee underlines the pivotal role of NDMA in laying down policies of disaster
management and finalization of national plan besides coordinating the enforcement and
implementation of the policy and plan for disaster management. The Committee also takes into
consideration the observation of Task Force for enlarging the role of NDMA and observes that
the NDMA should be provided with suitable logistic and HR support to carry out its functions
in case the Government decides in favour of enlarging its role and responsibility. The
Committee understands that finalization of National Disaster Management Plan may take some
time. But there should not be undue delay in finalizing the Plan and steps may be taken for
its early f inalisation. (para 2.3.7)
Action Taken
3.1.1 NDMA has been provided regular staff consisting of Secretary, Advisors/Joint
Secretaries, Joint Advisors/Directors and Deputy Secretaries, Under Secretaries, Senior
Research Officers, Section Officers, Assistants, Personal Private Secretaries, Personal
Assistants, etc. Besides this, NDMA is also having Domain Specialists and Consultants. As
such there is no shortage of staff. As far as National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) is
concerned, it is informed that National Plan has been prepared by National Executive
Committee (NEC) and forwarded to NDMA for its approval. However, approval of NDMA is
still awaited.
Further Observation
3.1.2 The Committee does not buy the contention of the Government keeping in mind
vacancies of the Vice Chairman and other members of the Authority. The Constitution
of the Authority is still pending with vacancies for more than eight months. The
Committee feels that the country can ill afford indecisiveness at the apex level in the
matter of disaster management. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
the posts of the vice chairman and other members should be filled without further
delay. The Committee also apprehends that the approval of the National Disaster
Management Plan may get stuck in the newly constituted NDMA as the new incumbents
must be needing time to go through and understand it. The Committee, therefore,
directs that the National Disaster Management Plan, as prepared by NEC (National
Executive Council) and which is under consideration of NDMA be cleared at the earliest
so that the same is implemented throughout the country for better disaster management
without much delay.
24

25
Recommendation
3.2 In view of the Committee, the National Disaster Management Guidelines are guiding
documents which provide compiled information/action points to the Ministries/Departments of
the Government of India, State Governments/Union Territories and other stakeholders and it
would just be voluminous paper work, if there is no feedback on putting those guidelines/
action points in practice. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a mechanism should be
placed in the NDMA to address this shortcoming and to encourage all stakeholders to strive
for effective implementation of those guidelines as per their availability of resources and the
feasibility of implementation etc. (para 2.4.3)
Action Taken
3.2.1 The guidelines of NDMA are not mandatory in nature and depend on the decisions of
the concerned State Government on whether to follow these guidelines or make their own
policies or programmes as per the availability of resources and the feasibility of its
implementation. This is consistent with the existing State laws and the framework of
governance. This is an ongoing process. NDMA, however, has held discussions with Central
Government/Organizations and States for, inter-alia,  compliance with Disaster Management
Guidelines released by NDMA.
3.2.2 The Ministries/Departments/Organizations reviewed by the Authority are:-
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairy &
fishery, Ministry of Water Resources and Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation,
Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Housing & Poverty Alleviation, Ministry of
Mines and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Chemical &
Petrochemicals, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of Environment &
Forests and Dep artment of Pharmaceuticals, Department of Agricultural Research &
Education, Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Panchayti Raj, Department of Land
Resources, Department of Rural Development, Ministry of Rural Development,
Department of Telecom, Ministry of Earth Science, Department of Space, Ministry of
Civil Aviation, Department of Atomic Energy.
3.2.3 Discussion with the State Governments of Nagaland, West Bengal, Manipur, Mizoram and
Himachal Pradesh have been held. Discussions with other States have been planned in near future.
Further Observation
3.2.4 The Committee finds the views offered by the Government somewhat
confusing as in case guidelines of NDMA are not mandatory then there is no point
in having meetings with the State Governments for its compliance. In view of the
Committee the guidelines of a authority of apex level should have some sanctity
befitting its status. The Committee also understands that National Disaster
Management Guidelines are to be implemented subject to availability of resources in
the hands of State Governments/Union Territories and other stakeholders and the
feasibility of implementation etc. However, keeping in view the guiding documents
for preparedness, preventive and mitigation activities against any disaster, the

26
Central Government must make all out efforts to persuade all stakeholders for
effective implementation of those guidelines.
Recommendation
3.3 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the Government’s State
of affairs pertaining to approval and execution of projects entrusted to NDMA. Out of ten
projects which were identified during Eleventh five year plan, four are yet to be approved and
one project i.e.  National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project has been approved as late as on
5th April, 2013. Out of the remaining five projects which were sanctioned during Eleventh Five
Years Plan, only one project viz. Micro-zonation of major cities has been completed and the
remaining four are still under various stages of implementation. This is sorry status of working
of NDMA which has been mandated to perform functions relating to disaster management. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the administrative ministry must monitor the
functioning of NDMA. (para 2.8.6)
Action Taken
3.3.1 During Eleventh Plan, the Detailed Project Report (DPR) of the following schemes were
proposed by NDMA:-
(i) National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) Phase-I.
(ii) National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project (NERMP).
(iii) National Landslide Risk Mitigation Project (NLRMP).
(iv) National Flood Risk Mitigation Project (NFRMP).
(v) National School Safety Project (NSSP).
(vi) National Disaster Communication Network (NDCN).
3.3.2 After due deliberations in the Ministry and discussions with NDMA officers, NCRMP-
phase-I (with World Bank Assistance) and School Safety Programme were approved by the
Government. The NERMP was approved in Twelfth Plan based on revised proposal submitted
by NDMA. In addition, NDMA under its delegated powers has sanctioned another two projects
namely National Disaster Management Service (NDMS) and Decision Support System (DSS)
for incident response for handling nuclear off site emergency schemes, during the Eleventh
Five Year Plan. NDMA has also informed that four studies such as Brahmaputra River Erosion
Study, Preparation of Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Map of India (PASA), Psychological support
of for survivors and families of victims of Mangalore air crash, Vulnerability Building Types
which were started during Eleventh Five Year Plan have been completed.
3.3.3 Remaining proposals, on NDCN, NLRMP and NFRMP have not been considered fit for
approval.
Further Recommendation
3.3.4 The Committee notes the evasive reply and is dismayed to observe that instead
of being specific on the issue of approval and implementation as well as completion of

27
the projects, the Government is trying to beat around the bushes. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation and desires that the performance of NDMA should be
monitored at the apex level.
Recommendation
3.4 The Committee understands that the mandate of NDMA is not only confined to
requesting the stakeholders i.e.  the concerned Ministries/Departments and the State
Governments to incorporate into its programmes the mainstreaming of Disaster Risk Reduction
(DRR) Programme but also to ensure the implementation of DRR of the concerned projects of
stakeholders. NDMA should review the projects undertaken by stakeholders to ensure that DRR
is inbuilt in all schemes of Government of India and State Governments. NDMA should
perform the task assigned to it by the Cabinet, i.e.  to review all major national projects to
include’ structural requirements for disaster reduction. (para 2.10.4)
Action Taken
3.4.1 The Government of India has adopted mitigation and prevention as essential
components of their development strategy. The mainstreaming of DRR into the Developmental
Plans is an important mandate of the DM Act,2005. The importance of in-built disaster
management into ongoing and new development plans has been envisaged in the National
Policy. It has been made mandatory that each project (plan and non-plan) in a natural hazard
prone area will have to include disaster prevention/mitigation as a pre-condition and that the
project document has to address those conditions.
3.4.2 In support of the DRR mainstreaming process, the relevant Ministries/Departments viz.
Urban Development, Rural Development, Agriculture & Cooperation, Human Resources
Development, Health & Family Welfare, Drinking Water & Sanitation and Environment & Forest
have been asked to take initiatives for DRR mainstreaming in the development plans.
3.4.3 The Ministry of Finance has issued guidelines for 10 % Flexi-funds within the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes (CSS) to be utilized for innovation, disaster mitigation and restoration
activities in the event of natural calamities in the sectors covered by the CSS. The States/UTs
have been requested to take necessary steps to make effective use of flexi-funds for disaster
mitigation and for restoration in different sectors.
Further Observation
3.4.4 The Committee is of the considered view that effective mainstreaming of DRR
into the development strategy/plan would lead to achievement of target of National
Policy and better disaster management. The Committee during its visit to
Visakhapatnam in connection with on the spot study of relief and rehabilitation schemes
in the aftermath of Hudhud cyclone, came to know about the absence of this provision
in the Developmental projects and it seemed that the State Government was unaware of
such provisions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that monitoring mechanism
may be evolved to ensure mandatory and strict compliance of guidelines of the Ministry
of Finance regarding actual utilization of 10% flexi funds for Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSS).

28
Recommendation
3.5 The Committee in this context recommends that NDMA should not procrastinate
infilling up of vacant posts. The number of vacant posts should not be allowed to increase
beyond a point. There should be a constant effort to fill up vacancies. (para 2.11.4)
Action Taken
3.5.1 At present, all the critical posts except those of Financial Advisor and Advisor
Operation are filled up. Action has been taken to fill these 2 posts and it is expected that these
posts will be filled very soon. In brief, out of 123 sanctioned posts 59 are vacant. A large
number of vacant posts are coterminous in nature and have been kept vacant due to, e.g.,
resignation of Vice Chairman and Members. As soon as the Members are appointed, these
vacancies will be filled.
Further Observation
3.5.2 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that the critical posts in
NDMA like those of Financial Advisor and Advisor Operation are vacant and Vice
Chairman and some Members are yet to be appointed, therefore, the Committee
wonders as to how the system in NDMA is functioning though it has so much vital role
to play and responsibility to discharge. The Committee therefore recommends that all
the vacant posts should be filled up without further delay.
Recommendation
3.6 The Committee, keeping in view the paramount role of State Disaster Response Force
(SDRF) in disaster management, recommends that due consideration must be paid to evolve
mechanism to strengthen SDRF. All the States/UTs that have not yet set up SDRFs may be
insisted upon the need to set up the same at the earliest. (para 2.22.2)
Action Taken
3.6.1 As per para 3.4.5 of National Policy on Disaster Management, every State/UT is
supposed to raise SDRF from its own resources. Though National Disaster Response Force
(NDRF) has ten battalions which are placed in various places of the country, there may be
some time lag between the occurrence of the disaster and the time of arrival of NDRF
personnel at the site. It could be reduced considerably, if the State(s)/UT(s) have their own
contingents of SDRF stationed at the important locations. Further, it has been observed that
the number of disasters are increasing over the last decade and raising of a specialist disaster
response force in the State can effectively contain damages during the disaster.
3.6.2 From the past experiences including the recent very severe cyclone ‘Phailin’, which
had struck Odisha in the month of October 2013, it has been experienced that existence of
SDRF in a State immensely helps the State Government in dealing with the pre and post
disaster situations.
3.6.3 If the State Governments are able to earmark or convert State Armed Police Forces
(including India Reserve Battalions) into SDRF, the training requirement of SDRF can be

29
fulfilled by National Disaster Response Force and Central Armed Paramilitary Forces training
institutes.
3.6.4 Therefore, State Disaster Response Forces need to be created, equipped and trained by
the State Governments, so that they can play an effective role during disaster response. NDRF
can help in the training of the personnel. The Ministry of Home Affairs is pursuing with the
State Governments and UTs to raise their own Disaster Response Forces vide letter dated 30th
December 2013. The issue was also discussed during the Relief Commissioner’s Conference
held on 27th May 2014 and those States and UTs which have so far not done so were
impressed upon to raise their own SDRFs.
Further Observation
3.6.5 The Committee desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs may highlight and
share with other States the effective combating of the very severe cyclone ‘Phailin’,
which had struck Odisha in the month of October 2013, to make them understand
that existence of SDRF in a State would immensely help the State Government in
dealing with the pre and post disaster situations. The Committee in this regard
would also like to observe that the State Government of Andhra Pradesh has raised
only one battalion of SDRF, which is quite not enough in view of the frequency of
cyclones being faced by the State annually. The Committee therefore emphasizes that
the MHA should persuade every State/UT Government to raise sufficient SDRF from
its own resources. The Committee underlines that State Disaster Response Forces
need to be created, equipped and trained by the State Governments, so that they can
play an effective role during disaster response. The Committee further recommends
that NDRF and CAPF must be entrusted with the responsibility of extending training
to the SDRF personnel.
Recommendation
3.7 The Committee is of the view that National Institute of Disaster Management
(NIDM) should act as centre for excellence so far as the capacity building for effective
disaster management is concerned The Committee is in agreement with the observation of
the Task Force that NIDM should function as an autonomous body in respect of its
entrusted activities and human resource practice and not as a subordinate organisation of
either NDMA or MHA. National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) can, however,
have linkages with NIDM for capacity building and other activities. Action may be taken
in this direction. (para 2 .23.6)
Action Taken
3.7.1 This is one of the recommendations of Task Force to make NIDM as an
autonomous body. NIDM is already a grantee institution and functioning like an
autonomous body except that it has to function under the broad policies of NDMA. This
recommendation of the Committee is already under consideration as the Task Force has
also recommended the same.

30
Further Observation
3.7.2 The Committee, while taking note of the fact that National Institute of Disaster
Management (NIDM) is functioning as an autonomous body under the broad policies of
NDMA, reiterates its recommendation that NIDM must be duti-bound to act as centre
for excellence so far as the capacity building for effective disaster management is
concerned. The Government may also consider making NIDM institute of national
importance.
Recommendation
3.8 The Committee understands that disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness are
the most important aspects that are to be given attention in achieving the goals and objectives
of vulnerability reduction. The Committee strongly believes that mainstreaming of Disaster Risk
Reduction in the Development Strategy would go a long way in disaster management in the
country and overall economic growth. (para 3.6.2)
Action Taken
3.8.1 Government of India has adopted mitigation and prevention as essential components of
their development strategy. Mainstreaming DRR into the Developmental Plans is an important
mandate of the DM Act, 2005. Importance of in-built disaster management into ongoing and
new development plans has been envisaged in the National Policy. It has been made mandatory
that each project (plan and non-plan) in a natural hazard prone area will have to include
disaster prevention/mitigation as a pre-condition and the project document has to address those
conditions.
3.8.2 The Ministry of Finance has issued guidelines for 10% Flexi-funds within the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes (CSS) to be utilized for innovation, disaster mitigation and restoration
activities in the event of natural calamities in the sectors covered by the CSS. The States/UTs
have been requested to take necessary steps to make effective use of flexi-funds for disaster
mitigation and for restoration in different sectors.
Further Observation
3.8.3 The Committee notes the reply but feels that the laudable initiative has not
gathered momentum and there is. lack of response or knowledge on the part of State
Governments. The Committee desires that provisions of 10% flexi-funds should be made
popular among the State Governments. The Ministry may discuss with all the States.
Recommendation
3.9 The Committee agrees with the recommendation of Task Force that the selection of
members of NDMA should be through an open and transparent process and for that purpose
a Search and Selection Committee may be constituted. The Committee is also in agreement
with the views of the Task Force that the tenure and age limit of the Members should be
specified in the DM Act, 2005 as has been prescribed in other Acts such as those relating to
the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, the Election Commission, the Competition

31
Commission, and the National Human Rights Commission etc. The Committee, however, is in
agreement with the views of NDMA that keeping in view the recommendation of the Task
Force for enlarging the role of NDMA and with the frequency of occurrence of new types of
disasters in the country, any reduction in the number of full time Members of the NDMA
would make NDMA handicapped in the performance of its functions and accomplishing its
responsibilities. The Committee is, therefore, not in agreement with the recommendation of
Task Force in this regard. (para 2.3.11)
Action Taken
3.9.1 As per Disaster Management Act, it is the privilege of Prime Minister to nominate
Members of NDMA and determine the number of Members, their pay structure and status. The
recommendations of Task Force are being processed on these lines to retain the primacy of
the Prime Minister. .
Further Recommendation
3.9.2 The Committee wonders as to why not the tenure and age limit of the Members
should be specified in the DM Act, as has been prescribed in other Acts such as those
relating to the Central Regulatory Commission, the Election Commission, the
Competition Commission and the National Human Rights Commission, etc. After all,
appointments in those bodies are also made with the approval of Prime Minister and
such prerogative is not subject to any challenge. The Committee is of the firm opinion
that discretion should not, by any stretch of imagination, give suspicion in any mind.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the selection of members
of NDMA should be through an open and transparent process and for the purpose a
Search and Selection Committee may be constituted.
Recommendation
3.10 The Committee is not happy to note that Advisory Committee which ceased to exist
from mid of June, 2010 had not been re-constituted till 2013. The Committee understands that
Advisory Committee is a significant organ of NDMA consisting of experts in the field of
disaster management and having practical experience of disaster management at the national,
State or district level to make recommendations on different aspects of disaster management
but unfortunately such significant Committee has not been reconstituted since 2010. The
Committee takes serious exception to this inordinate delay and wants to convey its strong
feeling in this regard. The Committee strongly recommends that the advisory Committee be
constituted without further delay . (para 2.7.3)
Action Taken
3.10.1 The issue relating re-constitution of Advisory Committee of NDMA has been drawing
the attention of the Government and from time to time it has been advising NDMA about the
need of re-constitution of the Committee at the earliest. However, it is to inform that at present
most of the positions of members in NDMA are vacant. Once all the members are appointed,
the advisory committee of NDMA will be re-constituted.

32
Further Recommendation
3.10.2 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the prevailing state
of affairs pertaining to composition and functioning of NDMA wherein many posts of
Members are vacant since long and the issue relating to re-constitution of Advisory
Committee of NDMA is hanging fire since June, 2010. The Committee understands that
such modus operandi of NDMA would be unacceptable to any Government of the
democratic country where disasters visit so frequently and so vigorously. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that vacant posts of Members in NDMA be
filled up without further delay and Advisory Committee of NDMA be reconstituted,
sooner the better for effective functioning of NDMA.
Recommendation
3.11 The Committee is in agreement with the observation of C&AG that the action by
NDMA is lacking as has been mandated under the DM Act for recommending provision of
funds for the purpose of mitigation and relief in repayment of loans or for grant of fresh
loans to the persons affected by disasters. The contention of NDMA that no affected State
has sought NDMA’s intervention in the matter is in contrast with the expected level of
activism on the part of an institution at apex level. The Committee believes that once the Act
mandates NDMA to perform certain functions, it would be inappropriate to await the request
of the State Government for the intervention of NDMA particularly when the State is reeling
under the disaster effect. The Committee feels that NDMA should intervene in the matter
suo-moto and act promptly in case of occurrence of any disaster in the State. The Committee
recommends that NDMA should be more proactive as mandated by the Act. NDMA must also
undertake follow up action to observe as to what extent its recommendations have been
complied with. (para 2.9.4)
Action Taken
3.11.1 The Reserve Bank of India being the Principal Regulating Agency of the Government
of India for monetary policy, had issued guidelines in 1984 to all the Scheduled Commercial
Banks to take necessary action for providing relief to the persons affected by the disasters.
These guidelines were updated regularly. The banks are guided by these guidelines and as such,
NDMA had not initiated any action for recommending relief in the repayment of loans or for
grant for fresh loans to the persons affected by the disasters.
Further Recommendation
3.11.2 The Committee observes that relief to the persons affected by the disaster must
be immediate as well as comprehensive so that affected persons are solaced immediately
and economic status of the affected state can be brought back on a better developmental
track. The Committee in this regard, recommends that the role of banks in
implementation of relief programme and long term reconstruction plan must be prompt
and pro-active and sympathetic while fixing terms of loan interest and period of
repayment of loan and grant for fresh loan. The Committee also feels that the provision
mandating NDMA for recommending allocation of funds for the purpose of mitigation

33
and relief in repayment to loans or for grant of fresh loans to the affected persons by
disasters may be incorporated in the DM Act.
Recommendation
3.12 The Committee believes that as mandated by the Disaster Management Act 2005,
District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs) chaired by the respective District
Collectors and co-chaired by the chairmen of the Zilla Parishads at the district level have
been established However, in many cases, these are not active and operational except a few
exceptions. Similarly, even though the Disaster Management Act 2005 stipulates the setting
up of the Disaster Response Fund and the Disaster Mitigation Fund at national, State and
district levels, only the National and State Disaster Response Funds have become
operational till now. The Committee therefore desires that the provisions of the Disaster
Management Act 2005 should be enforced in letter and spirit in view of the increasing
frequency of disasters in the country and resultant damage to property, assets and
infrastructure caused by them. (para 2 .20.7)
Action Taken
3.12.1 The SDRF and NDRF are based on the award of the Thirteenth Finance Commission
which was set up under Article 281 of the Constitution. The award is for the period of 5
years, as such it is difficult to change it.
3.12.2 The proposal for creation of National Disaster Mitigation Fund as per Section 47 of the
Disaster Management Authority Act, 2005 was under consideration in consultation with NDMA.
However, since a provision of 10% Flexi fund within the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS)
to be utilized inter alia  for mitigation/restoration activities in the event of natural calamities in
the Sectors covered by Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) has been made, a separate
Mitigation Fund may not be required.
Further Recommendation
3.12.3 The Committee is of the considered view that since district administration is
the first responder to any disaster, District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs)
must be well equipped as per the proyision of the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
Financial assistance at the nick of time is required in the event of any disaster and,
therefore, it cannot wait assessment of damage and releasing time of adequate fund
either from Central Government or State Government. Therefore, on the spot
financial management at the district level is a must to meet immediate requirement
of fund. The Committee also notes that with regard to the Disaster Response Fund and
the Disaster Mitigation Fund at national, State and district levels as stipulated under
the DM Act, only the National and State Disaster Response Fund have become
operational till now and with the provision of 10% Flexi-funds under CSS, the
Government is of the view that funds for other purposes may not be required. The
Committee is not in agreement with the views of the Government as the concept of
flexi-funds may not have legal sanctity and it has other aspects under its coverage,
disaster mitigation as one of them.

34
Recommendation
3.13 The Committee understands that Home Guards play pivotal role as an auxiliary to the
police, serve as an auxiliary to the police in the maintenance of law and order, internal security
and help the community in any kind of emergency such as air-raid, fire, cyclone, earthquake,
epidemic. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Home Guard should be given due
training in the disaster management and their service conditions should also be improved in
order to motivate them in the service of the nation. (para 2.27.3)
Action Taken
3.13.1 Home Guards is a voluntary organization which functions under the administrative
control of the State Governments and role of Central Government is limited to reimburse the
expenditure incurred by the States oraising, equipping and training the Home Guards.
Further Recommendation
3.13.2 Though Home Guards function under the administrative control of State
Governments, nevertheless, Central Government must prepare plan and effective
guidelines which should be adopted by States for raising, equipping and training of the
Home Guards.
Recommendation
3.14 The Committee takes into account the fact that in the incidents of the disasters of
similar magnitude in USA and Japan, the loss of lives is much less as compared to that in
India. The Committee, therefore, observes that prevention and mitigation should contribute to
the lasting improvement in evolving safety and the same should be integrated in the disaster
management. (para 3.6.3)
Action Taken
3.14.1 After India faced the two major disasters viz. Odisha Cyclone in 1999 and the Bhuj
Earthquake in 2001, the approach towards disaster management has been significantly changed
from response centric reactive approach to a holistic proactive approach comprising of all the
segments of disaster management like prevention, preparedness, mitigation, response, relief,
rehabilitation etc. Recently, when very serious cyclonic storms Phailin and Hudhud had a land
fall in Odisha and Andhra Pradesh, the country has demonstrated the effectiveness and
importance of the preparedness, immense use of advance warning and the need for coordinated
efforts in disaster management.
Further Recommendation
3.14.2 The Committee is of the strong view that holistic approach to disaster
management viz. paradigm shift from response centric reactive approach to prevention,
preparedness and mitigation must entail capacity and resilience to withstand the
potential damage of disaster so far safety of lives and protection of property is
concerned. That is possible only when preparedness to prevention and mitigation is

35
strengthened at the ground level. But the Committee is pained to observe that adhocism
is being used so far as implementation of policies and statutory provisions is concerned.
The Committee wishes to draw attention of the Government to the issues like non
existence of DDMAs, except in some States, non provisioning of operationalisation of
Disaster Response Funds at national and State level, Constitution of SDRF as stand
alone Force on the line of NDRF by all States, institutionalization of Disaster
management at PRI/ULB level, strengthening of EOCs at State, District, Sub-Division
and Revenue Circle level, non maintenance of the Cyclone Shelters and poor
maintenance of early warning systems in vulnerable areas in. the States as well as no
proper establishment & maintenance of EOCs at district level. The Committee desires
that these issues are addressed without any failure.
Recommendation
3.15 From the disasters, the Committee noticed that the loss of life and property due to
disasters is mainly due to poor quality of construction of houses and buildings and lack of
knowledge and training about managing disasters. The Committee strongly feels that these
aspects need to be kept in mind. (para 3.6.4)
Action Taken
3.15.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs had been pursuing with the Ministry of Urban
Development for bringing in amendments in building bye-laws, land use zoning regulations,
development controlled regulations, town and Country Planning Acts in various States to ensure
structural safety against natural hazards and to strengthen the mechanisms for their
compliance. As a result, most of the States have amended the building bye-laws. During the
First session of the National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction held in May, 2013 there was
a session on ‘Making Our City Safe’ which emphasized the need for enforcing techno legal
regime.
Further Recommendation
3.15.2 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the loss of life and property due
to disaster can be prevented and mitigated by enforcing techno legal regime on the
ground level. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Government
must undertake concerted efforts for implementation of building bye-laws, land use
zoning regulations, development controlled regulations, town and Country Planning laws
in various States to ensure structural safety against natural hazards and to strengthen
the mechanisms for their compliance for better disaster management. The Committee in
this background recommends that the decisions taken in the First session of the
National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction held in May, 2013 in which there was a
session on ‘Making Our City Safe’, must be implemented in letter and spirit.
Recommendation
3.16 The Committee takes notes of the following shortcomings in Disaster Management set-
up in the State and recommends that suitable course of action may be undertaken to overcome
the following issues/shortcomings:-

36
(i) Non maintenance of the Cyclone Shelters and poor maintenance of early
Warning systems in vulnerable area in the State;
(ii) No pr oper establishment & maintenance of EOCs at district level;
(iii) Lack of coordination between departments and non Government organizations;
(iv) Low level of awareness among the community and the departments;
(v) Poor Drainage maintenance at urban level;
(vi) Encroachments all along the drainages are the main reason for disasters; and
(vii) Absence of building bylaws to construct Earthquake resistance structures.
(para 4.2.4)
Action Taken
3.16.1 The shortcomings pointed out by the committee relates to Andhra Pradesh. The State
Government has been advised to take suitable measures to overcome the weakness in the
system.
Further Recommendation
3.16.2 The colossal devastation caused by the recent cyclone Huhud in Vishakhapatnam
is a testimony to the truth to inherent weaknesses in Disaster Management set up in
Andhra Pradesh which has been highlighted by the Committee in Para 4.2.4 of its 178th
Report. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Union Ministry of Home
Affairs must monitor to ensure that all the State Governments undertakes suitable
measures to overcome the weaknesses in the system.
Recommendation
3.17 The Committee, however, notes that DRM programme has been very successful in rural
areas, but it has not achieved the success as a grassroots programme in urban areas. The
Committee therefore, desires that mitigation aspect in urban areas needs to be addressed in
letter and spirit while projects are conceived and implemented. (Para 4.4.4)
Action Taken
3.17.1 The Gol-UNDP programme (2013-2017) -'Enhancing Institutional and Community
Resilience to disasters and climate change’ is under implementation in the States. Reducing
disaster risk in urban areas by enhancing institutional capacities and to integrate climate risk
reduction measures in development programs and enhancing community capacities to manage
disasters and climate risk in urban areas are the major objectives.
Further Recommendation
3.17.2 The Committee recommends for mid-term evaluation of the implementation of
Government of India- UNDP Programme (2013-2017)- enhancing institutional and

37
community resilience to disaster and climate change. The Government should now
evaluate the achievement of institutional capacities and climate risk reduction measures
to assess as to how much the same have been integrated to development programs in
urban areas as against the set target/objective and also to find out scope for
improvement for better implementation.
Recommendation
3.18 The Committee is in agreement of the suggestion of State Government that Role of
Relief Commissioner maybe defined in the Act; Involvement of Secretaries of line Departments
in State Executive Committee; Formalization of functions of SDMA and encouraging
participation of elected representative at District level and other District level officers to
participate in DM activities. The State has also indicated several other inadequacies and made
other suggestions. The Ministry of Home Affairs may look into all the suggestions and take
appropriate action. (para 4.8.8)
Action Taken
3.18.1 As stated in response to earlier questions that the Task Force which was set up to review the
Disaster Management Act, 2005 has recommended several amendments in the Disaster Management Act.
The report of the Task Force is still under consideration of the Government.
Further Recommendation
3.18.2 The committee is constrained to express its displeasure that Government is
procrastinating in considering the recommendation of the Task Force which are of
pivotal importance for better disaster management. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that Government must consider the suggestions of Task Force in time
bound manner so that appropriate action is taken well within time.
Recommendation
3.19 The Committee is in agreement with the observations of the Ministry of Home Affairs
and recommends that Central Government as well as the State Government should chalk out
specific strategy with the objective to make the Disaster Management set-up more resilient and
effective. (para 4.13.5)
3.19.1 The State Government suggested that concrete steps were required to be taken for
further strengthening of DM mechanism in the State which inter-alia  includes mainstreaming
Disaster Management with Development plans & programmes, strengthening techno legal
regime in the State, retrofitting measures for lifeline buildings, schools & Health facilities,
strengthening and equipping DCs at State, District, Sub-Divisional levels, hazard specific
strategic planning by all concerned departments, resource mobilization and mass awareness
drive, continuity in training and capacity building activities for the stakeholders & volunteers
etc. and greater involvement of the PRIs, knowledge networking with expert institutions/
organizations in the areas of disaster risk reduction and better monitoring and evaluation of
development/infrastructure projects and putting in place an integrated response mechanism. The
Committee desires that the State Government must take necessary steps to complete all the

38
above tasks. Union Ministry of Home Affairs may also render necessary assistance to the State
in this regard. (para 4.13.7)
3.19.2 The Committee also feels that setting up of a State of the Art Institute of Disaster
Management would facilitate in carrying out need based training and capacity building activities
in the State. (para 4.13.8)
Action Takep
3.19.3 The State Government of Assam has been requested to chalk out specific strategy for
the State with the objective to make the Disaster Management set up more resilient and
effective. Regarding setting up of an institute for disaster management, this is to inform that
faculty members of the NIDM as well as officials of NDMA are visiting the State frequently
for developing the capacity of the people of Assam in the field of disaster management.
Further Recommendation
3.19.4 The Committee reiterates its suggestion that in order to make the Disaster
Management set up more resilient and effective in the Assam, the State Government
must chalk out hazard specific strategic planning and encourage greater involvement of
DDMA/PRIs and skill networking with expert institution for better disaster risk
reduction. The Committee further reiterates its recommendation that Government must
reconsider setting up of a state of the art institute of Disaster  Management in Assam
for carrying out need based training and capacity building activities in the State for
NER.
Recommendation
3.20 The Committee observes that SDMA and DDMAs have been set up in the State.
However, Disaster Management set up in the State needs further strengthening through various
measures like institutionalization of DM at PRIs/ULB level, strengthening of EOCs at State,
District, Sub-Division and Revenue Circle Level. A State wise smooth communication system
is also required to be put in place. Sufficient SDRF battalions need to be created to reach the
affected corners of the State quickly. (para 4.13.6)
Action Taken
3.20.1 Government of India through NDMA would continue its advocacy with the State(s) to
constitute State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) as a standalone Force on the line of NDRF
at the earliest, and also for institutionalization of Disaster management at PRI/ULB level and
for strengthening of EOCs at State, District, Sub-Division and Revenue Circle level.
Further Recommendation
3.20.2 The replies of the Ministry in response to the Committee's recommendation are
very general and vague, therefore, the Committee desires that Ministry of Home Affairs
must furnish’ state specific steps taken for strengthening and institutionalization of
Disaster Management at the ground level.

39
Recommendation
3.21 The Committee recommends that sanction of 36 posts for making the establishment of
Directorate of Disaster Management fully functional should be accorded at the earliest. Demand
of better communication support between islands in view of their topography as well as
transport vehicles is justified and should be looked into on priority basis. The Committee took
into account the observation of the MHA that on the basis of the formula worked out on pro
rate basis by the DM division, a proposal has been sent by the UT Division of MHA to Ministry
of Finance for establishing the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) for the UTs which is
under active consideration in that Ministry. If the approval of the Ministry of Finance has been
received, a separate SDRF for each UT may be created. The Committee desires that MHA
should undertake requisite follow up action if the approval has not yet been received from
Ministry of Finance. (para 4.22.6)
Action Taken
3.21.1 M/o Finance has approved the allocation of ` 50.00 crore under SDRF for creation of
Disaster Response Fund for UTs. Allocation to each UT is as follows:
(i) A&N Admn — ` 10.00 crore
(ii) Chandigarh — ` 5.00 crore
(iii) D&N Haveli — ` 5.00 crore
(iv) Daman & Diu — ` 5.00 crore
(v) Lakshadweep — ` 10.00 crore
(vi) NCT of Delhi — ` 5.00 crore
(vi) Puducherry — ` 10.00 crore
3.21.2 The matter was referred to the M/o Finance to provide financial assistance as
mentioned above to UTs also, as per the procedure adopted in case of States i.e.  direct
management and administration by the M/o Finance (Under Demand No. 36, Major Head-3601).
3.21.3 The Ministry of Finance has advised that the requirement may be taken up during the
preparation of budget for the next year. The revised proposal has already been sent to the
M/o Finance and it is under consideration with them.
3.21.4 As there is a blanket ban on creation of posts, no decision could be taken so far on
creation of posts.
Further Recommendation
3.21.5 The Committee is not in agreement with the imposition of a blanket ban on
creation of ports which is urgently required for making the establishment of Disaster
Management fully functional and is of the view that sanction for posts should be
accorded at the earliest. The Demand of better communication support between islands
in view of their topography as well as transport vehicles appears to be justified and
should be looked into on priority basis. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends

40
that Ministry of Finance must appreciate the requirements of UTs and consider the
proposal of UT division of Ministry of Home Affairs, positively.
Recommendation
3.22 The Committee feels that the UT’s request for funds for setting up of the Disaster Cell
as well as technical guidance to prepare disaster plan need to be addressed. For strengthening
of disaster management set up, UT needs capacity building of DM among the public, public
awareness, improved use of technology and social family activities. An early action may be
taken in this regard. (para 4.25.3)
Action Taken
3.22.1 The prime need of the Union Territory of Daman & Diu is setting up of Disaster
Management Cell in the UT. As it involves creation of posts, no decision has been taken till
now.
Further Recommendation
3.22.2 The Committee observes that since setting up of Disaster Management cell in the
UT of Daman & Diu involves creation of posts implying financial requirement,
therefore, Central Government must look into the matter without much delay and guide
the UT for setting up/strengthening of disaster management set up and creating public
awareness towards capacity building of disaster management.
Recommendation
3.23 The Committee observes that proposals for the formation of State Disaster Response
Force (SDRF) in UTs are pending in the Ministry of Finance. The Committee desires that MHA
should actively take up the follow up action with that Ministry for considering the proposals,
if not cleared as yet. The Committee further notes that at present there is no staff provided
for the Disaster Management Directorate and the same is managed with the staff of Revenue
Department. There is also further need to strengthen the existing control room with adequate
staff and with most modern equipments. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Home
Affairs should examine all these issues. (para 4.26.2)
Action Taken
3.23.1 The Union Territory of Lakshadweep is having a Disaster Management Cell at the Head
Quarter and other Islands. The Disaster Management Plans have been updated and capacity
building is being done continuously with the help of NDMA and NIDM. The identified
personnel of the Union Territory are trained by NDRF and they are arranging Island wise
various capacity building programme in the Union Territory.
Further Recommendation
3.23.2 The Committee notes the reply and observes that the reply is silent on the core
issue of the recommendations which concerns with the proposal of setting up of disaster

41
response force in the UT of Lakshadweep. It seems that the proposal is still pending
with the Ministry of Finance. If it is so the Committee recommends that the proposal
should be approved without any further delay.
Recommendation
3.24 The Committee takes a serious view that after lapse of three months of the tragedy,
formalities were still to be completed for giving the relief announced by the concerned
authorities. The categorical statement given by the Chief Minister of Uttarakhand  that all those
people, who are missing for one month, will be presumed to be dead, showed the sincere
empathy of the State Government for the victims. However this seems to be evaporating when
much time is taken for giving compensation. The Committee feels that the Government is not
doing justice to the families of those whose members are missing. The Committee views that
there must have been some other methods to accomplish the task. The Committee strongly
recommends that the assurance given by the Home Secretary as well as the State Government
officials for completing formalities for compensation should be met and compensation should
be given at the earliest. (para 6.6.4)
Action Taken
3.24.1 As soon as the guideline was issued by the Registrar of death & birth to issue death
certificates to Next of Kin (NOK) of the missing persons, issuance of death certificates and
distribution of compensation to NOK of missing in Uttarakhand disaster, 2013 is being done
on war footing. Out of 3,178 missing persons from other States, death certificates and
ex-gratia relief have been provided to next of kin of 2,741 persons.
Further Recommendation
3.24.2 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that out of 3,178 missing
persons from the other states 437 next of kin (NoK) of missing persons are still to be
compensated in the aftermath of the disaster in Uttarakhand even after elapse of one
and half year despite the assurance of State Government and Union Home Secretary for
completing formalities for compensation without much delay. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that State Government should immediately act upon the
recommendation of the Committee to ensure timely compensation to NoK of missing
persons without causing than further delay.
Recommendation
3.25 The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs should play a proactive role to ensure
that all insurance claims of the victims of Uttarakhand disaster are expedited. For this purpose, a
nodal officer in the Ministry of Home Affairs may be appointed to take care of such insurance claims
of life and property and also to liaise with Ministry of Finance. (para 6.6.6)
Action Taken
3.25.1 For settlement of insurance claim, the RGI has already circulated a detailed guideline
for declaring the missing persons as dead. The death certificates have been issued to the

42
missing persons. The Department of Financial Services has issued instructions to the insurance
companies for settlement of claims based on these death certificates.
Further Recommendation
3.25.2 The Committee observes that the Ministry of Home Affairs in response to
recommendation contained in Para 6.6.4 apprised the Committee that out of 3,178
missing persons from other States, death certificates and ex-gratia  relief have been
provided to next to kin of 2,761 person only. The Committee, therefore, desires that the
State Government should check and clarify the fact so that all assurance claims of life
and property are settled fully at the earliest.
Recommendation
3.26 The Committee understands that it is difficult for local people from remote village to
procure building materials viz. cement, steel, wood etc. Therefore, the Committee desires that
the District authorities should provide cement and other construction material at subsidized
rates. The Committee wishes to driw home the need to give proper attention on the
construction activities in Uttarakhand at reasonable prices at this critical hour. Since people are
opting for owner-driven building of houses, efforts should be made to ensure that the plan of
the building and the structure is earthquake-resistant. Therefore, while approving the
construction plans, care should be taken to ensure that every building design is earthquake-
resistant and every house so constructed is insured for, at least, 15 years through the
insurance companies. (para 6.10.4)
Action Taken
3.26.1 A Project Management Unit and several project implementation units have been
constituted to ensure speedy implementation of various rehabilitation and reconstruction works
in Uttarakhand. A dedicated Monitoring Cell has, at the same time, been constituted for
monitoring the progress of these works.
3.26.2 Disaster affected families opting for Owner Driven Construction of Houses (ODCH) are
being provided on-site technical know-how on earthquake safe construction. Designs and
construction plans for the construction of ODCH are being provided to the owners. Provision
of insurance of these houses is also being made. The first installment of `1.5 lakh per
beneficiary has already been released for 1922 (77.75 %) beneficiaries.
Further Recommendation
3.26.3 The Committee notes that only 77.75% beneficiaries have been given first
instalment of `1.5 lakh. The Committee is of the view that this is not a good
achievement made by the State Government after lapse of a substantial period. The
Committee therefore recommends that all the remaining beneficiaries should be
provided their due and legitimate relief amount within three months. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this matter.

43
Recommendation
3.27 The Committee would like to put it on record the great work done by the Force
personnel in evacuating people there and the Committee pays tribute to those 20 personnel who
lost their lives while trying to rescue the general public who were stranded at various places.
The Committee believes that the country will never forget the great sacrifice they have made.
In regard to the network of airstrips and helipads for the entire country, with particular
reference to Uttarakhand, the Committee observes that the space is very limited and the State
is not able to provide air ambulance to evacuate people in case of emergency. The Committee
desires that the Home Ministry may take note of this aspect and take necessary action in this
regard at the earliest. There should be a good network of shelter houses with food security
to the stranded population as and when calamity of such nature happens. The Committee would
like to cite the example of the coastal area of the country, where community centres have been
created near the coast. As and when something happens, people are immediately rushed to that
place. Then community kitchens are opened and the affected people are taken care of The
Government should consider such things in Uttarakhand. (para 6.10.20)
Action Taken
3.27.1 The concern of the Committee about the space crunch in the State for Air Lifting is
noted. However it is informed that 52 Helipads at different locations of the State are being
constructed.
Further Observation
3.27.2 The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the issue of
construction of shelter houses/community centres with sufficient food stock in
Uttarakhand. The Committee recommends that Government should pay urgent attention
to this vital issue of infrastructure.
Recommendation
3.28 The Committee feels that observations of C&AG on the working of Disaster
Management set up in Uttarakhand are very serious. The Committee observes that the NDRF
and the ITBP, along with other personnel of the Armed Forces, have done a commendable
job in rescuing the stranded pilgrims and locals. The Committee takes note of the disaster
preparedness of the State from the background note as already stated earlier. However, in the
light of C&AG observations, the Committee feels that a strong and robust disaster
management system is all the more necessary as Uttarakhand has a sensitive eco system
which is prone to natural calamities. Though the Committee understands that the nature's
fury is beyond human control, disaster preparedness can substantially reduce loss of life as
can be seen in the examples of the countries of Japan and the USA which frequently face
Tsunamis and Hurricanes etc. Due to complex terrain and ongoing tectonic activities, disaster
management should be an integral part of the governance in the State of Uttarakhand In this
direction, the State Government must ensure effective and efficient functioning of the SDMA
by convening regular meetings and monitoring follow up action of its recommendations.
Immediate steps should be taken to formulate the policy guidelines, plans, rules and norms

44
ensuring that Disaster Management measures are incorporated in the developmental process.
The Committee feels that the State Government should codify building bye-laws to ensure
safe construction practices in the State and Hazard Safety Cell should be empowered suitably
to carry out its functions effectively. Moreover, the State Government should provide critical
infrastructure such as trauma centre, so that the affected people could be given immediate
medical attention. (para 6.11.3)
Action Taken
3.28.1 The meetings of SDMA are being conducted on a regular basis for formulation of the
policies, plans, norms, guidelines and rules.
3.28.2 Hazard Safety Cell (HSC) at the State Level and Hazard Safety Units (HSU) at the
district level are created in the State and the process of empowering these units is in progress.
Recommendation
3.29 The Committee is also of the view that Government should take steps to prepare
training modules and calendars to upgrade the skills of personnel, NGOs & communities
engaged in disaster prevention and mitigation. Government should prioritize assessment of
structural and non-structural safety of school buildings and identify necessary mitigative action
to be included in the school safety programme. (para 6.11.4)
Action Taken
3.29.1 NIDM and NDMA are engaged in upgrading the skills of personal and communities
including the NGOs. The Government of India is already implementing a pilot project on school
safety which covers two schools in each District of 22 States. Under this scheme, both
structural and non-structural measures are included.
Further Recommendation
3.29.2 The Committee recommends that the pilot project of Government of India on
school safety should cover all schools of each district of all States and UTs. The
committee further recommends that Government should undertake concrete steps for
upgrading the skills of personal and communities including the NGOs.
Recommendation
3.30 The Committee was informed that implementation of environment protection laws and
all other measures to preserve the eco-system was the responsibility of the State Government.
However there was also a need that the situation/conditions on ground are reviewed from time
to time by MoEF to effect relaxations, as required and necessary so as to reduce the risk
caused by disasters. The Committee also recommends that Disaster Risk Reduction should
therefore be incorporated as one of the considerations in the implementation of such laws/
regulations. Crucially, a large percentage of roads in Uttarakhand are under the charge of BRO.
The Committee recommends that it is right time that the alignments of the roads are reviewed
in consultation with GSJ and full protection provided for the portion which are under constant

45
threat of landslides/or are part of the slide zones. Alternative modes of connectively such as
provision of tunnels and others must be considered. The strategic importance of the roads and
their all season connectivity in Uttarakhand need not be over-emphasized. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that MOD should seriously consider providing funds for this purpose.
The Committee wishes to point out that separate and alternative evacuation routes/roads are
also planned and developed by BRO particularly from the major pilgrim centres even though
for short stretches. (para 6.11.9)
Action Taken
3.30.1 Geological Survey of India (GSI) (Nodal Agency of the landslide investigation),
observing the great extent of damage to road infrastructures, village settlements and
developmental projects during heavy rainfall of 16th & 17th June’ 2013 in Uttarakhand’,
immediately undertook the spot assessment of landslides that affected the road sections
(National/ State Highway and village roads) in the State. This includes the road sections being
maintained by BRO in the State.
3.30.2 The rapid geological/geomorphic ground based assessment have been carried out with
an objective to assess the need for rehabilitation/relocation; and lord identification of road
stretches where realignment of road is necessary, besides preparing an exhaustive inventory of
landslides.
3.30.3 GSI d uring field Season 2013-14 launched high investigation for preliminary slope
Stability assessment of disaster affected areas including road infrastructure in five most
disaster affected districts- Rudraprayag, Uttarkashi, Chamoli, Bageshwar and Pithoragarh and
collected base line geological information on various geo-parameters, causative factors and
immediat/short term measures on all the landslides that affected the road networks in the
aftermath of the disaster.
3.30.4 In Chamoli district, 65 numbers of landslide have been studied along prominent road
(NH/SH) sections which includes 321 slides along kamaprayag-Joshimath- Badrinath sector
(NH-58): 8 slides along Joshimath- malaria sector (BRO road section), 8 slides along
Chamoli-Gepeshwar- Pokhri sector, 3 slides along kamaprayag- Simli- Gairsain sector, 14 slides
along Simli-Gwaldam sector (SH-11) and one slide along Govindghat - Ghangharia-Hemkund
Sahib sector ( State PWD). The chronic slide zones on road alignments where detailed studies
are required are at Birahi (km. 436.700), Pagal Nallah (km. 456.900), Patalganga (km. 468.200)
and Lambagarh (km.504.500).
3.30.5 In Rudraprayag district where the impact of disaster was maximum, 210 line km. of
road section of National/State Highway has been investigated. 40 incidences of landslides/ river
bank erosion have been recorded along NH-I09: 5 km. stretch from Sonprayag to Gaurikund
and 15 km. stretch between Tilwara and Banswada have been severely damaged/washed away.
It has been recommended that the stretches between Tilwara and Banswada, Kund and
Guptkashi, Sitapur and Sonprayag and Sonprayag to Gaurikund need to be realigned after
detailed geological investigations. Slides are critical and needs further investigations for
realignment of road sections. Simi village (km. 37.00), Vijaynagar (km.18.00) and Sonprayag
to Gaurikund (km. 70.00 to 76.00) are chronic landslide zones, requiring detailed investigations
for realignment/communication tunnel etc. The studies further revealed that the major slide

46
zones such as Naulapani, Silli, Semi and Kunjethi need comprehensive site specific treatment
slope protection measures.
3.30.6 In Bageshwar district, howere, no major slide zone has been recorded on State
Highways where realignment of the road is required. The geological studies revealed that the
slides/ subsidences occurring are of minor to macro scale and may be contained by applying
conventional remedial measures.
3.30.7 In Pithoragarh district, being the border district most of the roads are being maintained
by Border Road Organisation (BRO). Total 92 nos. of landslide/ subsidence/river bank erosion
have been reported, out of which 64 are along the highways and roads affecting a cumulative
stretches of about 21.7 km. The stretch at 40 locations has been recommended for
realignment. At certain locations, an option of tunneling has also been suggested especially in
Madkot- Serahat, Elaged and Sobla- Nyu sectors.
3.30.8 In Uttarkashi district, total nos. of 60 active landslide spots have been identified, out
of which 57 landslides affect the road section (NH-108 and NH-134). The prominent locations
where detailed studies of landslides are required for realignment / relocation of the road include
Dharasu Bend (km.123), Sukitop, Singori, Bhatwari, Chadethi and the section between Malla to
Lata on NH-108.
3.30.9 The interim reports of the above studies have already been submitted to the chief
Secretary of Uttarakhand.
3.30.10 Further, during the present field session (April,2014 to May,2015) the GSI has taken
up following studies:-
(i) Detailed geological investigation of subsidence affected areas of Semi village
(NH-109), Mandakini valley, and Kamera (NH-58), Alaknanda Valley,
Rudraprayag district in Uttarakhand;
(ii) Developing GIS-based, qualitative/quantitative landslide hazard and risk
assessment in Mandakni V alley;
(iii) Preparation of a 1:50,000 scale landslide susceptible map for mountaineous/ hilly
region on GIS platform in parts of Rudraprayag district, Uttarakhand;
(iv) Preparation of a 1:50,000 scale landslide susceptible map for mountaineous/ hilly
region on GIS platform in part of Rudraprayag district, Uttarakhand.
3.30.11 GIS is in constant touch with BRO and is ready to take up any additional site specific
study as and when required by them (BRO).
3.30.12 In pursuance of the decision the Medium and Long Term Rehabilitation for creation of
robust infrastructure capable of withstanding the weather and other challenges will be based
on the advice of Team of Experts working under the State Government/Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways (MoRT&H). The Planning Commission has informed that they have
worked out a medium and long term reconstruction package for Uttarakhand which includes
a financial package of `7346 crore from Centrally Sponsored Schemes, Central Plan, Special
Plan Assistance and Externally Aided Projects.

47
3.30.13 As per the direction from PMO and in consultation with the Army about 365 km
road length is to be handed over to MoRT & H in Uttarakhand from BRO.
3.30.14 The BRO, in addition, does roads construction work as per the requirement of
Army on strategic roads. For this, a collaborative measure has been initiated to establish a
multi-discipline-technical expert group with experts from Ministry of Science and Technology
(CRRI, CSIR, GSI etc.) to assist BRO in technical matters such as selection of alignment of
roads with the help of latest technology/trial of new technologies. Accordingly, the efforts to
earmark for utilizing 10% of its annual budget for pilot/trial projects of new technology by
BRO are under consideration.
Further Recommendation
3.30.15 The Committee observes that Planning Commission had worked out a medium
and long term reconstruction package for Uttarakhand which includes a financial
package of ` 7364 crore from Centrally Sponsored Scheme, Central Plan, Special Plan
Assistance and Externally Added Projects. The Committee now hopes that the NITI
Aayog would take cognizance of the decision of the erstwhile Planning Commission and
the concerted course of action would be taken by the Central Government to ameliorate
Uttarakhand from the shock of devastation and put the State back on the rail with the
objective of better back.
3.30.16 The Committee further notes that as per the direction from PMO and in
consultation with the Army about 365 km road length is to be handed over to MoRT &H
in Uttarakhand from BRO. The Committee recommends that the process of handing
over the road be completed at the earliest. The Committee also desires that the roads
so taken from the BRO should be maintained properly by NHAI. The Committee also
hopes that the services of the expert group with experts from Ministry of Science and
Technology (CRRI, CSIR, GSI etc.) constituted to assist BRO in technical matters such
as selection of alignment of roads with the help of latest technology/trial of new
technologies will be utilized and roads of international standards as one can see in hilly
regions of Europe will be constructed in Uttarakhand.
Recommendation
3.31 The following assistance was sought by the representatives of the State Governments:-
(i) For the rehabilitation of the damaged villages, requirement of ` 8000 crore may
be examined and assessed.
(ii) Highly sophisticated world class area specific warning system may be provided.
(iii) Army, ITBP and NDRF should make recruitment of their personnel to providing
employment to the jobless persons of the State also.
(iv) W aiver of interest and loan component of various dues of the disaster af fected
persons.
(v) While Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned a special package of ` 100 crore for
development of infrastructure. Special package particularly for transporters,

48
hoteliers and travel agents etc. who have suffered and will further face the
hardships because of the disaster and decline in tourism, is required. It will be
of great help if Nainital and Dehradun are developed as major Conference
Centres (While Dehradun has a modern airport, Pantnagar can service Nainital).
Direct flight from Dehradun to Kathmandu and back can be introduced, subject
to traffic potential.     (para 6.11.12)
3.31.1 The Committee recommends that the above suggestions may be considered by the
Ministry of Home Affairs. (para 6.11.13)
Action Taken
3.31.2 Consequent to June, 2013 Disaster in Uttarakhand a package of ` 7,346 crores has
been approved by the Government of India which includes a financial package of ` 7346 crore
from the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, Central Plan, Special Plan Assistance and Externally
Aided Projects. 52 Helipads are being constructed at different locations of the State.
3.31.3 The recruitment in the Army, ITBP and other Central Armed Police Forces are made in
accordance with the transparent policy which takes care of the concerns expressed by the
State Government.
Further Recommendation
3.31.4 The Committee strongly recommends that approved amount to the tune of
`7,346 crore must be released to the Government of Uttarakhand within set time frame
so that the State’s economy is put on track without much delay by emphasizing
completion of infrastructure and tourism promotion projects in time. The committee
further recommends that highly sophisticated world class area specific warning system
may be provided. Waiver of interest and loan component of various dues of the disaster
affected persons should also be provided.
Recommendation
3.32 The Committee notes that the allocation for mitigating disaster damages, is not purely
based on Gadgil Formula, but is based on vulnerability of a particular State. The Committee
feels that allocation for SDRF should be made on the basis of vulnerability of a State in the
right earnest. (para 7.9.5)
Action Taken
3.32.1 The Fourteenth Finance Commission has already been constituted and is likely to
submit its report shortly. The central assistances for disaster management to the States
including NE States are as per the recommendation of the Finance Commission. The States and
this Ministry have already given their suggestions to the Fourteenth Finance Commission.
Further Information
3.32.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide  its background note on the Natural Disasters
caused by devastating unseasonal rains, hailstorm and thunderstorm followed by

49
earthquake in various parts of the country and ongoing rescue, relief and rehabilitation
operations in the affected States meant for Committee’s meeting held on 7th May, 2015
apprised the Committee about the financial mechanism as recommended by the Fourteenth
Finance Commission to mitigate the damage caused by the natural disaster as under:-
“Financial assistance in the wake of natural calamities is towards relief and not for
compensation of the loss suffered. The main objective of the relief fund is to assist the
affected persons to restart their economic activities. The Scheme of financing the relief
expenditure is based on the recommendations of the successive Finance Commissions.
The present Scheme, which is in operation from 2015-16 to 2019-20, is based on the
recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC)."
3.32.3 The Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) has recommended that the following natural
calamities are to be considered eligible for providing assistance from into State Disaster
Response Fund (SDRF)/ National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF):-
(i) Avalanches (ii) Cyclone (iii) Cloud burst
(iv) Drought (v) Earthquake (vi) Tsunami
(vii) Fire (viii) Flood (ix) Hailstorm
(x) Landslides (xi) Pest attack (xii) cold wave/frost
3.32.4 In addition, the Fourteenth Finance Commission has considered that need for flexibility
in regard to State-specific disasters and recommended that expenditure for providing immediate
relief to the victims of State-specific disasters within the local context in the State, which are
not included in the Centrally notified list of disasters eligible for assistance from SDRF/NDRF,
can be met from SDRF within the limit of 10% of the available funds in SDRF. The flexibility
is to be applicable only after the State has formally listed the disasters for inclusion and
notified transparent norms and guidelines with a clear procedure for identification of the
beneficiaries for disaster relief for such local disasters, with the approval of the State
Executive Committee. This Ministry has already communicated to all States in this regard on
20th March, 2015.
3.32.5 The Fourteenth Finance Commission has recommended allocation of `61220 crore in
the SDRF for the years 2015-16 to 2019-20 against ` 33580.93 crore recommended by 13th
Finance Commission for the years 2010-11 to 2014-15. Contribution to the SDRF is shared
between the Centre and State in the ratio 75:25 for General States and 90:10 for Special
Category States.
Recommendation
3.33 The Committee notes the efforts of the Government to minimize the loss of human
lives and to some extent, it has been successful in achieving this task. But there is hardly any
effective remedy at hand to minimize the loss of properties, particularly, crops, houses, nets
and boats of fishermen, and also the damage to the public utility facilities like electricity, water
supply schemes, etc. The recent cyclones Helen and Laila left Andhra and Odisha with colossal
devastation, where electrical poles either bent or uprooted, coconut trees uprooted and paddy
crops totally damaged by floods. The Committee, however, notes lacunae in regard to the visit

50
of the Central teams to assess the quantum of damage in an affected State. The Committee
observes that the Central teams visit the affected States after a gap of ten or fifteen days or
twenty days and by that time one cannot expect a farmer to keep the water logging on in their
fields since the farmers engage hired tractors to remove the affected crops. Since the Central
Team visits after considerable lapse of time, it is not able to make actual assessment of ground
realities pertaining to the loss of property and crop. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that as and when such calamity happens, the Central team must make a visit to
the affected State within a period of two or three days for a preliminary assessment and to
take stock of ground realities. For final assessment, it would not be proper for Central team
on its own to finalise the actual damage. The Committee is of the considered opinion that the
both the State and the Central Government officials after detailed discussions should arrive at
final conclusion and final assessments of total loss. It is equally important to look into the new
funding options which would further enhance the process for disaster risk reduction and
sustainable development in a more integrated format. (para 7.10.4)
Action Taken
3.33.1 Upon receipt of the memorandum from the affected State, the IMCT is constituted
immediately as per the established procedure. The IMCT finalises its travel programme in
consultation with the affected State. Therefore, there is no institutional delay for visit of the
IMCT. After receipt of the IMCT report, the same is placed before the sub-Committee of NEC,
where a representative of the State Government is also invited. This enables a transparent
process of examination of the IMCT recommendations vis-a-vis  the memorandum submitted by
the State. In order to increase the resources for Disaster Management purpose, the
Government has recently introduced flexi funds within the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS)
to undertake mitigation/restoration activities in case of natural calamities. With this mechanism,
an enabling provision has been made.
Further Recommendation
3.33.2 The Committee is not convinced with the reply as there are some discrepancies in
the estimates of loss as claimed by the State Government and as estimated by IMCT,
wherein there is also a representative of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee notes that
the representatives of the Ministry of Finance as well as representatives of other Ministries
failed to arrive at the appropriate estimate of loss. The Committee further notes that the
amount as approved by NEC was not even released by the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that such estimation of losses mocks the so called
claims of transparent system made by the Government. The Committee, therefore, desires
that the Central Government should work in tandem with State Governments facing the
disaster. The Committee feels that the Central Government may adhere to resilient system
of monitoring and may order strict auditing on utilization of funds as given by the Central
Government to deal with situation of natural disaster. The Committee also takes into
account the announcement made by the Prime Minister regarding relief of ` 1000 crore to
the State Governments of J&K and Andhra Pradesh, but the Committee understands that
even this announcement of the highest executive of the country has not been honoured and
Andhra Pradesh has been given only ` 400 crore. The same case may be with J&K.

51
3.33.3 The Committee is of the considered view that if any package is announced by the
Prime Minister, it should be honoured by everyone without any question. If there is
some reservation in any quarter of the Government, the Prime Minister should be
properly briefed before any announcement. The Hudhud cyclone struck Odisha and
Andhra Pradesh and both the States suffered loss, though more in Andhra Pradesh.
However the Prime Minister chose to announce the relief package only for Andhra
Pradesh. The Committee apprehends that the people of Odisha may feel neglected in the
absence of concrete assurance from the Central Government for financial assistance to
meet the expenditure for medium term and long term reconstruction plan. The
Committee is also of the view that financial assistance and psychological relief should
go hand in hand and the Government must be very cautious in future in dealing with
States affected by disasters.
Recommendation
3.34 The Committee desires that Planning Commission must respond quickly to the needs of
the Central Ministries/Departments/States in matters relating to the plan for meeting situations
arising out of natural disasters, by enabling adjustment of schemes to meet the requirements
as far as possible. A mechanism should be evolved to take expeditious decisions on proposals
which involve transfer of funds from one scheme to another, or any other change which
involves departure from the existing schemes/pattern of assistance, new schemes and relaxation
in procedures, etc. in the case of natural disasters. (para 7.10.5)
Action Taken
3.34.1 Recently, Government has introduced flexi funds within the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme (CSS) to undertake mitigation / restoration activities in case of natural calamities. With
this mechanism for situations arising out of natural disasters, an enabling provision for
adjustment of the schemes to meet the requirements has been made.
Recommendation
3.35 In order to enable the Ministry of Home Affairs to discharge its duties and
responsibilities pertaining to disaster management, it is essential that adequate number of staff
and officers should be posted in the DM Division of MHA. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Disaster Management Division (DM Division) of the MHA in the
Government of India may be strengthened so that it is better equipped to undertake the
activities assigned by the Act. (para 8.7.5)
Action Taken
3.35.1 The Task Force appointed to review the Disaster Management Act has also
recommended strengthening of Disaster Management Division to discharge its statutory
functions as well as to serve as Secretariat to National Executive Committee. As the incident
of disasters are increasing day by day, there is immediate need to strengthen the Division. A
proposal to strengthen DM Division has been prepared however due to a ban on creation of
posts, the same is being revisited.

52
Further Recommendation
3.35.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that Disaster Management Division
(DM Division) of the MHA in the Government of India may be strengthened so that it
is better equipped to undertake the activities assigned by the Act keeping in view the
frequent occurrence of disasters in the country.
Recommendation
3.36 The Committee is in agreement with the observation of the Task Force that the NDMA
should be given the responsibility of preparing the National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP)
and also of monitoring the activities of various Ministries regarding the tasks assigned by the
Act. The Committee notes that NDMA is prepared to undertake the proposed onerous task of
preparing NDMP. The Committee recommends that the Government must provide enabling
environment by providing adequate number of consultants, experts and supportive staff and
officers to NDMA to undertake the task of preparing NDMP . (para 8.7.5)
Action Taken
3.36.1 This is one of the recommendations of the Task Force which is under consideration
of the Government. NDMA has adequate number of human resources and they also have the
powers to engage consultants whenever required.
Further Recommendation
3.36.2 The Committee recommends that Government should act upon recommendation
of the Task Force without further delay and NDMA should finalize National Disaster
Management Plan soon.

CHAPTER - IV
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation
4.1 The Committee is surprised to observe that NDMA was constituted in 2006 under the
DM Act, 2005 and even after elapse of a period of seven years, NDMA has not framed its
business rules pertaining to internal conduct of NDMA and it is only after observation of
C&AG that in an internal meeting of NDMA a decision was taken to follow the provisions of
Manual of Office Procedure (MOP) of Government of India. The Committee feels that separate and
specific business rules and SOPs for NDMA would inject functional efficiency. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that NDMA must frame its own business rules pertaining to its internal working.
(para 2.5.4)
Action Taken
4.1.1 The Government is in agreement with the recommendations of the Committee and
pursuing NDMA to prepare their business rules pertaining to their internal working to inject
functional efficiency. NDMA has already been suitably advised by MHA.
Recommendation
4.2 The Committee presumes that obscurity over the role and responsibility of
stakeholders of disaster management lies primarily because of the fact that MHA functions
as an executive arm of NDMA while on the other hand MHA also acts as an administrative
Ministry of it. Although the DM Act stipulates the various functions of NDMA, NEC, NCMC,
NDRF and NIDM but the Committee feels that clear demarcation of role and responsibility
of various stakeholders in disaster management would be crystal clear only when the
functional relation between MHA and NDMA is explicitly mentioned in the DM Act or at least
in the Rules. (para 2.6.3)
Action Taken
4.2.1 Disaster Management is multi-stakeholder activity having cross cutting issues.
Government has recognized that for effective disaster management, a coordinated approach is
needed which may sometimes lead to overlapping or functions of various agencies. To reduce
this, the Government had appointed a Task Force. On the basis of recommendations of Task
Force are explicit relationship between NDMA and MHA is being worked-out.
Recommendation
4.3 The Committee is in agreement with the observation of the Task Force that the
function of the local authority during response, relief and rehabilitation phase of disaster should
53

54
be well defined as the same would strengthen upgrade and supplement efforts towards
combating emerging and new vulnerabilities. The role and responsibility of local authorities and
municipal corporations in the management of disaster may be cautiously and diligently explored.
Necessary amendments may be made in the DM Act after discussions with the State
Governments. (para 2 .20.6)
Action Taken
4.3.1 A proposal to amend the Disaster Management Act on the basis of the recommendations
of the Task Force is under consideration of the Government.
Recommendation
4.4 The Committee acclaims the role of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) in
combating the major disasters occurring in the country including the recent one that took
place in Uttarakhand. The Committee agrees that institutional mechanism should be developed
to have the benefits of expertise of NDRF as store house in combating disaster management.
To have the continuity in the system, the Committee recommends that tenure of some
experienced NDRF Personnel be extended beyond normal deputation period of 5 years to 7-
10 years. Some regular staff may also be recruited as suggested by the Task Force for
continuity. (para 2.21.3)
Action Taken
4.4.1 NDRF personnel are drawn from different forces at different point of time and all the
trained personnel are not repatriated in one go. Moreover, at the time of disasters the services
of other Central Armed Police Force are also utilized. The experience / expertise acquired in
NDRF is useful even in other CAPFs. By this way, the number of specialized persons keeps
on growing. In view of this, it is felt that there is no need to change the present arrangement.
However, a proposal for extending deputation period of some NDRF personnel from 5-7 years
is under consideration of this Ministry. As the proposal involves amendments in the
Recruitment Rules which require Inter- Ministerial consultation, it may take some more time.
Recommendation
4.5 The Committee further believes that personnel involved in the exercise have to draw
upon knowledge of best practices and resources available to them. Information and training on
ways to better respond to and mitigate disasters to the responders should go a long way in
building the capacity and resilience of the country to reduce and prevent disasters. Training is
an integral part of capacity building as trained personnel respond much better to different
disasters and appreciate the need for preventive measures. Professional training in disaster
management should be built into the existing pedagogic research and education. Specialised
courses for disaster management may also be developed by universities and professional
teaching institutions, and disaster management should be treated as a distinct academic and
professional discipline. The Committee recommends that NIDM may be entrusted with this
task. Specific component in professional and specialised courses like medicine, nursing,
engineering, environmental sciences, architecture, and town and country planning could also

55
find place in the curriculum. An appropriate component of disaster awareness at the school
level will help increase awareness among children and, in many cases, parents and other family
members through these children. (para 2.23.7)
Action Taken
4.5.1 As per Section 42(9)(f) of the Disaster Management Act, the National Institute of
Disaster Management, for the discharge of its functions, may develop educational material for
Disaster Management including academic and professional courses. Accordingly, the
recommendations of the committee already finds a place in the provision of the Disaster
Management Act, 2005. As regards disaster awareness at the school level, Central Board of
Secondary Education (CBSE) has already integrated a short course on Disaster Management in
the school curriculum.
4.5.2 Further, National Institute of Disaster Management and, Ministry of Human Resource
Development have been requested vide  Ministry of Home Affairs letter dated 2nd December,
2014 to indicate whether any curriculum / courses as recommended by the Department Related
Parliamentary Committee has been developed / introduced.
Recommendation
4.6 The Committee notes that Government has adopted mitigation and prevention as
essential components of their development strategy. The Committee is of the strong view that
National Response Plan will pave the way for institutionalizing the response plan at three tiers
as envisaged in the Disaster Management Act. Similarly, the Capacity Development Plan will
provide a roadmap for undertaking the capacity building for people engaged in different facets
of disaster management and enhance the capacity at the individual, organizational as well as at
the environmental levels. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the National Response
Plan, National Human Resource and Capacity Development Plan and Mitigation Plans may be
finalized at the earliest and adopted by respective nodal Ministries. (para 3.6.5)
Action Taken
4.6.1 As per Disaster Management Act, one of the functions of the National Executive
Committee (NEC) is to prepare the national plan to be approved by the National Authority. The
NEC in its meeting held on 21st October, 2013 has finalised National Disaster Management Plan
consisting of Disaster Mitigation Plan, Disaster Response Plan and Capacity Development Plan.
The draft National Plan has been sent to the National Authority vide  letter No. 30-3/20l1-NDM-
II dated 25
th October, 2014 for their consideration and approval.
Recommendation
4.7 The Committee believes that once the mitigation plans are approved, concerned
Ministries will undertake activities for taking the prevention and mitigation measures to
address the hazard and risk involved in the activities of their sector. The Committee hopes
that with all measures undertaken, Government will ensure that hazards do not turn into
disasters. (para 3.6.6)

56
Action Taken
4.7.1 As per Disaster Management Act, every Ministry/Department of the Central Government
is required to prepare a Disaster Management Plan specifying the measures to be taken by them
for prevention and mitigation of the disasters in accordance with the National Plan. Once the
National Plan is approved by NDMA, the Central Ministries/Departments will finalize their
Disaster Management Plan and take necessary measures for prevention and mitigation of
disasters.
Recommendation
4.8 The Committee observes that 44% geographical area of Chhattisgarh is forest due to
which, in addition to natural calamity, loss of human life, livestock and crop take place due
to attacks of wild animal, snake bite, Scorpion bite, etc. The State Government suggested that
it should be included as a natural calamity. The Committee recommends that the Government
may consider the request of State Government for inclusion of ‘loss of life and property due
to wild animal attacks and sun stroke’, under natural calamity. The Committee also observes
that the State needs funds to meet its non-plan infrastructural requirement, agricultural subsidy
for drought cases, enhancement in quality of infrastructure/human resource requirement and
preparation of guidelines for dams/reservoir which affect inter-State boundaries. In the flood
affected districts of Chhattisgarh, fund is required for establishment of optical/microwave
remote sensing data, flood control work on rivers, engineering data on flood control,
investigation on GPS, development etc. All these issues need to be looked into. The Committee
believes that an effective Disaster Management strategy lessens the impact of any disaster,
which can be achieved through strengthening and reorienting existing organizational and
administrative structure from District, State & up to National level. The emergency response
plan must first attempt to follow a multi-hazard approach, to bring out all the Disasters on a
single platform and incorporate the culture of quick response. It must provide a framework to
the primary and secondary agencies and departments, which can outline their own activities for
Disaster response. The plan must include specific disaster action plans along with model
scenarios in detail to conduct practice drills at district level. The Committee hopes that the
Government of Chhattisgarh would undertake these measures for strengthening Disaster
Management set up in the State and the Ministry of Home Affairs should provide due guidance
to the State Government. (para 4.3.6)
Action Taken
4.8.1 W ith regard to the request of the State Government for inclusion of ‘loss of life and
property due to wild animal attacks and sun stroke’, under natural calamity, it is informed that
the issue of inclusion of any disaster in the list of notified natural disasters has traditionally
been considered by the successive Finance Commissions set up under the constitution of India
from time to time. The present list is based on the recommendation of the 13th Finance
Commission in which the calamities mentioned by the State Government have not been included
for assistance from SDR Fund/NDR Fund. As such, the concerned State Government is
required to provide relief/assistance from its own resources/plan according to its State specific
relief manual/code. Further, the 14th Finance Commission has been constituted. The Ministry
of Home Affairs in its memorandum to Fourteenth Finance Commission has suggested that the

57
Finance Commission may take appropriate decisions on the inclusion of other natural disasters
including lightening, snake bites, sun stroke, animal attack etc.
4.8.2 The State Government of Chhattisgarh was informed on 16th April, 2014 about the
recommendations of DPSC for taking up measures for strengthening of Disaster Management
set-up in the State. Response from the State Government is still awaited. However, State
Government has been reminded again on 2nd December, 2014.
Recommendation
4.9 The Committee take into account the suggestions of MHA and agrees that the work on
State Disaster Management Plan and State Disaster Resource Inventory work needs to be
expedited for strengthening of disaster management setup in the State and therefore,
recommends that appropriate action may be taken in that direction. The Committee notes that
multi-hazard District Disaster Management Plan is available only for Gurgaon but for others,
it is under preparation. The Committee recommends that the model plans for remaining districts
may be prepared on priority basis. (para 4.5.5)
Action Taken
4.9.1 The recommendation of the Committee is about Haryana. The State Government was
requested vide  Ministry of Home Affairs letter dated 21 st April, 2014 to send their response
about the recommendations of DPSC. Further, vide letter dated 27 th November, 2014 the State
Government was asked to prepare District Disaster Management Plan for the remaining
districts of Haryana. Response from State Government is still awaited.
Recommendation
4.10 The Committee also recommends that State Disaster Management Policy must be
formulated at the earliest. The Committee also feels that human resource support for SDMA
and DDMA is required. The Committee, therefore, feels that Government must develop a
Human Resource Development Plan for the State and build partnerships with various local level
resource institutions for capacity building, training and knowledge management. The State
Government must focus on building capacity of Panchayats and other local bodies on disaster
management. (para 4.5.6)
4.10.1 The Committee observes that concrete steps are required to strengthen Disaster
Management Mechanism in the State which inter-alia  includes preparation of Disaster Resource
Inventory, Regular updation of DM plans of the district and mock drills; strengthening of the
Emergency Operation Centres both at the State and district level; Strengthening of early
warning and dissemination systems in the State; strengthening and skill upgradation of rescue
personnel; conducting Hazard Risk and Vulnerability Analysis (HRV A); and Capacity Building/
strengthening of training institutes for imparting training on DM. (para 4.5.7)
Action Taken
4.10.2 As per Disaster Management Act, the State Executive Committee is required to prepare
State Plan which inter-alia  will include the capacity building and the preparedness measures to

58
be taken by the State. The issue raised by the Committee is about Haryana. The State
Government was requested vide  Ministry of Home Affairs letter dated 21 st April, 2014 to send
their response about the recommendations of DPSC. Further, vide letter dated 27 th November,
2014 the State Government was asked to prepare State Disaster Management Plan including
Human Resource Development Plan and take concrete step require to strengthen Disaster
Management mechanism in the State under the Disaster Management Act. Response from State
Government is still awaited. Besides writing in connection with DPSC, Ministry of Home
Affairs and NDMA has been writing to State Governments to prepare their State Disaster
Management Plan.
Recommendation
4.11 The Committee feels that the suggestion of the State Government to make KSDMA a
separate entity with KSNDMC & DMC of ATI under its jurisdiction may be examined. The
Committee extends whole heartily supports for R&D in the field of DM and DRR for further
improvement and desires that concerted efforts should be made in this regard. The Committee
also feels that there is urgent need for technical and skilled manpower support for enhancing
capacity building as the State in multi-disaster prone zone and frequently faces occurrence of
two or more disasters simultaneously. (para 4.7.6)
Action Taken
4.11.1 The recommendations of the Committee relates to Karnataka. The State Government
has been informed on 5th June, 2014 about the recommendations and requested to take
necessary action for implementation of the recommendation. Reply from State Government is
still awaited. Recent State Government has been reminded again on 2nd December, 2014.
Recommendation
4.12 The Committee feels that the State should prepare its DM Act, Disaster Management
Policy and DM Bye-Laws, fire service for rural areas, Earthquake Risk Mitigation Bill, updation
of planned SOPs. (para 4.8.9)
Action Taken
4.12.1 The recommendation of the Committee is about Maharashtra. Although the States can
frame their own laws but once the Central Act is enacted for the sake of uniformity, it would
be better to follow the same. However, the State Government has been informed on 21
st April,
2014 & 27 th November, 2014 about the recommendations of the Committee on the Disaster
Management Policy and DM Bye-laws etc. and with a request to take action as per Disaster
Management Act, 2005. Response from State Government is still awaited.
Recommendation
4.13 A good communication network is required for dissemination of early warning right
upto the village level. Awareness Generation program should be done on continual basis.
Massive training of Architects, Engineers and Masons in earth quake resistant design and
constructions would be vital. There is need to integrate mainstreaming development plan into

59
planning process and continuous updation of planned SOPs and manuals. The Committee also
stresses for introduction of earthquake resistant techniques into academic curriculum at the
engineering colleges and Architect Colleges, ITIs, Poly-techniques. (para 4.8.10)
Action Taken
4.13.1 Certain amount of training has been provided to State Engineers and Architects on
Rapid Visual Survey (RVS) and safety of lifeline buildings as a part of the Earthquake Scenario
Project. Further work in this direction is being done under National Earthquake Risk Mitigation
Project (NERMP). Department of Higher Education has been informed vide  Ministry of Home
Affairs letter dated 2nd December, 2014 about the recommendations of the DPSC and
requested to furnish the A TR on the issue.
Recommendation
4.14 The Committee recommends for constitution of State Disaster Response Force,
strengthening of Relief and Disaster Management Directorate and DMI and Integration of
Disaster Response System. The Committee desired that financial constraints of the NE States,
including Manipur in the instant case, should be appreciated and they should be properly be
supported to strengthen their disaster management system. (para 4.18.4)
Action Taken
4.14.1 The Fourteenth Finance Commission has already been constituted and is likely to
submit its report shortly. The Central assistances for disaster management to the State
including NE States are as per the recommendation of the Finance Commission. The States and
this Ministry have already given their suggestions to the Fourteenth Finance Commission
Recommendation
4.15 The Committee observes that the Disaster Management Act, 2005 has been adopted by
Mizoram; however, the Disaster Management Rules is still pending approval. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Disaster Management Rules needs to be approved as soon as
possible in order to enable the Department to function smoothly. (para 4.20.4)
Action Taken
4.15.1 The State Government of Mizoram have been informed vide  MHA letter dated 21st
April, 2014 and 1 st December, 2014 about the recommendations of the DPSC with the request
to expedite the approval of the Disaster Management Rules of the State at the earliest for
smooth functioning of the Disaster Management Department of the State.
Recommendation
4.16 The Committee feels that recruitment of adequate staff to man the Emergency
Operation Centers is necessary. The Committee also feels that in order to further strengthen
Disaster Management mechanism, technical personnel are crucial to be posted in the
Department. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the State Government should

60
appoint additional technical manpower support at the earliest. Further, Union Government in
tandem with the State Government must arrive at a decision with regard to providing more
funds in SDRF for procurement of equipments for search and rescue work and also for relief
of the victims. (para 4.20.5)
Action Taken
4.16.1 The State Government of Mizoram has informed that they have provided skeleton staff
to each district. There is no post created for the SEOC. Proposal for creation of certain posts
is under consideration of the State Government.
4.16.2 At pre sent there are no separate provisions for equipping and training of the SDRF in
present scheme of the Finance Commission. States are arranging funds for purchasing
equipments and construction of training infrastructure out of the money eannarked by the 13th
Finance Commission for Capacity Building Grants or out of the earmarked 5% of the State
Disaster Response Fund, which is meager amount to meet the requirement of some of the
smaller and vulnerable States. NDMA has made a recommendation to the 14th Finance
Commission for creation of standalone SDRF and one time provision for purchase of
equipments.
Further Information
4.16.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide  its background note on the Natural Disasters
caused by devastating unseasonal rains, hailstorm and thunderstorm followed by
earthquake in various parts of the country and ongoing rescue, relief and rehabilitation
operations in the affected States meant for Committee’s meeting held on 7
th May, 2015
apprised the Committee about the financial mechanism as recommended by the
Fourteenth Finance Commission under SDRF/NDRF to mitigate the damage caused by
the natural disaster as under:-
"The Four teenth Finance Commission has considered that need for flexibility in
regard to State-specific disasters and recommended that expenditure for providing
immediate relief to the victims of S tate-specific disasters within the local context in
the State, which are not included in the Centrally notified list of disasters eligible for
assistance from SDRF/NDRF, can be met from SDRF within the limit of 10% of the
available funds in SDRF The flexibility is to be applicable only after the State has
formally listed the disasters for inclusion and notified transparent norms and
guidelines with a clear procedure for identification of the beneficiaries for disaster
relief for such local disasters, with the approval of the State Executive Committee.
This Ministry has already communicated to all States in this regard on 20
th March
2015.
The Fourteenth Finance Commission has recommended allocation of `61220 crore
in the SDRF for the years 2015-16 to 2019-20 against `33580.93 crore recommended
by Thirteenth Finance Commission for the years 2010-11 to 2014-15. Contribution to
the SDRF is shared between the Centre and State in the ratio 75:25 for General States
and 90:10 for Special Category States."

61
Recommendation
4.17 The Committee would also like to suggest for developing interstate and international
cooperation for extending support on cross border disasters as 80% boundary of the State is
with Bangladesh. The Committee also recommends for development of early warning
mechanism within the State resources and linking up with national and international early
warning agencies. (para 4.21.9)
Action Taken
4.17.1 The recommendation of the Committee is under examination.
Recommendation
4.18 The Committee recommends that UT Government of Chandigarh should undertake
SWOT analysis of the Disaster Management set up in UT and review it from time to
time. (para 4.23.3)
Action Taken
4.18.1 The Union Territory of Chandigarh has sought more time to provide SWOT Analysis of
their DM set up.
Recommendation
4.19 The Committee is of the view that UT needs capacity building and awareness
generation programmes. UT also requires effective mitigation measures to be built in its
developmental process and be vigilant to safeguard its territorial/geographical interests. Besides,
the UT requires technical guidance and funds for seiting up of the Disaster Management Cell
and to prepare their Disaster Management Plan. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Home Affairs should take up the issues with the Ministry of Finance for setting up Disaster
Management Cell and for establishing SDRF. (para 4.24)
Action Taken
4.19.1 The Union Territory of Dadra & Nagar Haveli has informed that various training
programmes have been imparted to the college / school students and factory workers from
time to time. The administration is in the process of appointing staff for Disaster Management
Cell on contract basis.
Recommendation
4.20 The Committee notes the disaster management arrangements as well as preparedness at
Chennai Petro Chemicals Ltd. (CPCL) to meet any eventuality. The Committee is of the view
that CPCL as well as other such plants should strive to upgrade disaster management
arrangements by conducting evaluations at regular intervals. The Committee also desires that
Government should also take steps to ensure that effective disaster management system is put
in place at such plants in private sector also in the country. The Committee desires to be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. (para 5.5.5)

62
Action Taken
4.20.1 Disaster Management arrangements as well as preparedness, are in place at Chennai
Petroleum Corporation Limited to meet any eventuality. The existing Disaster Management Plan
was evaluated by the Disaster Management Institute (DMI) Bhopal and the Emergency
Response & Disaster Management Plan (ERDMP) was approved by them.
4.20.2 Subsequently the ERDMP was submitted to the Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory
Board (PNGRB) in 2013 after due approval of CPCL Board.
4.20.3 Of f-site Disaster Mock drill exercises are conducted every- year by Major Accident
Hazard (MAH) units of Manali Industrial area on rotation, involving all stake holders and
witnessed by District authorities & NDMA personnel.
4.20.4 The observations made by the observers during the mock drills become the basis for
upgradation of ERMDP.
4.20.5 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has been requested on 2nd December, 2014 to
take steps to ensure that an effective Disaster Management system is put in place at such
plants in private sector also in the country.
Recommendation
4.21 The Committee notes the disaster management arrangements as well as preparedness at
Chennai Port Trust to meet any eventuality. The Committee is of the view that Chennai Port
Trust as well as other major Port Trusts should strive to upgrade the disaster management
arrangements by conducting evaluations at regular intervals. The Committee also desires that
Government should also ensure that minor Ports spread across the coastline of the country
also take up steps to have effective disaster management system. The Committee desires to be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. (para 5.6.6)
Action Taken
4.21.1 The Ministry of Shipping has been reminded on 1st December, 2014 to ensure that
major ports should strive to upgrade the disaster management arrangements by conducting
evaluations at regular intervals and also that minor Ports spread across the coastline of the
country also take up steps to have effective disaster management systems.
Recommendation
4.22 The Committee notes the Disaster Management arrangements as well as preparedness
at SHAR, Sriharikota. The Committee desires .that all other establishments of ISRO should also
have well laid disaster management system comparable to world class disaster management
arrangements to meet any eventuality in case of any disaster. (para 5.11.7)
Action Taken
4.22.1 ISRO has been reminded on 1st December, 2014 to ensure that their all other
establishments should also have a well laid disaster management system / arrangement to meet
any eventuality in case of any disaster.

63
Recommendation
4.23 The Committee hopes that the development of flight model of C band Disaster
Management Synthetic Aperture Radar (DMSAR) must have been completed. There should be
an effective communication system to receive data from ISRO and disseminate it without any
loss of time. There should be regular coordination between Ministry of Home Affairs and
ISRO. Disaster Management support program should be widened and strengthened so that
even small mishaps that may have taken place predicted or un-predicted, may be
communicated for effective and quick relief R&D may be strengthened for improving early
warning of disasters. (para 5.11.8)
Action Taken
4.23.1 ISRO has been reminded on 1
st December, 2014 to expedite the information on
DMSAR.
Recommendation
4.24 The Committee takes note of the submission of additional Chief Secretary on the issue
of scientific dredging of River Bed Material (RBM) and restrictive policy of MoEF to treat river
system of Uttarakhand as a reserve forest. Since RBM is cited as the major reason for colossal
waste and loss, the Committee feels that picking up chugan is essential to clear the centre of
the rivers which are at present filled with RBM The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the MoEF may consider without delay the request of the State Government of Uttarakhand and
send a Task Force to understand and study the river system in Uttarakhand and reconsider the
restricted policy of MoEF so that colossal damage is prevented in future. (para 6.10.11)
Action Taken
4.24.1 The action on this is to be taken by State Government of Uttarakhand and the Ministry
of Environment & Forests. They have been reminded on 1st December, 2014 to take action
expeditiously and inform MHA to apprise the Committee.
Recommendation
4.25 The Committee takes into account the grievances of the State Government of
Uttarakhand regarding the restrictive forest land transfer as a constraint for reconstruction of
road connectivity and reply of MoEF thereon. The Committee desires that the State
Government may provide specific details of road stretches in respect to which forest diversion
in excess of permissible limit of one hectare is required. After getting the information, the
MoEF may consider the matter and take an early decision. (para 6.10.14)
Action Taken
4.25.1 The action on this is to be taken by the State Government of Uttarakhand and the
Ministry of Environment & Forests. They have been reminded on 1st December, 2014 to take
an action expeditiously and inform MHA to appraise the Committee.

64
Recommendation
4.26 The Committee understands that rescheduling by itself is not a solution as it again be
putting burden on the people, but, at the same time, the fact that they would not have to
pay the loan till the Government takes a final view would be a temporary psychological relief
The Committee therefore recommends that loan of marginal farmers should be fully waived
off and certain appropriate percentage of the loan taken by other category of farmers may
be waived off. (para 6.10.16)
Action Taken
4.26.1 The Government of Uttarakhand has been requested to inform about the proposal.
Recommendation
4.27 The State Government should take immediate steps to form Village Disaster
Management Committees in all villages of the State. The Government should also take
immediate steps to prepare a comprehensive Rehabilitation & Resettlement plan to rehabilitate
the disaster affected villages and monitoring and evaluation mechanism as prescribed by GOI
and the same should be made functional at the earliest. (para 6.11.5)
Action Taken
4.27.1 The State Government has been reminded to intimate the action taken regarding setting
up of village disaster management Committees and comprehensive Rehabilitation & Resettlement
plans to rehabilitate the disaster affected villages.
Recommendation
4.28 The Committee notes that IMD has prepared a comprehensive proposal for about
`360 crores for Integrated Himalayan Meteorological Programme both for Western and
Central Himalayas, including locating adequate number of Doppler radars and Automatic
Weather Stations (AWS) for monitoring hydro-meteorology, and submitted the same to the
Central Government /Planning Commission for approval. The Committee recommends that
the proposal which is under active consideration must get green signal because with the
implementation of the proposed Meteorological programme, as much as 48 hours advance
alert would be available to the State Governments for cloudbursts and extreme weather
events in time. It is also important that the globally practiced mitigation efforts of the
identified high hazard slide zones must be fully supported and funded by Union
Government. (para 6.11.8)
Action Taken
4.28.1 Indian Meteorological Department has proposed an Integrated Himalayan Meteorology
Programme to provide effective and user specific mountain meteorological services in holistic
manner in following two parts:
(i) Integrated Himalayan Meteorology Programme for Western & Central Himalayas
covering four States namely J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Sub

65
Himalayan West Bengal has been approved by the Government in August, 2014
at an estimated cost of ` 117.17 Crores to be implemented in the Twelfth Five
Year Plan (2014-17).
(ii) Similarly, another proposal “Integrated Meteorological Services for Northeastern
Region”, covering states namely Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya,
Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and Sikkim has been submitted to the
M/o Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) for in principle approval
and funding. IMD has also made a presentation to the M/o DoNER in Oct,
2013. Approval is awaited from the M/o DoNER for further processing of the
proposal.
Recommendation
4.29 The Committee feels the need for the road map for reconstruction and rehabilitation and
future strategy to overcome such natural disasters. In this connection, the following steps may
be considered:-
(i) need for a multi modal transport system;
(ii) network of airstrips and heliports;
(iii) adequate number of air ambulances;
(iv) netwo rk of godowns with built in shelters for providing food security to the
stranded population;
(v) scientific extraction of RBM from rivers beds to ward off expansion of river
channels;
(vi) augmentation of Wireless, Satellite and Ham communication systems and
installation of high performance computers and Doppler Radars and Automatic
Weather Stations (AWS) and other systems. (para 6.11.10)
Action Taken
4.29.1 The Government of India has constituted a Cabinet Committee under the Chairmanship
of Prime Minister, for providing broad guidance to re-construction and rehabilitation efforts in
Uttarakhand and to take all necessary decisions in this respect. An Inter-Ministerial Group
(IMG) has also been set-up under the chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary for drawing up a time
bound Action Plan for supporting rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts in Uttarakhand
through involvement of various agencies of the Central Government in the post-flood situation.
Cabinet Committee on Uttarakhand has met on 31
st July and taken decisions regarding providing
appropriate assistance to the State Government for restoring and protecting Kedamath temple.
IMG has also met regularly and monitored the progress of actions being taken by the central
Ministries/Agencies not only, for the immediate relief and restoration, but also for the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the State Infrastructure and for preparing an action plan.
Part of the financial support for the reconstruction package is being worked out as an
externally aided programme, with the involvement of the World Bank, Asian Development Bank
and International Fund for Agricultural Development.

66
Recommendation
4.30 The Committee notes that State Government has constituted an expert group to
examine the issue of tourism and carrying capacity of remote pilgrimage/tourist sites with a
view to issue some guidelines in the matter. The Committee feels that registration of pilgrims
should also be examined as Uttarakhand is a multi-entry State with pilgrims coming by
various modes of transport and visiting different religious shrines far flung from one another.
The Committee also desires that alternative means of livelihood for State population needs to
be worked out. (para 6.11.11)
Action Taken
4.30.1 For the Biometric registration of pilgrims the counters have been established at Narsan
Toll Plaza, Haridwar Railway Station, Rishikesh Bus Stand, Jankichatti, Guptkashi, Sonprayag,
Kedarnath, Gangotri and Badrinath. The Biometric registration facility was started on 30th
April, 2014.
4.30.2 The State Government of Uttarakhand is being asked to suggest alternative means of
livelihood for the State population.
Recommendation
4.31 The Committee observes that the CRF has been merged into the SDRF, the allocation
made through the FC’s recommendations are supposed to capitalise the SDRF, although it is
not specifically mentioned in the Act. The Committee finds that there is absence of mechanism
to capitalise the DDRF. The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that hardly any
State Government has set up district disaster funds, let alone providing funds for them. In
view of the Committee, this is one important part of the DM Act, 2005, which has not been
implemented at all. This is pathetic State of affairs keeping in view the fact that districts are
the gross root level implementing authority or agency to deal with all the response measures.
The Committee therefore, strongly, feels that the district administration should have immediate
and direct access to resources and for that, DDRF must be constituted and capitalized
throughout the country without an y exception and delay. (para 7.9.6)
Action Taken
4.31.1 The Task Force which was set up to review the Disaster Management Act in one
of its recommendations, has suggested that the State Government may decide whether to
have response and mitigation funds or to put in place the separate mechanism for timely
access to financial resources by District Authorities. The recommendations of the Task
Force are under consideration of the Government. Further, the 14
th Finance Commission
has already been constituted and is likely to submit its report shortly. The central
assistances for disaster management to the States including NE States are as per the
recommendation of the Finance Commission. The States and this Ministry have already
given their suggestions to the 14 th FC.
Recommendation
4.32 The Committee further desires that at the State level, the SDMA may be authorised for
preparing the State Disaster Management Plan and reviewing the performance of various

67
departments regarding the tasks assigned to them by the Act. A regular monitoring of the
activities of various departments of the State Government is required to be put in place for
better result. . (para 8.7.8)
Action Taken
4.32.1 As per the provision of Disaster Management Act, at present the responsibility to
prepare State Disaster Management Plan is of the State Executive Committee and the SDMA
has the power to approve it. The Task Force which was constituted to review the Disaster
Management Act has recommended that the responsibility to prepare the State Disaster
Management Plans may be transferred to SDMAs. The recommendation of Task Force is still
under consideration.
Recommendation
4.33 Since, the District Administration is the first responder to any disaster, the Committee
considers that the State Government must strengthen the DDMAs for effective disaster
management at the local level. In this regard, the Committee recommends that DDMAs should
be better equipped to be able to prepare district disaster management plans and undertake other
activities of managing disasters. (para 8.7.9)
Action Taken
4.33.1 The Government is contemplating a Plan scheme to assist State Governments in
strengthening the DDMAs and SDMAs which will enable them to discharge their statutory
functions. The States are being impressed upon to strengthen the DDMAs.
Recommendation
4.34 The Committee notes that mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) into program
of various Ministries and Departments is the need of hour and the Planning Commission also
desires to ensure that Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) is inbuilt in all schemes of Central and
State Governments. The Ministry of Finance had accordingly issued checklist, while preparing
EFC/ SFC/ CNE Memo and DPR for new schemes and revisions amounting to `50 crore and
above for enforcing DRR. It was also informed that the Building Code will be in public domain
to ensure disaster resilience and to incorporate retrofitting principles. Though the Government
has clearly articulated the need to look at disaster management as a development issue, but,
in practice, it is not happening as most of the functionaries responsible for certifying do not
have adequate skills in this regard and all State Governments are not familiar with the
methodology to undertake detailed risk assessment and there is very little capacity in the
Government to undertake these tasks. The continuing increase in the damage and destruction
of property, assets and public infrastructure is witness to this. The Committee views that all
development schemes in vulnerable areas should include a disaster mitigation analysis, whereby
the feasibility of a project is assessed with respect to vulnerability of the area and the
mitigation measures required for sustainability. The aim of a mitigation strategy must focus on
reducing losses in the event of a future occurrence of a hazard. The Committee recommends
that mitigation measures need to be considered in land use and site planning activities.

68
Constructions in hazardous areas like flood plains or steep soft slopes are more vulnerable to
disasters. Necessary mitigation measures need to be built into the design and costing of
development projects. The Committee accordingly is of the considered opinion that random
audits of such proposals in areas affected by disasters should be undertaken to ensure
adherence to the risk assessment with a long term view for mainstreaming disaster risk
reduction in development planning. (para 8.7.10)
Action Taken
4.34.1 The Department of Expenditure has issued format for EFC/PIB which takes care of the
aspect of main streaming DRR into various programmes/projects implemented by the
Ministries/Departments of Government of India as the Ministries/Departments proposing the
schemes have to certify that the proposal is secured against natural/man-made disasters like
floods, cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis, etc. If the proposal involves creation/modification of
structural and engineering assets or change in land use plans, the disaster management
concerns should be assessed.

RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE
MONITORING OF IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES
The Committee strongly recommends that the Central Government must
continue to encourage all the stakeholders to adopt National Disaster Management
Guidelines framed by the NDMA and the task of monitoring and even the review
exercise to assess implementation of the guidelines must be entrusted to NDMA without
delay. (para 1.3.2)
STRENGTHENING OF FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE IN THE COUNTRY
The Committee desires that allocation of `205 crore for upgradation of
National Fire Service College (NFSC) would ensure to meet the requirement of
specialized professional training in all aspects and the plan scheme of ` 200 crore
meant for strengthening of fire and emergency service in the country, which has
been completed in March, 2013 would have injected professional proficiency in
combating all type of emergencies. The Committee would further like to know the
activities to be undertaken in centrally sponsored scheme with an outlay of `75
crore for 2015. (para 1.8.3)
HEAT WAVE
The Committee desires that as suggested by the State Government of Rajasthan
heat wave may also be declared as natural calamity. (para 1.14.3)
APPROACH TOWARDS ZERO LOSS OF LIFE AND MINIMUM LOSS OF PROPERTY
The Committee notes the submission of the Government. It however feels that
a lot is still required to make the country more disaster resilient with a motto of
having the approach towards ‘Zero loss of life and minimum loss of property’ along
with fast pace of rehabilitation and compensation. The Committee in this context
appreciate the aim of the Odisha Government which has adopted the principle of Zero
loss of life. (para 1.27.3)
VACANCIES IN NDMA
The Committee does not buy the contention of the Government keeping in mind
vacancies of the Vice Chairman and other members of the Authority. The Constitution
of the Authority is still pending with vacancies for more than eight months. The
Committee feels that the country can ill afford indecisiveness at the apex level in the
matter of disaster management. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the
69

70
posts of the Vice Chairman and other members should be filled without further delay.
The Committee also apprehends that the approval of the National Disaster Management
Plan may get stuck in the newly constituted NDMA as the new incumbents must be
needing time to go through and understand it. The Committee therefore directs that the
National Disaster Management Plan, as prepared by NEC (National Executive Council)
and which is under consideration of NDMA be cleared at the earliest so that the same
is implemented throughout the country for better disaster management without much
delay. (para 3.1.2)
EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES
The Committee finds the views offered by the Government somewhat
confusing as in case guidelines of NDMA are not mandatory then there is no point
in having meetings with the State Governments for its compliance. In view of the
Committee the guidelines of a authority of apex level should have some sanctity
befitting it’s status. The Committee also understands that National Disaster
Management Guidelines are to be implemented subject to availability of resources in
the hands of State Governments/ Union Territories and other stakeholders and the
feasibility of implementation etc. However, keeping in view the guiding documents
for preparedness, preventive and mitigation activities against any disaster, the
Central Government must make all out efforts to persuade all stakeholders for
effective implementation of those guidelines. (para 3.2.5)
MONITORING OF PERFORMANCE OF NDMA
The Committee notes the evasive reply and is dismayed to observe that instead
of being specific on the issue of approval and implementation as well as completion of
the projects, the Government is trying to beat around the bushes. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation and desires that the performance of NDMA should be
monitored at the apex level. (para 3.3.4)
EFFECTIVE MAINSTREAMING OF DRR
The Committee is of the considered view that effective maistreaming of DRR
into the development strategy/plan would lead to achievement of target of National
Policy and better disaster management. The Committee during its visit to
Visakhapatnam in connection with on the spot study of relief and rehabilitation schemes
in the aftermath of Hudhud cyclone, came to know about the absence of this provision
in the Developmental projects and it seemed that the State Government was unaware of
such provisions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that monitoring mechanism
may be evolved to ensure mandatory and strict compliance of guidelines of the Ministry
of Finance regarding actual utilization of 10% flexi funds for Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSS). (para 3.4.4)

71
FILLING UP OF CRITICAL POST IN NDMA
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that the critical posts in
NDMA like those of Financial Advisor and Advisor Operation are vacant and Vice
Chairman and some Members are yet to be appointed, therefore, the committee wonders
as to how the system in NDMA is functioning though it has so much vital role to play
and responsibility to discharge. The Committee therefore recommends that all the
vacant posts should be filled up without further delay. (para 3.5.2)
TRAINING TO THE SDRF PERSONNEL
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs may highlight and
share with other States the effective combating of the very severe cyclone ‘Phailin’,
which had struck Odisha in the month of October 2013, to make them understand
that existence of SDRF in a State would immensely help the State Government in
dealing with the pre and post disaster situations. The Committee in this regard
would also like to observe that the State Government of Andhra Pradesh has raised
only one battalion of SDRF, which is quite not enough in view of the frequency of
cyclones being faced by the State annually. The Committee therefore emphasizes that
the MHA should persuade every State/UT Government to raise sufficient SDRF from
its own resources. The Committee underlines that State Disaster Response Forces
need to be created, equipped and trained by the State Governments, so that they can
play an effective role during disaster response. The Committee further recommends
that NDRF and CAPF must be entrusted with the responsibility of extending training
to the SDRF personnel. (para 3.6.5)
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DISASTER MANAGEMENT (NIDM) AS CENTRE FOR EXCELLENCE
The Committee, while taking note of the fact that National Institute of Disaster
Management (NIDM) is functioning as an autonomous body under the broad policies of
NDMA, reiterates its recommendation that NIDM must be duti-bound to act as centre
for excellence so far as the capacity building for effective disaster management is
concerned. The Government may also consider making NIDM institute of national
importance. (para 3.7.2)
PROVISIONS OF 10% FLEXI-FUNDS
The Committee notes the reply but feels that the laudable initiative has not
gathered momentum and there is lack of response or knowledge on the part of State
Governments. The Committee desires that provisions of 10% flexi-funds should be
made popular among the State Governments. The Ministry may discuss with all the
States. (para 3.8.3)
OPEN AND TRANSPARENT PROCESS FOR SELECTION OF MEMBERS OF NDMA
The Committee wonders as to why not the tenure and age limit of the Members
should be specified in the DM Act, as has been prescribed in other Acts such as those

72
relating to the Central Regulatory Commission, the Election Commission, the
Competition Commission and the National Human Rights Commission, etc. After all,
appointments in those bodies are also made with the approval of Prime Minister and
such prerogative is not subject to any challenge. The Committee is of the firm opinion
that discretion should not, by any stretch of imagination, give suspicion in any mind.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the selection of members
of NDMA should be through an open and transparent process and for the purpose a
Search and Selection Committee may be constituted. (para 3.9.2)
EFFECTIVE FUNCTIONING OF NDMA
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the prevailing state
of affairs pertaining to composition and functioning of NDMA wherein many posts of
Members are vacant since long and the issue relating to re-constitution of Advisory
Committee of NDMA is hanging fire since June, 2010. The Committee understands that
such modus operandi  of NDMA would be unacceptable to any Government of the
democratic country where disasters visit so frequently and so vigorously. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that vacant posts of Members in NDMA be
filled up without further delay and Advisory Committee of NDMA be reconstituted,
sooner the better for effective functioning of NDMA. (para 3.10.2)
BETTER DEVELOPMENTAL TRACK
The Committee observes that relief to the persons affected by the disaster must
be immediate as well as comprehensive so that affected persons are solaced immediately
and economic status of the affected State can be brought back on a better developmental
track. The Committee in this regard, recommends that the role of banks in
implementation of relief programme and long term reconstruction plan must be prompt
and pro-active and sympathetic while fixing terms of loan interest and period of
repayment of loan and grant for fresh loan. The Committee also feels that the provision
mandating NDMA for recommending allocation of funds for the purpose of mitigation
and relief in repayment to loans or for grant of fresh loans to the affected persons by
disasters may be incorporated by bringing amendment to the DM Act. (para 3.11.2)
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AT THE DISTRICT LEVEL
The Committee is of the considered view that since district administration is the
first responder to any disaster, District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs) must be
well equipped as per the provision of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. Financial
assistance at the nick of time is required in the event of any disaster and, therefore, it
cannot wait assessment of damage and releasing time of adequate fund either from Central
Government or State Government. Therefore, on the spot financial management at the
district level is a must to meet immediate requirement of fund. The Committee also notes
that with regard to the Disaster Response Fund and the Disaster Mitigation Fund at
national, State and district levels as stipulated under the DM Act, only the National and

73
State Disaster Response Fund have become operational till now and with the provision of
10% Flexi-funds under CSS, the Government is of the view that funds for other purposes
may not be required. The Committee is not in agreement with the views of the Government
as the concept of flexi-funds may not have legal sanctity and it has other aspects under its
coverage, disaster mitigation as one of them. (para 3.12.3)
HOME GUARDS
Though Home Guards function under the administrative control of State
Governments, nevertheless, Central Government must prepare plan and effective
guidelines which should be adopted by States for raising, equipping and training of the
Home Guards. (para 3.13.2)
HOLISTIC APPROACH TO DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee is of the strong view that holistic approach to disaster
management viz.  paradigm shift from response centric reactive approach to prevention,
preparedness and mitigation must entail capacity and resilience to withstand the
potential damage of disaster so far safety of lives and protection of property is
concerned. That is possible only when preparedness to prevention and mitigation is
strengthened at the ground level. But the Committee is pained to observe that adhocism
is being used so far as implementation of policies and statutory provisions is concerned.
The Committee wishes to draw attention of the Government to the issues like non
existence of DDMAs, except in some States, non provisioning of operationalisation of
Disaster Response Funds at national and State level, Constitution of SDRF as stand
alone Force on the line of NDRF by all States, institutionalization of Disaster
management at PRI/ULB level, strengthening of EOCs at State, District, Sub-Division
and Revenue Circle level, non maintenance of the Cyclone Shelters and poor
maintenance of early warning systems in vulnerable areas in the States as well as no
proper establishment & maintenance of EOCs at district level. The Committee desires
that these issues are addressed without any failure. (para 3.14.2)
PROJECTS UNDER ‘MAKING OUR CITY SAFE'
The Committee is of the considered opinion that the loss of life and property
due to disaster can be prevented and mitigated by enforcing techno legal regime on
the ground level. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Government must undertake concerted efforts, for implementation of building bye-
laws, land use zoning regulations, development controlled regulations, town and
Country Planning laws in various States to ensure structural safety against natural
hazards and to strengthen the mechanisms for their compliance for better disaster
management. The Committee in this background recommends that the decisions taken
in the First session of the National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction held in May,
2013 in which there was a session on ‘Making Our City Safe’, must be implemented
in letter and spirit. (Para 3.15.2)

74
WEAKNESSES IN DISASTER MANAGEMENT SET UP  IN ANDHRA PRADESH
The colossal devastation caused by the recent cyclone Hudhud in Vishakhapatnam
is a testimony to the truth to inherent weaknesses in Disaster Management set up in
Andhra Pradesh which has been highlighted by the Committee in Para 4.2.4 of its 178 th
Report. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Union Ministry of Home
Affairs must monitor to ensure that all the State Governments undertake suitable
measures to overcome the weaknesses in the system. (para 3.16.2)
MID-TERM EVALUATION OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA-UNDP PROGRAMME
The Committee recommends for mid-term evaluation of the implementation of
Government of India-  UNDP  Programme (2013-2017)- enhancing institutional and
community resilience to disaster and climate change. The Government should now
evaluate the achievement of institutional capacities and climate risk reduction measures
to assess as to how much the same have been integrated to development programs in
urban areas as against the set target/objective and also to find out scope for
improvement for better implementation. (para 3.17.2)
RECOMMENDATION OF THE TASK FORCE
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that Government is
procrastinating in considering the recommendation of the Task Force which are of
pivotal importance for better disaster management. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that Government must consider the suggestions of Task Force in time
bound manner so that appropriate action is taken well within time. (para 3.18.2)
HAZARD SPECIFIC STRATEGIC PLANNING
The Committee reiterates its suggestion that in order to make the Disaster
Management set up more resilient and effective in the Assam, the State Government
must chalk out hazard specific strategic planning and encourage greater involvement of
DDMA/PRIs and skill networking with expert institution for better disaster risk
reduction. The Committee further reiterates its recommendation that Government must
reconsider setting up of a state of the art institute of Disaster  Management in Assam
for carrying out need based training and capacity building activities in the State for
NER. (para 3.19.4)
INSTITUTIONALIZATION OF DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The replies of the Ministry in response to the committee’s recommendation are
very general and vague, therefore, the Committee desires that Ministry of Home Affairs
must furnish state specific steps taken for strengthening and institutionalization of
Disaster Management at the ground level. (para 3.20.2)

75
REQUIREMENTS OF UTS
The Committee is not in agreement with the imposition of a blanket ban on
creation of ports which is urgently required for making the establishment of Disaster
Management fully functional and is of the view that sanction for posts should be
accorded at the earliest. The Demand of better communication support between islands
in view of their topography as well as transport vehicles appears to be justified and
should be looked into on priority basis. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that Ministry of Finance must appreciate the requirements of UTs and consider the
proposal of UT division of Ministry of Home Affairs positively. (para 3.21.5)
SETTING UP OF DISASTER MANAGEMENT CELL IN THE UT OF DAMAN & DIU
The Committee observes that since setting up of Disaster Management cell in the
UT of Daman & Diu involves creation of posts implying financial requirement,
therefore, Central Government must look into the matter without much delay and guide
the UT for setting up /strengthening of disaster management set up and creating public
awareness towards capacity building of disaster management. (para 3.22.2)
SETTING UP OF DISASTER RESPONSE FORCE IN THE UT OF LAKSHADWEEP
The Committee notes the reply and observes that the reply is silent on the core
issue of the recommendations which concerns with the proposal of setting up of disaster
response force in the UT of Lakshadweep. It seems that the proposal is still pending
with the Ministry of Finance. If it is so the Committee recommends that the proposal
should be approved without any further delay. (para 3.23.2)
DISASTER IN UTTARAKHAND
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that out of 3,178 missing
persons from the other states 437 next of kin (NoK) of missing persons are still to be
compensated in the aftermath of the disaster in Uttarakhand even after elapse of one
and half year despite the assurance of State Government and Union Home Secretary for
completing formalities for compensation without much delay. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that State Government should immediately act upon the
recommendation of the Committee to ensure timely compensation to NoK of missing
persons without causing than further delay. (para 3.24.2)
CLAIMS OF LIFE AND PROPERTY
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Home Affairs in response to
recommendation contained in Para 6.6.4 apprised the Committee that out of 3,178
missing persons from other States, death certificates and ex-gratia relief have been
provided to next to kin of 2,761 person only. The Committee, therefore, desires that the
State Government should check and clarify the fact so that all assurance claims of life
and property are settled fully at the earliest. (para 3.25.2)

76
DUE AND LEGITIMATE RELIEF AMOUNT
The Committee notes that only 77.75% beneficiaries have been given first
installment of `1.5 lakh. The Committee is of the view that this is not a good
achievement made by the State Government after lapse of a substantial period. The
Committee therefore recommends that all the remaining beneficiaries should be
provided their due and legitimate relief amount within three months. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this matter. (para 3.26.3)
CONSTRUCTION OF SHELTER HOUSES/COMMUNITY CENTRES WITH SUFFICIENT
FOOD STOCK IN UTTARAKHAND
The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the issue of
construction of shelter houses/community centres with sufficient food stock in
Uttarakhand. The Committee recommends that Government should pay urgent attention
to this vital issue of infrastructure. (para 3.27.2)
SCHOOL SAFETY
The Committee recommends that the pilot project of Government of India on
school safety should cover all schools of each district of all states and UTs. The
committee further recommends that Government should undertake concrete steps for
upgrading the skills of personal and communities including the NGOs. (Para 3.29.2)
MEDIUM AND LONG TERM RECONSTRUCTION PACKAGE FOR UTTRAKHAND
The Committee observes that Planning Commission had worked out a medium and long
term reconstruction package for Uttrakhand which includes a financial package of ` 7364 crore
from Centrally Sponsored Scheme, Central Plan, Special Plan Assistance and Externally Added
Projects. The Committee now hopes that the NITI Aayog would take cognizance of the decision
of the erstwhile Planning Commission and the concerted course of action would be taken by the
Central Government to ameliorate Uttrakhand from the shock of devastation and put the State
back on the rail with the objective of better back. (para 3.30.15)
SELECTION OF ALIGNMENT OF ROADS
The Committee further notes that as per the direction from PMO and in
consultation with the Army about 365 km. road length is to be handed over to MoRT
& H in Uttarakhand from BRO. The Committee recommends that the process of
handing over the road be completed at the earliest. The Committee also desires that the
roads so taken from the BRO should be maintained properly by NHAI. The Committee
also hopes that the services of the expert group with experts from Ministry of Science
and Technology (CRRI, CSIR, GSI etc.) constituted to assist BRO in technical matters
such as selection of alignment of roads with the help of latest technology/trial of new
technologies will be utilized and roads of international standards as one can see in hilly
regions of Europe will be constructed in Uttarakhand. (para 3.30.16)

77
COMPLETION OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND TOURISM PROMOTION PROJECTS
The Committee strongly recommends that approved amount to the tune of
` 7,346 crore must be released to the Government of Uttarakhand within set time frame
so that the State’s economy is put on track without much delay by emphasizing
completion of infrastructure and tourism promotion projects in time. The committee
further recommends that highly sophisticated world class area specific warning system
may be provided. Waiver of interest and loan component of various dues of the disaster
affected persons should also be provided. (para 3.31.4)
AUDITING ON UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
The Committee is not convinced with the reply as there are some discrepancies
in the estimates of loss as claimed by the State Government and as estimated by IMCT,
wherein there is also a representative of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee notes
that the representatives of the Ministry of Finance as well as representatives of other
Ministries failed to arrive at the appropriate estimate of loss. The Committee further
notes that the amount as approved by NEC was not even released by the Ministry of
Finance. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that such estimation of losses mocks
the so called claims of transparent system made by the Government. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Central Government should work in tandem with State
Governments facing the disaster. The Committee feels that the Central Government
may adhere to resilient system of monitoring and may order strict auditing on
utilization of funds as given by the Central Government to deal with situation of natural
disaster. The Committee also takes into account the announcement made by the Prime
Minister regarding relief of ` 1000 crore to the State Gov ernments of J&K and Andhra
Pradesh, but the Committee understands that even this announcement of the highest
executive of the country has not been honoured and Andhra Pradesh has been given
only ` 400 crore. The same case may be with J&K. (para 3.33.2)
HUDHUD CYCLONE
The Committee is of the considered view that if any package is announced by the
Prime Minister, it should be honoured by everyone without any question. If there is
some reservation in any quarter of the Government, the Prime Minister should be
properly briefed before any announcement. The Hudhud cyclone struck Odisha and
Andhra Pradesh and both the States suffered loss, though more in Andhra Pradesh.
However the Prime Minister chose to announce the relief package only for Andhra
Pradesh. The Committee apprehends that the people of Odisha may feel neglected in the
absence of concrete assurance from the Central Government for financial assistance to
meet the expenditure for medium term and long term reconstruction plan. The
Committee is also of the view that financial assistance and psychological relief should
go hand in hand and the Government must be very cautious in future in dealing with
States affected by disasters. (para 3.33.3)

78
STRENGTHENING OF DISASTER MANAGEMENT DIVISION OF MHA, GOVERNMENT OF
INDIA
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that Disaster Management
Division (DM Division) of the MHA in the Government of India may be strengthened so
that it is better equipped to undertake the activities assigned by the Act keeping in view
the frequent occurrence of disasters in the country. (para 3.35.2)
NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT PLAN
The Committee recommends that Government should act upon recommendation
of the Task Force without further delay and NDMA should finalize National Disaster
Management Plan soon. (para 3.36.2)

MINUTES

81
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 7 th May, 2015 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Vijay Goel
6. Shri Derek O' Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
10. Shri Selvakumara Chinnayan S.
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
13. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
14. Shrimati Kirron Kher
15. Shri Kaushal Kishore
16. Shri Harish Meena
17. Shri Nagarajan P.
18. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
19. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
20. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
21. Shri B. Sreeramulu
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director

82
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee and
informed them about the agenda of the meeting i.e.,
(i) proposed visit of the Committee to Assam, Meghalaya and Manipur from 25 th to
29th May, 2015 to undertake on the spot study of development in North-Eastern
Region and implementation of Action Taken Report by the Government on 173 rd
Report of the Committee; and
(ii) Hearing of representatives of the Ministry of Rome Affairs on the recent Natural
Disasters caused by devastating un seasonal rains, hailstorm, thunderstorm and
earthquake in Northern and Eastern parts of the country and ongoing rescue,
relief and rehabilitation operations in the affected States.
3.0 * * *
4.0 * * *
 [On Ar rival of the Additional Secretary, MHA And Representatives of
Ministry of Agriculture and Finance]
5.0 The Chairman then welcomed the Additional Secretary and other officials of the
Ministry of Home Affairs and the officials from the Ministry of Agriculture and Finance to the
sitting and asked the Additional Secretary to brief the Committee on the present status of
rescue, relief and rehabilitation operations in the affected States in the aftermath of recent
Natural Disasters.
5.1 The Joint Secretary, Disaster Management made a power point presentation on the
subject. After the presentation, Members sought clarifications on the issues such as assessment
of losses suffered by farmers due to hailstorm and unseasonal rains, status of forecasting
mechanism for disaster in the country, study on earthquake-resistant buildings, financial
compensation to the victims of recent natural disasters and constitution and vacancies in
NDMA etc. The queries were responded to by the officials. With regard to unanswered queries
the Chairman asked the officials to send written replies at the earliest.
6.0 A Verbatim record of the Proceeding of the meeting was kept.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 11.10 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters

83
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 11 th June, 2015 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
6. Shri Baishnab Parida
7. Shri D. Raja
8. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
10. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhary
11. Shri Selvakumara Chinnayan S.
12. Shri Ramen Deka
13. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
14. Shri Kaushal Kishore
15. Shri Harish Meena
16. Shri Nagarajan P.
17. Shri Dilip Patel
18. Shri Lalubhai babubhai Patel
19. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
20. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director

84
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri L. C. Goyal, Home Secretary
2. Shri Anoop Kumar Srivastava, Secretary (BM)
3. Shri H.K. Makwana, Joint Secretary (BM)
4. Shrimati Bina Prasad, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
5. Shri Sailesh, Joint Secretary (P-II)
6. Shri Rajit Punhani, Joint Secretary (J&K)
7. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Joint Secretary (IS-I)
8. Shri S.K. Chakraborty, Addl. RGI
9. Shri Shambhu Singh, Joint Secretary (NE)
10. Shri V . Vumlunmang, Joint Secretary (PM)
11. Shri G .K. Dwivedi, Joint Secretary (F)
12. Shri. Dilip Kumar, Joint Secretary (FFR)
13. Shri Y .S. Sehrawat, Chariman, LPAI
14. Shri J.S. Chaddha, Consulant, LPAI
15. Shri Pankaj Goyal, Director
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs
Shrimati S. Ranganathan, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
Shri Naveen Kumar, Director
Representatives of Border Road Organisation (BRO)
1. Maj. Gen. Balraj Singh, OSD
2. Shri A.K. Dikshit, SE
Representatives of Assam Rifles
1. Lt. Gen. R.K. Rana, Director General, Assam Rifles
2. Capt. Abhishek Chhikara, ADC to DG, Assam Rifles
Representatives of Border Security Force (BSF)
1. Shri K.K. Sharma, ADG
2. Shri Rajeev Krishna, IG
3. Shri Pardeep Katyal, DIG

85
Representatives of Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
1. Shri Krishna Chaudhry, DG
2. Shri R.K. Saini, IG
Representatives of Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
1. Shri B.D. Sharma, DG
2. Shri Deepak Kumar, IG
Representatives of Coast Guard
Shri K.R. Suresh, DIG
Representatives of National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC)
1. Dr. A.K. Mittal, CMD
2. Ms. A. Sabeena, GM
Representatives of Central Public Works Department (CPWD)
1. Shri K.K. Peshin, Chief Engineer
2. Shri M.K. Sharma, Chief Engineer (IBBZ)
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting
and apprised them the agenda of the day i.e. to consider and adopt the draft 187 th and 188 th Action
Taken Reports and to seek further clarifications from the Home Secretary on the issues raised by
the Members on the subject ‘Border Management’ in the light of the Committee’s meeting held on
5th February, 2015 and the issue concerning the status on Indo-Bangladesh Border.
3.0 The Chairman, then, read out the contents of Rule 294 (1) of Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) about declaration of
interests:-
Consideration of Draft 187
th And 188 th Action Taken Reports
4 . 0 *                                  * *
4.1 The Committee then took up the draft l88 th  Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 178 th Report on Disaster
Management in the country for consideration. After a brief discussion, the report was also
adopted.
4.2 The Committee also authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual
errors and if necessary further vetting.
{On the arrival of the witnesses}
I V . *                                   * *
*** Relate to other matters

86
5.0 * * *
5.1 * * *
5.2 * * *
5.3 * * *
5.4 * * *
6.0 A Verbatim record of the Proceedings was kept.
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4:35 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.