PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 153
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON BORDER FENCING AND FLOODLIGHTING
PROJECTS ALONG INDO-PAK BORDER
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA, 1933 (SAKA)NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA, 1933 (SAKA)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23  NOVEMBER, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22  NOVEMBER, 2011)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23  NOVEMBER, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22  NOVEMBER, 2011)
RD
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)RD
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)
RD
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)RD
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 3  NOVEMBER, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
ON BORDER FENCING AND FLOODLIGHTING
PROJECTS ALONG INDO-PAK BORDER
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 3 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(FORW ARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 3 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD NOVEMBER, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22 ND NOVEMBER, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2011/KARTIKA, 1933 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.) 297

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(iii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ..................................................................................... 2—5
CHAPTER II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......... 6
CHAPTER III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ....... 7—13
CHAPTER IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited . ................................................ 14—16
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE 17—19
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 21—24

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on  31st August, 2010)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Javed Akhtar
*
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Raman Deka
15. Shri L. Rajagopal
16. Shri Maulana Mohammed Asrarul Haque
17. Shri Naveen Jindal
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
23. Adv. A. Sampath
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
27. Shri Ravneet Singh
28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
29. Shri Harsh Vardhan
30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
* Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  21 st September, 2010.
(i)

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakali Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh V ardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Fifty Third Report on the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in its One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report on Border
Fencing and Floodlighting Projects along Indo-Pak Border pertaining to the Ministry of Home
Affairs.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Parliament on 21
th October, 2008.
3. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the Action Taken Notes and updated Action Taken
Notes on One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report on Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects along
Indo-Pak Border. The present Action Taken Report of the Committee has been prepared on the
basis of the updated Action Taken Notes.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
27
th July, 2011.
5. Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
27th July , 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs

1
1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report of
the Committee on border fencing and floodlighting projects along the Indo-Pak border. The One
Hundred Thirty Fifth Report was presented to/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
the 21
st October, 2008.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I : The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the
Government: Paras: 2.5.1; 2.5.3; 3.6.2; 3.6.3; 3.6.4; 3.10.2; and 3.11.2 (of the One
Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report).
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation as
mentioned in Chapter – I of the Report.
Chapter II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government's replies: Paras: 2.3.5 ( ibid).
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee
has not accepted or is not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Paras: 2.3.1;
2.3.3; 2.5.2; 2.5.4; 2.5.5; 3.10.3 and 3.11.1 ( ibid).
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation or unsatisfactory
implementation of recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should
furnish logical explanation and convincing responses in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter-IV : The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of
the Government have not been received: paras 2.3.2; 2.3.4; 3.2.1; 3.4.1; 3.6.1; 3.8.1;
and 3.10.1 ( ibid).
The Ministry has furnished either incomplete or interim replies in respect of
recommendations placed in Chapter-IV. In most of the Action Taken Notes indicated in this chapter,
it has been mentioned that the proposals are under consideration/examination. The Committee
desires that the Ministry should furnish detailed, pointed and final Action Taken Notes in respect
of the recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV .
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 EXPEDITIOUS APPROVAL OF REVISED COST
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee understands that the geographical and topographical location of the region
as well as remoteness and tough terrain conditions of Rann have greatly hampered the border
fencing and floodlighting projects. The financial anticipated revised cost to the tune of Rs.1210
crore was under the consideration of Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). The Committee
recommends that the revised cost may be expeditiously approved by CCS for early completion of
the works.
(Para 2.5.1 )
Action Taken
1.1.2 Approval of the Cabinet Committee on Security for revised cost of Rs.1201 crore has been
obtained on 20th July 2009. The works of construction of fencing, road, floodlighting and Border
Out Posts has since resumed in Gujarat Sector and the entire works are targeted to be completed
by 2011-12 or three working seasons whichever is later.
Further Recommendation
1.1.3 The Committee desires that the construction work of fencing, road, floodlighting and
Border Outposts in Gujarat Sector may be completed as per schedule.
1.2 COMPLETION OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF BORDER ROADS WITHOUT FURTHER
DELAY
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee is constrained to observe that the work of construction of border roads has
not been taken up seriously. Out of total length of 134  kms. which was required to be constructed.
73.5 kms. road has been allotted to CPWD and 60.5 kms. to the NBCC. Out of 73.5  kms., CPWD
has constructed only 49 kms. road. NBCC too has not completed its work. The Committee strongly
recommends that Government must make an inquiry into the matter and direct the agencies
concerned to complete the construction of border roads without further delay, for effective
patrolling of the border areas by BSF personnel.
(Para 2.5.3 )
Action Taken
1.2.3 Out of 340 km. border roads sanctioned in Gujarat sector construction work of 260 km.
stretch has been completed and work on 20 km. is now in progress. Construction of the balance
pending works has been approved by the Competent Authority and financial releases have been
made. The executing agencies, viz., Central Public Works Department (CPWD) and National

3
Building Construction Corporation (NBCC) have been directed to expedite the progress and
complete the remaining works in the schedule manner.
Further Recommendation
1.2.4 The Committee recommends that the work in progress may be completed at the
earliest. The balance pending works may be taken up and completed as per targets without
time and cost overruns.
1.3 REALIGNING THE FENCE TOWARDS THE ZERO LINE
Recommendation
1.3.1 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the Indian farmers sow the crops
in the large land located between the fencing line and international border areas which is very
fertile. Unfortunately, during the harvest time the crops are taken away by the people from the
other side of the border with the connivance and support of the border guarding forces of the
neighbouring country. The Committee is of the view that the problem being faced by our farmers
is expected to be minimized with the forward shifted of this stretch of fence.
(Para 3.6.2 )
Action Taken
1.3.2 Realignment of the fence towards the zero line, due to large tracks of cultivable land lying
ahead of the present fencing alignment, has been considered by the Government. A proposal for
forward shifting of 23.380 km. of fencing closer to zero line in Ferozpur sector has been approved
by Government in January 2008 and work is in progress.
Further Recommendation
1.3.3 The Committee recommends that there should not be any delay in the completion of
the project on shifting of 23,380 kms. of fencing closur e to Zero Line in Ferozpur Sector. The
Committee desires to be informed of the time frame by when the work will be completed.
1.4 WOMEN CONSTABLES TO BE DEPLOYED AT THE FENCING GATES FOR FRISKING
OF WOMEN FARMERS
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee further recommends that the recruitment of 685  women constables to be
deployed at the fencing gates for frisking of women farmers, should be completed at the earliest
so that no inconvenience is caused to the women farmers while being frisked.
(Para 3.6.3 )
Action Taken
1.4.2 Government has sanctioned 745 posts of women constables in BSF out of which 658 have
been deployed at the fencing gates for frisking of women farmers and 87 are undergoing training.
1.5 CHANGE IN COMPOSITION OF METAL USED IN THE FENCE
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee has been officially informed that painting of fence is being done regularly

4
as per specifications and budget and for this purpose funds have been allocated to the battalions.
However, the Committee has been given to understand that there are some funds constraints in this
regard. Considering the condition of weather in the area and to avoid recurring cost, the Committee
recommends that the composition of metal used in the fence should be changed and fencing may
be done by using good quality galvanized iron or steel.
(Para 3.6.4 )
Action Taken
1.5.2 The construction agencies entrusted with fencing work have been directed to maintain the
quality of fencing and take remedial measures. They have also been advised to use good quality
galvonised iron or steel in fencing in consideration of hostile weather condition in border areas.
1.6 ONE MORE BATTALION AT THE FEROZPUR SECTOR
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee desires that the issue of raising one more battalion at the Ferozpur Sector,
may be examined in the Ministry of Home Affairs as this is a hyper sensitive area.
(Para 3.10.2 )
Action Taken by the Government
1.6.2  As per the requirement projected by BSF, the MHA has recently considered augmentation
of manpower of BSF and has accorded sanction to raise additional 29 Battalions, 7 Sector
Headquarters and 3 Frontier Headquarters in 5 phases from the financial year 2009-10 to 2013-14.
Key location plans have also been approved.
Further Recommendation
1.6.3 The Committee desires that Ferozpur Sector may be included among the key
locations plans.
1.7 CHALLENGES IN PROPER MANAGEMENT OF THE BORDER
Recommendation
1.7.1 It is the understanding of the Committee that proper management of the Border spells out
many challenges viz. coordination and concerted action by administrative, diplomatic, security,
intelligence, legal, regulatory and financial agencies of the country to secure the frontiers and
subserve its interests. Keeping in view these facts, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Home Affairs should chalk out a strategic Action Plan which may include construction of effective
and quality fencing, floodlighting and concrete roads along the border areas; deployment of high
tech surveillance equipments on the border; strengthening of security of coastal borders of the
country etc.
(Para 3.11.2 )
Action Taken by the Government
1.7.2 The Government has accorded high priority to the construction of fencing, border roads
and floodlighting along Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Pakistan border. Out of 3436 km. of fencing and
4326 km. of border roads sanctioned by the Government, 2677 km. of fencing and 3330 km. of
border roads have been completed along Indo-Bangladesh border. Remaining works are expected to

5
be completed by March, 2012. Besides, 277 km. of floodlighting has also been completed along
Indo-Bangladesh border and a project for construction of 2840 km. of floodlighting is currently
under progress.
1.7.3 Along Indo-Pakistan border, 1948 km. of fencing and 1861 km. of floodlighting has been
completed out of sanctioned length of 2043 km. and 2009 km. respectively. Balance works in
Gujarat sector are under progress.
1.7.4 To redress the inadequacy of infrastructure along Indo-China Border, the Government has
undertaken the construction of 27 strategic roads totaling 804 km. length. The work of
construction in respect of 21 roads has since started and the entire project is targeted to be
completed by March 2013.
1.7.5 In order to strengthen the coastal security, a supplemental scheme is under implementation
in 9 coastal States and 4 Union Territories. Under this scheme, 71 Coastal Police Stations have been
set up out of 73 sanctioned by the Government. Interceptor boats to the Coastal States and Union
Territories are also being provided for effective surveillance of the coastal borders. The coastal
security Phase-II scheme has also been approved by the Government for implementation w.e.f.
April 2011.
1.7.6 Apart from the above measures, Border Guarding Forces have been/are being equipped with
hi-tech surveillance equipments like Hand Held Thermal Imagers, Long Range Reconnaissance
Observation System, Mobile Surveillance V ehicles, Binoculars, etc., which are acting as force
multiplier for effective border management.
1.7.7 The measures enumerated above will go a long way in effective management of the borders
of the country.

6
6
CHAPTER-II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
2.1 WATER SUPPLY FOR THE BSF PERSONNEL
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee notes that the place of worship in the border areas are closely intertwined
with daily life of ESF Jawans. It is of the considered view of the Committee that if water tank/
reservoirs/lakes could be constructed near such places of worship, it would to a great extend solve
the daily necessity of the Jawans as well as the cattle of the farmers. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should come out with suitable scheme for providing
water tanks/reservoir/lakes near the places of worship located near the frontier areas.
(Para 2.3.5 )
Action Taken
2.1.2 The Government has introduced several schemes for providing drinking and potable water
to the border districts under Border Area Development Programme. BSF has however, been asked
to prepare a consolidated proposal for construction of water tanks/reservoirs/lakes, etc. near the
places of worship in border areas in consultation with their field formations. MHA proposes to
provide funds for this purpose under the Border Area Development Programme.

7
7
CHAPTER-III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT
OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE OR IS NOT
SATISFIED WITH THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
3.1 STELLAR ROLE OF BSF IN GUARDING THE COUNTRY’S FRONTIERS
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee hails the stellar role of BSF in guarding the country’ s frontiers under
tremendous adverse circumstances due to geographical, climatic and other conditions. Our borders
are secure due to their diligence, loyalty and commitment to their arduous duty. The Committee duly
acknowledges their patriotism. In this context, the Committee strongly recommends that the
Government should provide better conditions of living and better conditions of service to BSF
personnel. The Committee also recommends to the Government to grant desert/remote areas
allowance and ration money. The Government should also expedite the opening of Kendriya
Vidyalaya in the border areas so that the education of the children of the BSF jawans is not
neglected on account of posting in frontier areas.
(Para 2.3.1 )
Action Taken
3.1.2 The Government is committed to provide better living and service conditions to the BSF
personnel. In pursuance of this objective, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has granted
accommodation allowance, consequent upon the implementation of the 6
th Central Pay Commission
(CPC) Report, at the rate of Rs.700/- per month ( i.e.10% of minimum of PB-1 + Grade pay of
Rs.1800/-) to all Central paramilitary forces personnel who are not eligible for either rent free
accommodation/House Rent Allowance (HRA). Besides, Central Para Military Forces (CPMF)
personnel have been granted ration money allowance at par with that available to the defence
personnel vide MHA order dated 24
th February, 2009. So far as desert/remote area allowance is
concerned, at present it is being paid to the BSF personnel posted in various areas of J & K and
North-Eastern States.
3.1.3 Order for grant of Risk/Hardship based allowance, i.e. High Altitude Allowance/CPMFs
personnel deployed under Ops control of Army or in areas/climate defined by Army but not under
Ops control, CPMFs deployed in LWE areas has been issued on 10 th April, 2009. The children of
BSF personnel are entitled for admission in the Kendriya Vidalayas located in any part of the
country. In the border areas of Gujarat and Rajasthan, 3 Kendriya Vidyalayas already exist and
proposal for opening of one more Kendriya Vidyalaya is under consideration of the Government.
3.1.4 The following new Kendriya Vidyalayas upto Class-V at BSF Locations have been opened
during the month of September, 2010:-

8
(a) Raninagar (Jalpaiguri) WB, (SHQ BSF Jalpaiguri)
(b) Humama, Srinagar (STC BSF Kashmir)
(c) Teliamura Khasiamangal, Tripura West (SHQ BSF Taliamura)
(d) Sunderbani, Jammu (SHQ BSF Sunderbani)
(e) Bhikiwind, Amritsar, Punjab
(f) Seemanagar, Krishnanagar, WB
(g) Ramgarh, Rajasthan
(h) Rampur Fazilka, Punjab
(i) Amarkot, Punjab
(j) Gandhinagar, Cooch Behar, WB
(k) STC BSF Chakur, Latur
(1) KMS W ala, Punjab
(m) Baikunthpur, WB
(n) Raisingh Nagar, Rajasthan
(o) Khajuwala, Bikaner, Rajasthan.
Further Recommendation
3.1.5 The Ministry have stated that the desert/remote area allowance is presently paid
to the BSF personnel posted in various areas of J & K and North-Eastern States. The
Committee, however, desires that such desert/remote area allowance should be paid to
the BSF personnel in all desert/remote areas. There should not be any discrimination in
this regard. In fact, the border areas in Gujarat and Rajasthan are sparsely inhabited
having harsh climate and are non-negotiable. The personnel posted there deserve special
allowance. The committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation in this
regard.
3.1.6. The Committee has noted that there are only three Kendriya Vidyalayas in border
areas of Gujarat and Rajasthan and one is proposed to set up. Since these schools are
meant for the children of BSF personnel posted in frontier areas/border areas, they are
essential due to lack of sufficient educational infrastructure, in those places. However,
considering the large border area in Rajasthan and Gujarat, sufficient number of central
schools may be opened as per the requirement.
3.2 LOGISTICS STRATEGY FOR BORDER SURVEILLANCE AND MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee is of the view that that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take into

9
account the geographical and topographical location of Jaisalmer and Barmer sectors for chalking
out logistic strategy of border surveillance and management. This sector is one of the largest
having an area of 470 kms. Where BSF has been entrusted with the task of taking care of 122
BOPs and 187  gates. Since the terrain of these sectors is sandy, marred with permanent and
shifting sand dunes of varying height of 10 to 50 metres, a well chalked out strategy is the need
of the hour. Regular maintenance and repairing of roads would ensure continued surveillance of
the border areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should
provide a tractor to each company for regular repairing and maintenance of roads along the border
areas. The BSF should get the required basic infrastructure for monitoring the border, for example,
lateral and axial roads upto the BOPs to enhance the operational efficiency. The task of
surveillance should be carefully examined so that effective monitoring mechanism is put in place.
At present, one Battalion is entrusted on an average with the task of manning 60-62 kms. which
inhibits operational efficiency. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home
Affairs should look into the matter at the earliest.
(Para 2.3.3 )
Action Taken
3.2.2 The holding of Tractors by sectors is as under:–
(i) Jaisalmer (S) – 08 Tractors
(ii) Jaisalmer (N) – 09 Tractors
(iii) Barmer – 09 Tractors
3.2.3 However, a case for authorization of 01 Tractor per border deployed coy for the battalions
under Jaisalmer (S), Jaisalmer (N) and Barmer Sector (Total 2 Tractors) for the purpose of regular
maintenance and repair of border roads to ensure continuous surveillance of the border area stands
submitted to the MHA.
Further Recommendation
3.2.4 The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that the Ministry has not commented
on the observations of the Committee regarding manning of 60 to 62 Kms. by one battalion
which inhibits operational efficiency. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the
Ministry should look into the matter at the earliest. The Committee also desires to be
informed of the decisions taken regarding proposed authorization of tractors. In this
connection, the Committee also takes note of the fact that tractors, which are mainly used
for agriculture purposes may not be very suitable for Border Guarding Forces as they are
very slow. It would be better if modern, fast moving and more efficient vehicles are used
in place of tractors. Government may consider this and take necessary action in the matter.
3.3 EMERGENCY EVACUATION IN THE BHUJ/NALIYA SECTOR
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Committee observes that the existing system of emergency evacuation in the Bhuj/Naliya

10
Sector by IAF on requisition from BSF is not a proper arrangement as the helicopter has to fly
to the place of incident from Jamnagar after refuelling. The term ‘emergency evacuation’  has no
meaning as disaster will not wait for h ours before it strikes. The Committee, therefor e, recommends
that an alternative arrangement may be put in place.
(Para 2.5.2 )
Action Taken
3.3.2 This issue has been examined in the MHA. One Chetak helicopter is positioned at Jodhpur
to meet the operational requirement of BSF. The helicopter can also be utilized in case of any
disaster. With the support of Indian Air Force, the existing arrangement appears to be sufficient
to meet any emergent requirement in the area.
3.3.3 BSF MI-17 helicopters stationed at New Delhi are also deployed expeditiously for
operational or any emergency in any part of the country. The fleet of MI-17 IV, helicopters is
located at Safdarjung Airport and carrying out assigned tasks on detachment basis in the various
parts of the country.
3.3.4 Out of the 8 helicopters, 4 ALH/Dhruv are deployed in Central India, i.e. LWE affected
areas and can be redeployed at Bhuj/Naliya Sector at short notice.
Further Recommendation
3.3.5 The Committee does not agree with the contention of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the
positioning of one helicopter at Jodhpur would meet the operational requirement at short notice in
emergent situation as Gujarat Frontier has a long Border extending upto Barmer Sector. The
Government may reconsider the requirement of Helicopter in emergency situation and take strategic
decision in the matter. The Government may also consider deployment of some of the helicopters,
presently, stationed at Delhi at the strategic positions in Indo-Pak Borders of the country to meet
emergency situation.
3.4 EXPEDITIOUS CONSTRUCTION OF THE REMAINING LINK ROADS
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee further recommends that the construction of the remaining link roads (to the
extent of 21 kms.) be expedited. The reported wearing and tearing of the link roads from
Dharamshala to BOP Vigokot and Dharamshala to BOP Bediabet, due to heavy vehicular traffic
of NBCC/CPWD need immediate attention for repair.
(Para 2.5.4 )
Action Taken
3.4.2 The proposed works of construction of the remaining link roads have been approved by the
Competent Authority and financial releases has been made. The construction agencies, viz., Central
Public Works Department (CPWD) and National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC) have
been directed to undertake early repair of border and link roads which have been damaged due to
construction activities.

11
Further Recommendation
3.4.3 The Committee takes serious view of the fact that the repair of link roads is taking unduly
a long time and construction works are unnecessarily delayed, which is not acceptable. The works
may be completed within the next construction season.
3.5 STRENGTHENING OF THE MONITORING  MECHANISM IN THE BHUJ SECTOR
Recommendation
3.5.1 The Committee has been given to understand that Creek Sector is a porous border. A number
of small infiltration in collusion with anti-national elements and terrorists, enter the country
through this border. Smuggling of fake currency notes, narcotics, arms and ammunition, explosives
and trafficking of illegal immigrants, are some of the common anti-national activities that are
carried out through this area. Creek area is reportedly used as a launch pad for terrorist activities
and gathering information on patrolling pattern of the country. All these activities indicate the
nefarious design of the forces inimical to the country’ s interests, to widen the scope of terrorism
to coastal areas. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should immediately pay attention towards strengthening of the monitoring mechanism in the Bhuj
Sector, and plug the porous points in the border. Sooner it is done it would be in the national
interest.
(Para 2.5.5 )
Action Taken
3.5.2 In order to strengthen the monitoring mechanism in the Bhuj sector and to plug the porous
points in the border, following steps/measures have been taken:-
(i) One BSF Battalion has been exclusively deployed for the creek area
(ii) Six floating BOPs have been stationed at important check points in this area
(iii) Patrolling is being carried out with the help of speed boats and medium crafts
(iv) Two UA V and two hepter r ecee are being carried out every month
(v) Procurement of Fast Attack Crafts (FACs) : MHA has accorded procurement sanction
for US$ 81,61,799.20 (INR 38,23,80,293.00) including 10 years AIAMC (all inclusive
AMC) vide their O/o No. P- 4/869(FAC)/PC/BSF/2010/MHA (PW), dated 18.11.2010
for procurement of 4 FACs. Procurement cell, BSF has placed of tender to
M/s Tampa Yacht Manufacturing LLC, USA vice AT No. P-4/869/AT-FAC/PC/BSF/
2010/53/9259-68 dated 10.12.2010.
(vi) Procurement of Hover Crafts: MHA has sanctioned Rs.14.56 crore for procurement of
two Hover Crafts for Gujarat Frontier. Tenders were invited and subsequently same
were scarped due to non fulfilment of terms and conditions, i.e.  trial/test.
Subsequently, a decision was taken for procurement of 4-6 seater Hover Crafts
available in the range of Rs.10-30 lakhs. As desired by the CA, various firms were
contacted through e-mail for details of their product. Only two firms (M/s Neoteric
Hovercraft, INC, USA and M/s Mariah Hovercraft, Australia) have responded in this

12
regard. A Board of Officers has been detailed to conduct demonstration/trail of four
seater Hover craft at Jammu where the product of M/s Neotric Hovercraft, INC, USA
is available in India. Further action will be taken on receipt of feedback from the
Board of Officers.
Further Recommendation
3.5.3 The Committee is of the view that the tendering process may be completed at the earliest
and the Hovercraft be provided without any delay. The Committee feels that frequency of recee
by UA Vs and hepters may be increased, so that, more vigil can be kept in this porous border area,
effectively.
3.6 CONSTRUCTION OF FORWARD COMMAND POST
Recommendation
3.6.1 The Committee also urges upon the Ministry for an early decision on construction of
Forward Command Post.
(Para 3.10.3 )
Action Taken
3.6.2 BSF has asked its field formations to forward a detailed proposal for creation of forward
command post in addition to already existing Observation Posts, steel towers and naka machans
for effective domination of the border.
Further Recommendation
3.6.3 The Committee observes that no tangible progress has been made in regard to
the construction of Forward Command Post despite the recommendation made by it in
2008. The Committee during study visits, noticed the necessity of construction of
forward command post. The Committee, therefore, feels that the issue of Forward
Command Post is strategically very important. An early decision may therefore, be
taken in the matter.
3.7 UPGRADING AMENITIES FOR THE TOURISTS
Recommendation
3.7.1 During the course of its study visit, the sub-Committee had occasion to witness the retreat
ceremony at the Wagha Border at Amritsar. The Committee observed that although a large number
of tourists visit this area for witnessing the retreat ceremony, the infrastructure and amenities are
inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need for upgrading amenities for
the tourists. The Committee also had an opportunity to visit JCP Hussainiwala. This place is also
home to the Samadhis of Saheed Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev. However, this spot is less
popular amongst the visitors. Therefore, there is a need to popularize this place amongst the public.
The Committee also recommends that there is an urgent need for a longer gallery to accommodate

13
more persons to witness the retreat ceremony as the existing one can accommodate small number
of persons, at JCP Hussainiwala.
(Para 3.11.1)
Action Taken
3.7.2 The sanction for Development of Visitors’ Gallery at Retreat Point Hussainiwala for
Rs.6,22,00,000/- was accorded by MHA on 29.9.2010. The Hon’ble Home Minister has laid the
Foundation Stone of Viewers Gallery at JCP, Hussainiwala on 22.10.2010. The work will be
executed by CPWD.
Further Recommendation
3.7.3 The Committee observes that nothing has been mentioned about the Action Taken in
respect of recommendation concerning inadequate infrastructure and amenities at the
Wagah Border. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation in the
matter. The Committee also recommends that developmental work at Retreat Point at
Hussainiwala be completed within the stipulated time frame and without cost overrun in
order to facilitate the visitors.

14
CHAPTER-IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 INCIDENTS OF DEATH OF BSF PERSONNEL DUE TO SNAKE BITE
Recommendation
4.1.1 The Committee also came across incidents of death of BSF personnel due to snake bite
coupled with the time taken to move the victims to hospital located far off from the border.
One of the solution that was suggested to the sub-committee was that the BSF personnel be
provided with knee-high boots. The Committee, agreeing to the suggestion, strongly,
recommends that the Government should make a provision for supplying knee –  high boots to
the BSF personnel.
(Para 2.3.2 )
Action Taken
4.1.2 In  this connection, BSF has approached Director (Technical) FDDI to frame specification
and also to develop a sample of knee-high boot for consideration and authorization by the Ministry
of Home Affairs. Sketch of the shoe drawn by the Director (Technical) FDDI was received and
same after approval of IG (Prov) has been sent to Director FDDI on 30.12.2009 for fabrication
of one same and specification. BSF has also sent reminders to expedite fabrication of one sample
of High Ancle Boot. However, no response has yet been received. Further efforts are underway to
get the sample prepared and authorized by the MHA.
4.2 WATER SUPPLY FOR THE BSF PERSONNEL
Recommendation
4.2.1 The Committee was given to understand that about Rs.3 crore was spent on water supply
for the BSF personnel. It was suggested that a water pipeline along the BOP line may be provided
for use of BSF personnel as well as for the wildlife and tree plantations. The Committee agrees
that laying of pipelines along the border would be economical as compared to the supply of water
by the water tankers and accordingly recommends the same for early implementation.
(Para 2.3.4 )
Action Taken
4.2.2 Sanction of Rs.13,71,493.00 for providing water supply to seventeen BOPs by laying
pipe line, filtration plant, water pump as deposit work has been accorded by MHA on 18/29
November, 2010.
4.2.3 Pr oposal for providing water supply to other BOPs where resources are available
and feasible for providing water supply through pipe line has been asked for from the field
formation.
14

15
4.3 UPGRADING INDIA’S BORDER SURVEILLANCE AND MILITARY PREPAREDNESS
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee was apprised that the bund which was constructed in order to provide
security cover to the persons engaged in fencing work, had now become counterproductive and
was helping militants. It has been reported that Pakistan has made a lot of construction after
ceasefire. It had constructed 97  OP Towers and 162 barracks. The Committee, therefore, strongly
feels that Government of India should upgrade India’s border surveillance and military
preparedness.
(Para 3.2.1 )
Action Taken
4.3.2 A proposal for construction of earthen bundh on home side of fencing, naka cum machan
cum fighting bunkers and road in Jammu stands submitted to MHA. The proposal was discussed
in 19th HLEC held on 13 January, 2009 and the same is under active consideration for CCS
approval.
4.4 REPLACEMENT OF THE EXISTING BORDER FLOODLIGHT (BFL) SYSTEM
Recommendation
4.4.1 Keeping in view the fact that the floodlight equipments have outlived their life and cables
have also become obsolete and damaged, the Committee recommends that it is necessary to replace
the existing Border Flood Light (BFL) system with utmost expedition.
(Para 3.4.1 )
Action Taken
4.4.2 The Government is aware that the floodlight equipments along Indo-Pakistan border
including Punjab sector have outlived their life and cables have also become obsolete and damaged
since these floodlights were erected long back. A proposal regarding upgradation/replacement of the
existing Border Flood Lights system in Punjab sector with new and more illuminating devices is
under examination of the Government.
4.5 REALIGNING THE FENCE TOWARDS THE ZERO LINE
Recommendation
4.5.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the issue of
realigning the fence towards the zero line on top priority as large tracks of cultivable lands lie
beyond the present fencing area. The Committee also recommends that shifting of fencing in
Abohar and Ferozpur Sectors be completed in a scheduled time frame and the proposal of shifting
of fencing in Gurudaspur Sector be finalized and approved at the earliest.
(Para 3.6.1 )
Action Taken
4.5.2 Realignment of the fence towards the zero line, due to large tracks of cultivable land lying
ahead of the present fencing alignment, has been considered by the Government. A proposal for
forward shifting of 23.380 km. of fencing closer to zero line in Ferozpur sector has been approved
by Government in January 2008 and works are in progress.

16
4.6 CONSTRUCTION OF A PONTOON BRIDGE
Recommendation
4.6.1 The committee appreciates the hardships being faced by farmers in cultivating their land
beyond the rivers Tarna, Sutlej and Ravi. The committee, therefore, recommends that government
should explore the possibility of construction of a pontoon bridge at Chakri over river Tarna,
bridge over Ravi at Kakkar village and a bridge over Sutlej.
(Para 3.8.1 )
Action Taken
4.6.2 BSF has earmarked some locations where construction of bridges/culverts over the rivers
in Punjab needs to be taken. Operational clearance from Ministry of Defence is being obtained
before finalizing the proposal and obtaining necessary approvals.
4.7 CONSTRUCTION OF PUCCA ROADS ALONG THE ENTIRE STRETCH OF PUNJAB
FRONTIER
Recommendation
4.7.1 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the absence of Black Top (Pucca) road
along the entire stretch of fencing of Punjab Frontier. The Committee would like the Ministry of
Home Affairs to look into this grey area and examine the possibility of construction of pucca roads
along the entire stretch of Punjab Frontier. The Committee strongly recommends that axial and
lateral roads connecting border fence gates, are required to be constructed for effective patrolling
of the border areas. The Committee is of the strong view that pontoon bridges/belley bridges are
also required to be constructed at strategic locations to facilitate movement of BSF troops as well
as farmers. The Committee further recommends that the construction of pucca roads and their
timely repairing would improve better surveillance of border areas by the BSF and curbing of
infiltration from other side of the border area.
(Para 3.10.1 )
Action Taken
4.7.2 A proposal for construction of 394 km. of lateral and 210 km. of axial roads in Punjab is
under examination in the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4.7.3 Regarding construction of pontoon bridges on rivers for accessibility during the fair
weather, need based bridges are constructed on strategic locations every year.

17
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSION/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
EXPEDITIOUS APPROVAL OF REVISED COST
The Committee desires that the construction work of fencing, road, floodlighting and
Border Outposts in Gujarat Sector may be completed as per schedule. (Para 1.1.3)
COMPLETION OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF BORDER ROADS WITHOUT FURTHER
DELAY
The Committee recommends that the work in progress may be completed at the
earliest. The balance pending works may be taken up and completed as per targets without
time and cost overruns. (Para 1.2.4 )
REALIGNING THE FENCE TOWARDS THE ZERO LINE
The Committee recommends that there should not be any delay in the completion of
the project on shifting of 23, 380 Kms. of fencing closur e to Zero Line in Ferozpur Sector.
The Committee desires to be informed of the time-frame by when the work will be
completed. (Para 1.3.3)
ONE MORE BATTALION AT THE FEROZPUR SECTOR
The Committee desires that Ferozpur Sector may be included among the key
locations plans. (Para 1.6.3)
STELLAR ROLE OF BSF IN GUARDING THE COUNTRY'S FRONTIERS
The Ministry have stated that the desert/remote area allowance is presently paid to
the BSF personnel posted in various areas of J&K and North-Eastern States. The
Committee, however, desires that such desert/remote area allowance should be paid to the
BSF personnel in all desert/remote areas. There should not be any discrimination in this
regard. In fact, the border areas in Gujarat and Rajasthan are sparsely inhabited having
harsh climate and are non-negotiable. The personnel posted there deserve special allowance.
The committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation in this regard.
(Para 3.1.5)
The Committee has noted that there are only three Kendriya Vidyalayas in border
areas of Gujarat and Rajasthan and one is proposed to set up. Since these schools are
meant for the children of BSF personnel posted in frontier areas/border areas, they are
essential due to lack of sufficient educational infrastructure, in those places. However,
considering the large border area in Rajasthan and Gujarat, sufficient number of central
schools may be opened as per the requirement. (Para 3.1.6)
17

18
LOGISTICS STRATEGY FOR BORDER SURVEILLANCE AND MANAGEMENT
The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that the Ministry has not commented
on the observations of the Committee regarding manning of 60 to 62 Kms. by one battalion
which inhibits operational efficiency. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the
Ministry should look into the matter at the earliest. The Committee also desires to be
informed of the decisions taken regarding proposed authorization of tractors. In this
connection, the Committee also takes note of the fact that tractors, which are mainly used
for agriculture purposes may not be very suitable for Border Guarding Forces as they are
very slow. It would be better if modern, fast moving and more efficient vehicles are used
in place of tractors. Government may consider this and take necessary action in the matter.
(Para 3.2.4)
EMERGENCY EVACUATION IN THE BHUJ/NALIYA SECTOR
The Committee does not agree with the contention of the Ministry of Home Affairs
that the positioning of one helicopter at Jodhpur would meet the operational requirement
at short notice in emergent situation as Gujarat Frontier has a long Border extending upto
Barmer Sector. The Government may reconsider the requirement of Helicopter in
emergency situation and take strategic decision in the matter. The Government may also
consider deployment of some of the helicopters, presently, stationed at Delhi at the strategic
positions in Indo-Pak Borders of the country to meet emergency situation. (Para 3.3.5)
EXPEDITIOUS CONSTRUCTION OF THE REMAINING LINK ROADS
The Committee takes serious view of the fact that the repair of link roads is
taking unduly a long time and construction works are unnecessarily delayed, which is
not acceptable. The works may be completed within the next construction season.
(Para 3.4.3)
STRENGTHENING OF THE MONITORING MECHANISM IN THE BHUJ SECTOR
The Committee is of the view that the tendering process may be completed at the
earliest and the Hovercraft be provided without any delay. The Committee feels that
frequency of recee by UA Vs and hepters may be increased, so that, more vigil can be kept
in this porous border area, effectively. (Para 3.5.3)
CONSTRUCTION OF FORWARD COMMAND POST
The Committee observes that no tangible progress has been made in regard to the
construction of Forward Command Post despite the recommendation made by it in 2008. The
Committee during study visits, noticed the necessity of construction of forward command
post. The Committee, therefore, feels that the issue of Forward Command Post is
strategically very important. An early decision may, therefore, be taken in the matter.
(Para 3.6.3)
UPGRADING AMENITIES FOR THE TOURISTS
The Committee observes that nothing has been mentioned about the Action Taken

19
in respect of recommendation concerning inadequate infrastructure and amenities at the
Wagah Border. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation in the
matter. The Committee also recommends that developmental work at Retreat Point at
Hussainiwala be completed within the stipulated time-frame and without cost overrun in
order to facilitate the visitors. (Para 3.7.3)

MINUTES

22

23
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 27 July, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Shri Raman Deka
8. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque
9. Shri Naveen Jindal
10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
11. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
12. Adv. A. Sampath
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
15. Shri Ravneet Singh
16. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
17. Shri Harsh Vardhan
18. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
19. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
23

24
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee
Apprising the agenda of the day, he informed the members that the meeting of the Committee was
called to consider and adopt the draft 153 rd Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report on Border
Fencing and Floodlighting Projects along Indo-Pak Border.
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft 153 rd report for consideration. After some
discussion, the Committee adopted the report with some modification.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.25 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.