c.s. 111103 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE CENSUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 1993/BHADRA, 1915 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
I. CoMPOSITION or- TnE CoMMITTEE 
II. RErORT or- Tllf:: CoMMITTEE 
III. BILL As REPORTED Bv TilE CoMMITTEE 
IV. ArrENDJX 
Minutes of the meetings of the Committee 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
1- 3 
5-11 
13-17 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Slui Anantray Dcvshankcr Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Dliawan 
5. Slui Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Gaya Singh 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
*8. Vacant 
9. Slui Rafique Alam 
10. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
11. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
12. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
14. Slui Subramanian Swamy 
15. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
16. Dr. C. Silvera 
17. Shri Sudhir Sa want 
18. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
19. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
20. Prof. M. Kamson 
21. Slui A. Vcnkatcsh Naik 
22. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
23. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
24. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
25. Kum. Mamata Banerjee 
26. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
27. Shri Dhanuskodi At hi than 
28. Dr. Girija Vyas 
29. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
30. Maj. Gen. (Rctd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
31. Shrimati Vijaya Rajc Scindia 
32. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
33. Shri Ram Singh 
34. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
35. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
• Vacancy caused due to the retirement of Shri Samar Mukherjee from the Membership of the Rajya 
Sabha on the 9th July, 1993. 
(i) 

(ii) 
36. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
37. Mahant Abcdya Nath 
38. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
39. Shri Rabi Ray 
40. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
41. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
42. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
43. Shri Prcm Ch:wd Ram 
44. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta 
45. Shri B. Raja Rav i Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shrimati Shovana Narayan, Director 
2. Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Committee Officer 

REPORT OF THE COl\1MITTEE 
L the Chairmar1 of the Dcparlmcnt.- Rc:lated Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs , having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this Fifth Repor. of the Committ~e. 
2. In pursuanr.:e of the rules relating to the Department-Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committees , the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker , 
Lok Sabha, referred '" The Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992**, as introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on the 18th December, 1992 and pending in that House , to the Committee for 
examination and report. 
3. The Committee in its meeti ngs held on the 18th, 19th and 25th August, 1993 
discussed the provisions of the Bill and also heard the views of the represe:ntative s of 
the Ministries of Home Affairs and Law , Justice & Company Affairs. In its meeting 
held on the 25th August , 1993, the Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration 
of the Bill. 
In the said meeting the Committee considered and adopted the drafl Report. 
4. ln their background note supplied to the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affair~ 
explained the need for amending the Census At"t, 1948 as follows:-
'The Census is normally taken after every 10 years. The last Census being held in 
1991, the next decennial census would lake place in the year 2001 only. However . 
the Census Organisation is required to undertake surveys or census in parts of the 
country from time to time meet the exigencies of the situation. for example, an 
ethographic survey was done in Jammu & Kashmir in the year 1986-87 to identify 
the communities which should be declared as Scheduled Tribe s. Similarly, in 
Punjab, a survey was done in Kandu Khera village in the year 1986. That is, under 
the Census Act, 1948, census can be taken in any part of the country at any 
particular point of time. Accordingly , it is necessary to get the Census (Amend­
ment) Bill passed as quickly as possible to meet such emergent situations. 
Under the Census (Amendment) Bill, powers are being vested with the Central 
Government to determine the question .naire s for the Census. This power was 
earlier vested with the State Governments ... Different State Governments followed 
different approaches. This not only created administrative difficulties but also, due 
to lack of uniformity, led to uneven quality of data. However , the situation has 
changed drastically in the country during the last three or four decades and it is 
essentia l that there should be uniformity of norms and standards, etc. in the 
censuses and surveys throughout the country. It is towards this end that the powers 
to determine the census questionnaires are being vested with the Central 
Government under the Census (Amendment) Bill ... 
The Amendment Bill provides for requisitioning of vehicles and buildings under 
Section 7(A) to (H) so as to tackle difficulties faced in acquiring of buildings and 
the vehicles at the time of the Census. The requisitioning of buildings an.-1 vehicles 
under the Amendment Bill would be for a very short period ... 
The Census (Amendment) Bill also provides for prosecution and penalties for 
certain offences. Increasingly , it has been found that the Census enumerators and 
supervisors who are usually school teachers or other government functionaries are 
•Rajya Sabha Parliamentary B11llctin Part IJ dated the 6th August, 1993. 
••Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary , Part II, Section 2, dated the 18th December , 1992. 

2 
un-willing to perform the census duty. Many census officials are also found to be 
negligent in discharge of their census duty. Some times there have been cases 
where the local authorities or other government departments refuse to give their 
personnel for census duties. There have been organised movement s hy the unions 
and staff associations against the performance of the census duti es. There have 
been organised movements in many parts of the country making it difficult to take 
the census. Organised movements also put pressure against census officials to 
record the particular responses to the census questions. In the past, the census 
organisations had to contend with organised movements whose aim was to secure 
inflated census returns in regard to certain religions or mother tongues. It is with 
this view that the Census (Amendment) Bill provides for various penalties. 
Creation of hindrance or obstruction by any person in performance of any duty 
under the Census Act is being made cognizable under the Amendment Bill. This 
Bill is primarily directed against the delinquent census officials and it does not tend 
to abridge the fundamental rights of citizens. In fact, the citizens' rights will not be 
abddged in any way by the Census (Amendment) Bill. Rather, it makes it 
mandatory on the part of _the Census enumerators to record an individual's 
response to census questions in truthful manner, and as such, protects the rights of 
an individual's response to census questions in truthful manner, and as such, 
protects the rights of an individual. Towards this end, putting of any offensive or 
improper questions or knowingly making any false return by a census official is 
being made cognizable offence under the Amendment Bill. Some of the other 
offences provided under the Census Act are also being made cognizable so as to 
act as a deterrent to those who refuse to perform census duties.' 
5. As a sequel to the submissions made by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs before the Committee with regard to the justification for the Amending 
Bill, that Ministry in their supplementary note supplied to the Committee, stated as 
under: 
'It is proposed to amend the existing Census Act in order to ensure that the 
Central Government and through it the Census Commissioner of India is vested 
with sufficient authority to take action against any person who refuses to cooperate 
with the requirement of conducting national census. The need for this has been felt 
as the penalties already prescribed under Section 11 of the Census Act do not 
appear to be exhaustive or adequate for the purpose of ensuring smooth conduct of 
census operation in future ... 
The list of penalties under the present Act does not, for instance, cover cases of 
requisitioning premises, vessels, vehicles or animals needed or likely to be needed 
for the conduct of census. The present Act also does not safeguard the interest of 
persons who are asked to perform census duties, inasmuch as under the existing 
Act there is no obligation cast on the deputing organisations to treat the deputed 
staff as on duty. The rule making power under the existing Act would be of no 
avail to meet the chasm in such cases since, a rule cannot stand without support of 
express statutory provisions. It is precisely for this reason that amendments to the 
original Act have become necessary ... 
Partly to fill these lacunae and partly to bring the Census Act more in line with 
the realities of today's situation, amendments to the Act are proposed .... In future, 
because of the changing socio-economic climate more and more such occasions may 
arise and it would not do at all to be found wanting in adequate legal protection to 
back the direction. In this context, it needs to be pointed out that the purpose of 
introducing penal provision cannot be served by resorting to disciplinary proceed­
ings. The taking of census is a short period, time-bound programme. Departmental 

3 
proceedings are notoriously time-consuming. They are hardly likely to deter 
delinquent workecl. The proposed amendment provides for sufficient safeguard 
against any possible misuse of penal provisions. It is necessary to obtain previous 
sanction of the Central/State Governments before prosecuting any person. The 
need for seeking Central Government's prior sanction has been introduced only in 
limited cases. It would be easier for the Central Government in those cases to 
ascertain if any mitigating factors exist before deciding to sanction prosecution .... 
The proposed amendments, as pointed out above, are only supplementing and 
modifying the already existing provisions which regulate the conduct of all those 
involved in the Census taking. The amendments are in the nature of forearming 
the census organisation to deal with problems which seem to be in the offing .... It 
can be seen that the thrust of the proposed amendments is clearly and unmistak­
ably in favour of strengthening the perceived authority of the Census Commis­
sioner who is charged with an arduous responsibility of conducting time bound 
census all over the country. It is submitted that the proposed amendments would 
go a long way in stabilising the position of the Census Commissioner in a fast 
changing world where every action of the authorities is being questioned. If such a 
timely step is not taken, it may become difficult for the census organisation to hold 
census in future.' 
6. The Committee having heard the representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs 
and Law, Justice and Company Affairs and having considered the notes on the subject, 
concludes that in view of the facts placed before it, related to the conduct of population 
census in the country, it has been found necessary to amend the Census Act, 1948 with 
a view to achieving the objectives as set out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of 
the Amending Bill. Accordingly, Clauses 2 to 15 of the Bill were adopted by the 
Committee without any change. 
7. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with. some changes 
which are of consequential or drafting nature. 
8. The Committee recommends that the Bill, as reported, be passed. 
New Delhi; 
August 25, 1993 
M.M. JACOB 
Chairman 
Department-Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs. 

THE CENSUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992 
(As REPORTED BY THE CoMMfiTEE) 
Bill No 182 of 1992 
[Words under-lined indicate the amendments suggested by the ,Committee] 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Census Act, 1948. . . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fourth year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Census (Amendment) Act, 1993. Short title. 
37 of 19-lS. For section 2 of the Census Act, 1948 (herein referred to as the Substitution 
5 Principal Act), the following sections shall be substituted, namely:- of section 2. 
45 of 1860. 
I of 1872. 
10 
2 of 1974. 15 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Premises" means any _land, building or part of a building 
and includes a hut, shed or other structure or any part thereof; 
(b) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(c) "vehicle" means any vehicle used or capable of being vsed for 
the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by mechanical 
power or otherwise. 
2A. Any reference in this Act to the Indian Penal Code, the Indian 
Evi9ence Act, 1872 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, 
in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, be construed 
5 
Definitions. 
Rule of con­
struction re­
specting 
enactments. 

not extend· 
ing to 
Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
6 
as a reference to the corresponding enactment in force in that State. 
Amendment 3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
of section 4. word "census officers", the words "with such designations as that 
Government may deem necessary" shall be inserted. 
lnsenion of 
new section 
4A. 
Staff of every 
local authori· 
ty to be 
mode avail· 
able for 
taking 
4. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall 5 
be inserted. namely:-
"4A. Every local authority in a State shall, when so directed by a 
written order by the Central Government or by an authority 
appointed by the Central Government in this behalf, make available 
to any Director of Census Operations such staff as may be necessary 
for the performance of any duties in connection with the taking of 
10 
census. census." 
Insertion of 5. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
n.:w sections be inserted . namely:-
7A to 711. 
Requisi· 
tinning 
premises, 
vehicles, etc. 
for taking of 
a census. 
Payment of 
CO Ill· 
pensation. 
'7A. (1) If it appears to the Central Government that , in 
connectio n with taking of a ccnsus,-
(a) any premises ate needed or arc likely to be neede d, or 
(b) any vehicle, vessel or animal is needed or is likely to be 
needed, 
15 
that Government may by order in writing requisition such premises, 20 
or vehicle. vessel or animal, as the case may be, and make such 
further orccr!> as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient in 
connection- with the requisitioning . 
(2) The requisition shall be effected by an order in wntmg 
addressed to the person deemed by the Central Government to be 25 
the ownq or person in possession of the property. and such order 
shall be -;ervcd in the prescribed manner on the person to whom it is 
addressed. 
(3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under sub-section (1) 
the period of such requisition shall not extend beyond the period for 30 
which such property is required for any of the purposes mentioned in 
that sub-section. 
73 . (I) Whenever in pursuance of section 7 A the Centra l Govern­
ment requisitions any premises, there shall be paid to the persons 
intl!rcstcd compensation the amount of which shall be determined qy 35 
t:.tking into consideration the following, namely :-
(i) the rent payable in respect of the premises or if n0 rent is so 
payable, the rent payable for similar premises in the locality; 

7 
(ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the premises the person 
interested is compelled to change his residence or place of business, the 
reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to such change: 
5 Provided that where any person interested being aggrieved by the 
amount of compensation so determined makes an application within 
the prescribed time to the Central Government for referring the 
matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation to be paid shall 
be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Central 
Government may determine: 
10 Provided further than where there is any dispute as to the title to 
receive the compensation or as to the appointment of the amount of 
compensation, it shall be referred by the Central Government to an 
arbitrator appointed in this behalf by that Government for determina­
tion, and shall be determined in accordance with the decision of such 
ts arbitrator . 
. Expla11ation.-In this sub-section, the expression "person interested" 
means the person who was in actual possession .of the premises 
requisitioned under section 7A immediately before the requistion, or 
20 where no person was in such actual possession, the owner of such 
premises. 
(2) Whenever in pursuance of section 7 A the Central Government 
requisitions any vehicle, vessel, or animal, there shall be paid to the 
owner thereof compensation the amount of which shall be determined 
25 by the Central Government on the basis of the fares or rates 
prevailing in the locality for the hire of such vehicle, vessel or animal: 
Provided that where the owner of such vehicle, vessel or animal 
being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so determined makes 
an application within the prescribed time to the Central Government 
30 for referring the matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation 
to be paid shall be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by 
the Central Government may determin e: 
Provided further that where immediately before the requisitioning 
the vehicle or vessel was by virtue of a hire-purchase agreement in the 
35 possession of a person oth~r than the owner, the amount determined 
under this sub-section as the total compensation payable in respect of 
the requisition shall be apportioned between that person and the 
owner in such manner as they may agree upon and in default or 
agreement in such manner as an arbitrator appointed by the Central 
40 Government in this behalf may decide. 
The Central Government may with a view to requisitioning any 
property under section 7A or determining the compensatio n payable 
under section 7B, by order, require any person to furnish to such 
authority as may be specified in the order such information in his 
45 possession relating to such property as may be so specified. 
70. (1) Any person authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government may enter into any premises and inspect such premises 
and any vehicle, vessel or animal therein for the purpose of 
determining whether and if so in what manner, an order under 
so section 7 A should be made in relation to such premises, vehicle, 
vessel or animal or with a view to securing compliance with any order 
made under that section. 
(2) In this section. the expressions "premises'" and '"vehicle" have 
the same meanings as in section 7 A. 
Power tn ""· 
tam lllf<lrm;•­
tlo n 
Pnwcr of ~~~ ­
try •nto anti 
in, pecti<lll of 
111 cmi't''· 
etc. 

Eviction 
from re· 
quisilion.:d 
premises. 
Release of 
premises 
from requisi· 
tion. 
Ddegtuion 
of functions 
of the Cent­
ral Govern­
ll\ent with re· 
gard to re· 
qui~i u o n ing. 
Pennlty for 
contraven· 
lion of uny 
on.ler regard· 
ing requ~Si· 
tio.1ing 
8 
7E. (1) Any person rcmammg in possession of any rcqui!'itioncd 
premises in contravention of any order made under section 7A may 
be summarily evicted from the premises by any officer empowered by 
the Central Government in this behalf. 
(2) Any officer so empowered may, after giving to any women not 5 
appearing in public reasonable warning and facility to withdraw, 
remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door of any 
building or do any other act necessary for effectiflg such eviction. 
7F. (1) When any premises requisitioned under section 7A arc to 
be released from requisition the possession thereof shall be delivered 
to the person from whom possession was taken at the time when the 
premises were requisitioned or if there were no such person, to the 
person deemed by the Central Government to be the owner of such 
premises, and such delivery of possession s~1all be a full discharge of 
the Central Government from all liabilities in respect of such 
delivery, but shall not prejudice any rights in respect of the premises 
which any other person may be entit led by due process of law to 
enforce against the person to whom possession of the premises is so 
deliver ed. 
10 
15 
(2) Where the person to whom possession of any premises 20 
requisitioned under section 7 A is to be given under sub-section (I) 
cannot be found or is not readi ly ascertainable or has no agent or any 
other person empowered to accep t delivery on his behalf, the Central 
Government shall cause a notice declaring that such premises arc 
released from requisi tion to be affixed on some conspicuous part of ::s 
such premises and publish the notice in the official Gazette. 
(3) When a notice referred to in sub-section (2) is published in the 
Official Gazette, the premises specified in such notice shall cease to 
be subject to requisition on and from the date of such publication and 
be deemed to have been delivered to the person entitled to 30 
possession thereof, and the Centra l Government shall not be liable 
for any compensation or other claim in respect of such premises for 
any period after the said date. 
7G. The Central Government may by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any powers conferred or any duty imposed on 
that Government by any of the provisions . of section 7 A to 7f shall, 
under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction be 
exercise d or discharged by such officer as may be specified. 
35 
7H. If any person contravene s any order made u nder section 7 A or 
section 7C, he shall be punishable with imprisonmen t for a t erm 40 
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both . 

2 of 197-1 
9 
6. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amendment 
words "State Government'', the words "Ce ntral Government" shall of section 8. 
be substituted. 
7. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (I) for the Amendment 
5 words "State Government" at both the places where they occur, the of section 10. 
words "Census Commissioner'' shall be substituted. 
8. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/)- Amendmc:nt 
(i) for part (u), the following parts shall be substituted , 
namely:-
10 "(a) Any census officer or any person lawfully required to g1ve assistance toward~ 
the taking of censu~ who refuses to perform any duty imposed upon him hy this Act or 
any rule made thereunder or any per~on who hinders or oh~truct~ another person 1n 
performing anv ~uch duty. or 
15 "(aa) any census-officer or any person Javrfully required to give 
assistance towards the taking of a census who neglects to usc 
reasonable dihgcnce m performing any duty imposed upon him or in 
obeying any order issued to him in accordance with thts Act or any 
rule made thereunder, or any person who hinders or obstructs 
20 another person in performing any such duty or obeying any such 
order, or", 
(ii) after part (c), the following part shall be inserted, namely·-
(aa) any local authority which fails to comply with 'ln order made 
under section 4A, or''. 
25 (iii) for the brackets, letters and words "(b) or (c) shall also be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months", the 
brackets, letters and words "(a), (b) or (c) shall also be punishable 
with impnsonment which may extend to three years" shall be 
substituted 
()( section II. 
.10 9. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following sectton shall be Suh~titution 
substituted, namely:- of ne'' sec­
t,on for sec­
tinn 12. 
"12 Without prejudice to the provisions of section 197 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. no prosecution under this Act shall be 
institute d except with the previous sanction-
35 (a) in the case of a person who is employed or was at the time of 
commission of the alleged offence emp loyed-
(i) in a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 
Sanction re­
qtured for 
prosecutions 
1 of 1956 1956 in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up capital is 
held by the Central Government or any company which is a 
40 subsidiary thereof within the meaning of that Act. or 
(ii) by a corporation or a local authority established by or under 
a Central Act which is owned or controlled by the Central Govern­
ment, 

Insertion of 
new section 
13A. 
Certain 
off~nces 
to be 
cognizable 
and triable 
summarily. 
10 
of the Central Government or of an authority authorised in this 
behalf by that Government; and 
(b) in the case of a person other than referred to in Clause (a) of 
the State Government." 
10. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall 5 
be inserted, namely:-
"13A (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, no police officer or court shall take 2 ,,f 
cognizance of any offence under part (a), (b) or (c) of sub-section (I) 
of section 11, except upon information received from or on a 10 
complaint made by, as the case be the Director of Census Operations 
or any officer authorised by him in this behalf." 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, every offence punishable under part (a), (b) or (c) 
of sub-section (/) of section 11 may be tried summarily." 15 
Amendment 11. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words "Presidency 
of sccti<)n I-I Magistrate or a Magistrate of the second class", the words "Met ­
ropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class'' shall 
be substituted. 
Insertinn of 12. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following sections 20 
new section shall be inserted, namely:-
ISA and 
1513. 
Protection of 
service inter· 
ests of mem­
bers of cen­
sus staff. 
Prot~ction of 
actilln taken 
in g(10J f;,ith . 
Amendment 
of section 17. 
"15A. No member of the census staff shall suffer any disability in 
service by reason of his being on census duty and the period spent by 
him on such census duty shall be deemed to be the duty under his 
lending employer and any duty performed under this Act shall not in 
any manner affect the right of promotion or other advancement in his 
original service. 
158. No. suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie 
against the Census Commissioner or any Director of Census Opera ­
tions or any census-officer or any member of the census staff for any­
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder. •· 
13. In section 17 of the principal Act, for the opening portion 
beginning with the words "The Census Commissioner" and ending 
with the words "authorise in this behalf', the words "Subject to the 
provisions of section 15, the Census Commissioner or any Director of 
Census Operations'' shall be substituted. 
25 
35 

11 
14. After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"17A. The Central Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, extend the provisions of this Act, with such restrictions and 
5 modifications as it thinks fit, to pre-tests, pilot studies, census of 
houses which precede the population count and post enumeration 
check and evaluation studies or statistical surveys or any other 
operation as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of census." 
15. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words 
10 "and providing for the manner of service of orders regarding 
requisitioning of premises or vehicles , vessel or animal and the time 
within which the application may. be made to it by any interested 
person aggrieved by the amount of compensation determined under 
section 7B for referring the matter to an arbitrator" shall be added at 
15 the end. 
Insertion of 
. new section 
17A. 
Power to 
extend the 
provisions of 
act to other 
operations. 
Amendment 
of section 18: 

13 
APPENDIX 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITIEE 
XIV 
*FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M . on Wednesday, the 18th August, 1993 in Committee Room 
'A'. Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Gaya Singh 
~. Shri Rafique Alam 
4. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
6. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
7. Prof. M. Kamson 
8. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
9. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
10. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
11. Sh;·imati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
12. Dr. Girija Vyas 
13. Shri Ram Singh 
14. Slui Shyam Lal Kamal 
15. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
16. Shri Rabi Ray 
17. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Shovana Narayan, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. * 
3. * 
• * 
• • 
4. The Committee held discussion on the provisions of the Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992 
and decided to hear the views of the representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs and Law, 
Justice and Company Affairs in the matter. 
5 .• 
6 .• 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 P.M. 
• 
• 
• Minutes of the First to Thirteenth meetings of the Committee relate to other mailers . 
'"• Relate to other matters. 
• 
• 

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 9.00 A.M. to 10.30 A.M. in Committee Room 63, First Floor, 
Parliament House and from 3.00 P.M. to 4.30 P.M. in Committee Room 'D', Ground floor 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi on 19th August, 1993. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri ·M.M. Jacob - Chairman 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
3. Shri Gaya Singh 
4. Shri Rafique Alam 
5. Shri Krishan La! Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri G urucharan Singh Galib 
7. P10f. M. Kamson 
8. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
9. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
10. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
11. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
12: Shri Ram Singh 
13. Shri Shyam La! Kamal 
14. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
15. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
16. Shri Rabi Ray 
17. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Shovana N'arayan, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF TilE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri S. Balakrishan Advisor 
2. Shri Madhukar Gupta Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. S.K. Bose Joint Secretary 
4. Shri M.M. Jha Joint Registrar-General 
5. Shri S.P. Sharma Deputy Registrar-General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPA!'IY AFFAIRS 
(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
1. Shri B.R. Atre - Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
14 

2. Dr. Raghbir Singh 
3. Slui Z. S. Negi 
2. * 
15 
Joint Secretary & Legislative Cou nsel 
Deputy Legislative Counsel 
• • 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs made a presentation on the Census 
(Amendment) Bill. 1992. Members sought clarifications on the various provisions of the Bill. 
The representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs and Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
replied thereto. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 25th August, 1993 in Committee Room 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M. M. Jacob - Chairman 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Shri A nan tray Devshanker Dave 
3. Shri R. K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Gaya Singh 
5. Shri Rafiquc Alam 
6. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
7. Slui Madhavsinh Solanki 
LOK SABIIA 
8. Dr. C. Silvera 
9. Slui Kirip Chaliha 
10. Slui Gurucharan Singh Galib 
11. Slui Shantaram Potdukhe 
12. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
13. Shri Ram Singh 
14. Slui Rabi Ray 
15. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Shovana Narayan, Director 
Slui Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Arun Sinha, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. R. Nanda, Registrar General & Census Commissioner 
3. Shri M. M. Jha , Joint Registrar General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
1. Shri Raghbir Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
2. Shri N. K. Nampoothiry, Assistant Legislative Counsel 
2. The Committee held further discussion on the provisions of the Census (Amendment) Bill, 
1992. Clarifications were sought by some Members on certain points which were replied to by 
the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee then took up clause-by­
clause consideration of the Bill. 
CLAUSES 2 TO 15 
The clauses were adop,ted without any change. 
*Minutes of the Sixteenth meeting relate to other matters. 

17 
CLAUSE /, THE ENACTING FORMULA AND Til£ TITLE 
Clause 1. the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted subject to the follo~ing 
amendments : 
Page 1. line 1 for 'Forty-third' sub.1tiwre 'Forty-fourth'. 
line 3 for '1992' subsriwre '1993'. 
3. The Committee considered the Dill. as amended, and adopted the same. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Fifth Report on the Bill. The C<,mmittce 
autlwris~:d the Chairman or in his absence Shri Rafique Alam and Shri Anantray Dcvshankcr 
Dave to present the report on its behalf to the Rajya Sabha on Friday, the 27th August. 1993. 
The Committee also authorised Shri Saifuddin Choudhury and in his absence Shri Kirip Chaliha 
to Jay the Report in the Lok Sabha on the same, day. 
5. • • • 
6. The Commit tee then adjourned at 4.00 J>.M. to meet again at 5.00 J>.M. on Frida y. the lOth 
September. 1993. 
•• • Rel:tro:s to other matter. 