C.S.(HA)-29 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE WORKING OF THE 
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (UPSC) 
(Presented on 0 4 (\ 1\ r~ 10 01; 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE . . . .. .. . .. .. . .. .. . . .. . . . .. . .. . . . .. . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCfiON .... .... .... ...... .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . .. . . . . .. .. . . (iii) 
3. REPORT..................................................................................................... 1-11 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12-21 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
5. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
7. Shri Murasoli Maran 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
10. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
13. Shri Raaj Babbar 
14. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
*15. Vacant 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sudhir Sawant 
17. · Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
19. Prof. M. Kamson 
20. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
23. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
27. Dr. Girija Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj. Gen . (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
30,: Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
32. Shri Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
•vacancy caused by induction of Dr. Jagannath Mishra in the Council of Ministers on the lOth June , 1995. 
(i) 

34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Abedya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
40. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
42. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
44. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman• of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the 
Committee, present this Twentieth Report of the Committee on the Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC). 
2. The Committee while discussing the Annual Report (1992-93) of the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (which is the administrative Ministry in respect of 
UPSC) noted that Parliament could not get time for the last several years to discuss the 
Reports of the UPSC. The Committee, therefore, decided in its sitting held on the 27th 
May, 1993, to examine the working of the UPSC in detail as part of the consideration of the 
Annual ~eport of the Ministry. 
3. The Committee while making its recommendations and observations has taken into 
consideration the following papers and !lubmissions/clarifications:-
(a) Annual Reports of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for 
the years 1992-93 and 1993-94. 
(b) Annual Reports of the UPSC for the years 1988-89, 1989-90, 1990-91 and 1991-92. 
(c) Background note and replies to the Committee's Questionnaires as furnished by the 
Ministry and the UPSC. 
(d) Submissions made and clarifications given by the representatives of the Ministry and 
the UPSC before the Committee. 
4. The Committee completed its deliberations in six sittings. Relevant Minutes of the 
sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
5. The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions and the representatives of the UPSC on the subject in its sitting held on the 11th 
February, 1994. 
6. In its sitting held on the 26th' May, 1994, the Committee further discussed the subject 
and sought clarifications from the representatives of the Ministry and the UPSC. 
7. The Committe~ in its sitting held on the 19th July, 1994 sought further clarifications 
from the Secretary of the Ministry and the representatives of the UPSC and asked them to 
furnish information on certain points. 
8. In its sitting held on the 28th November, 1994, the Committee considered the 
information furnished by the Ministry and the UPSC. 
9. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its sitting held on the 13th June , 
1995. 
NEW DELHI; 
June 13, 1995. 
(iii) 
RAJNI RANJAN SAHU 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

REPORT 
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
Constitution 
The UPSC is a Constitutional body set u~ under Article 315 of the Constitution of India. 
The Commission consists of Chairman and ten members, who are appointed by the President. 
The terms and conditions of service of Chairman and Members are governed by UPSC 
(Members) Regulations, 1969. Proviso to Article 316 provides that as nearly as may be one­
half of the Members of the Commission shall be persons who at the dates of their 
appointments have held office for at least ten years either under the Government of India or 
under the Government of a State. The Commission is assisted by a Secretariat headed by the 
Secretary. 
Functions: 
2. The functions of the Commission are governed broadly under two categories, namely (i) 
the provisions of the Constitution and the Acts, Rules and Regulations made thereunder and 
(ii) the conventions and special orders issued by the Government from time to time. 
The functions of the Commission as laid down in Article 320 of the Constitution are as 
under:-
(1) To conduct examinations for appointment to the Services of the Union. 
(II) If so requested by any two or more States, to assist those States in framing and 
operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services for which candidates possessing 
special qualifications are required. 
(III) The Commission shall be consulted: 
(a) on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to Civil Services and for civil 
posts; 
(b) on the principles to be followed in making appointments to Civil Services and 
posts and in making promotions and transfers from one service to another and on 
the suitability of candidates for such appointments, promotions or transfers; 
(c) on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the Government of 
India in a civil capacity, including memorials or petitions relating to such matters; 
(d) on any claim for reimbursement out of the Consolidated Fund of India by or in 
respect of a person who is serving or has served under the Government of India in 
a civil capacity, or any costs incurred in defending legal proceedings instituted 
against him in respect of acts done or purporting to be done in the execution of 
his duty; 
(e) on any claims for the award of a pension in respect of injuries sustained by a 
person while serving under the Government of India in a civil capacity, and on 
any question as to the amount of any such award; and 
(f) on any other matter, which the President may refer to the Commission. 
3. Consultation · with the Commission on the above matters is obligatory except to the 
extent specified in the UPSC (Exemption from Consultation) Regulations, 1958, as amended 
from time to time. 
1 

2 
4. \]nder Article 321 of the Constitution, an Act made by Parliament may provide fo; 
exercise of additional functions by the UPSC as respects the services of the Union anc 
Services of any local authority or other body corporate constituted by law or of any p1 
institution. 
5. The Commission is required to be consulted by convention or by special orders in 
following matters:-
(i) Proposals for amending the UPSC (Exemption from Consultation) R~gulations, .1 
(ii) Proposals for upgrading a class-III post or downgrading a Class-11 I 
recruitment to which was made without consulting the Commission. 
(iii) Association of the Chairman or a Member of the Commission with the Departme 
Promotion Committees constituted for considering promotions by selection to 
within Class-1 Services/Posts and to certain Class-11 Services/Posts. 
(iv) The Commission is not required to be associated with the DPCs for conside 
confirmations of officers. But the proceedings of such DPCs are required to be 
to the Commission for ratificatio~. In case the Commission does not agree with 
findings of such a DPC for confarmation, a fresh DPC meeting presided over t 
Member of UPSC is convened. 
(v) Recognition of educational qualifications for purposes of employment ur 
Government. 
(vi) Cases in which the Central Government proposes to take action against an office 
the All-India Services under any of the provisions of Rules 3, 6, 7 and 20 of the . 
India Services (Death-cum-Retirement Benefits) Rules, 1958. 
(vii) Where the President proposes to make a reduction in the special contribution to 
Provident Fund of a Railway Officer on his retirement under Rules, 1314(4) of 
Indian Railways Establishment Code Vol. I. 
(viii) Association of the Chairman or a Member of the UPSC with the Special Recruitm 
Board for making selections for the Scientists' Pool. 
(ix) Where the President proposes to withhold or withdraw the whole or part of pensi· 
permanently or for a specified period, or to effect recovery of pecuniary loss cau: 
to Government for gross misconduct or negligence during service under Rule 9 of 
Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 or under Rule 2308, Indian Railw 
Establishment Code Vol. I. 
(x) Where the President proposes to withhold or withdraw a pension or part there 
whether permanently or for a specified period, if the pensioner is conviCted 0 1 
serious crime or is found guilty of grave misconduct under Rule 8 of the Central 0 
Services (Pension) Rules, 1972. 
(xi) Principles for determination of seniority. 
(xii) Interpretation of existing conditions of service. 
(xiii). Equitable treatment in the matter referred to the Commission in regard to paym( 
of compensation to officers affected by abolition of posts. 

3 
(xiv) Recommendations made by the Commission for the appointment of a candidate to a 
higher initial pay than the minimum pay of the post, when the requisition for 
recruitment sent to the Commission admits of such higher initial pay being 
recommended by the Commission or where the Commission is consulted on the 
question of the initial pay to be given to any candidate. 
Examinations; 
6. The Commission conducts various examinations and recruitment tests every year on an 
all-India basis for recruitment to services/posts in various fields, such as administration, 
engineering, medical, forestry etc. The main examinations held by the Commission are as 
under:-
(i) Civil Services Examination. 
(ii) Engineering Services Examination. 
(iii) Indian Forest Service Examination. 
(iv) Combined Medical Services Examination. 
(v) Indian Economic Service/Indian Statistical Service Examination. 
(vi) Geologists' Examination. 
(vii) Combined Defence Services Examination. 
(viii) National Defence Academy and Naval Academy Examination. 
7. These examinations are held by the Commission in accordance with the ex~mination 
rules notified by the concerned Ministries/Departments. These examination rules are based 
upon the provisions contained in the Statutory Service Rules/Recruitment Rules notified by 
the Government in respect of the concerned Service/Posts. 
8. The Commission's office is at Delhi. It does not have any regional or branch office 
outside Delhi. Arrangements for holding examinations at various centres and sub-centres 
throughout the country are made by the Commission with the assistance of the concerned 
State Governments/State Public Service Commissions. The Commission however, deputes its 
officers to these centres and sub-centres to inspect the arrangements and actual conduct of 
the examinations to ensure that they are held properly and smoothly. Members of the 
Commission also visit various examination centres depending upon the importance and 
sensitivity of the examinations. 
Reports 
9. Under Article 323(1) of the Constitution, the Commission is required to present 
annually to the President a report as to the work done by it. The Article further provides 
that on receipt of such report the President shall cause a copy thereof together with a 
memorandum explaining, as respect the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission 
was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance, to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
Recommendations/Observations 
10. The Committee, after carefully considering the papers and materials placed before it 
and after hearing the representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions and the UPSC, makes the following recommendations/observations:-

(i) Appointment of Secretary: 
11. The Committee has been informed that the post of Secretary in the Commissior. 
been lying vacant since August, 1993. As per the existing practice for appointmer 
Secretary, the Commission approaches the Government to forward a panel of name~ 
filling up the post of Secretary and from the panel received, the Commission selects 
appoints its Secretary. But this time, the panel sent by the Government was not accep t 
to the Commission as it contained the names of only lAS Officers, whereas the Commi! 
preferred a panel of officers belonging to other organised services as well, to nrdke 
selection broad-based. The Government could not provide a fresh panel to the Commi! 
with the result the post of the Secretary remained vacant for a considerably long time. 
Committee ' has come to know through newswpaper reports that the Secretary has since 1 
'" appointed. · 
12. The Committee feels that the post should no1 have been allowed to remain vacan 
such a long 'time and sincere efforts should have been made by the Government and 
UPSC to end the stalemate. The Committee also feels that necessary action can be initi 
well in advance of the occurrence of a vacancy where the tenure of an incumbent is aln 
fixed. 
13. Regulation 3 of the Union Public Service Commission (Staff) Regulations, 
prescribes that the Secretary shall be appointed by the Commission. The Regulation fut 
prescribes that the Secretary may or may not belong to any organised , service. 
14. The Committee finds that till now the UPSC has been depending upon 
Government for making available the list of eligible officers from the organised service! 
selection of the Secretary although under the Regulations it was open to make the sele< 
outside the organised services as well. Such practice obviously restricted the field of ch< 
15. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the UPSC, instead of only depen 
upon the Government in this regard, should also circulate the post amongst all the .per 
who get eovered within the scope of the UPSC (Staff) Regulations, 1958. This would 
only widen the scope of selection but would also give equal opportunity to all eli! 
persons. The Committee however, suggests that before such an exercise is underte: 
necessary rules specifying the qualifications etc. of the post should be framed to Jeav( 
scope for arbitrariness and favouritism. 
(ii) Budget and financial autonomy: 
16. The UPSC has been impressing upon the Government to treat the Commission 
Ministry for financial purposes and to delegate Jbe financial powers accordingl y. In o 
words, it favours the financial autonomy as enjoyed by other Constitutional bodies, nam 
the Election Commission and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. ln cas< 
these bodies, the Committee has been informed , that their budget proposals are not sut 
to scrutiny by the Integrated Financial Advise.(? of their respective administrative Minis 1 
and are settled by Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance in consultation with 
Chief Election Commissioner and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India , whil' 
case of UPSC, the budget proposals are subject to scrutiny at the level of Integrc 
Financial Adviser in the Ministry of Home Affairs before their approval by the Ministr : 
Finance. The Committee has also been informed by UPSC that in this regard UPS< 
treated as an Attached/Subordinate Office of the Department of Personnel and Trainin. 
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions resulting in a situation when 
UPSC is sometimes constrained to take decisions which are not compatible with 
Constitutional position. The Committee has been further informed that while under Art 

5 
320 of the Constitution, the Commission is charged with the task of holding examinations for 
recruitment to civil services and posts, during budget scrutiny, pressures are put on the 
Commission to either forego vital expenditure required essentially for ensuring smooth 
conduct of various examinations or to raise its revenues by increasing the fees chargeable 
from the ca.pdidates. 
17. The bu~g~tary provisions of the Commission during the last three years i.e. 1991-92, 
1992-93 and 1993-94 are given below: 
1991-92 
(i) Budget Estimate 
(ii) Revised Budget Estimate Proposed (by UPSC) 
(iii) Accepted by DOP & T/Ministry of Finance 
(iv) Actual Expenditure 
1992-93 
(i) Budget Estimates 
(ii) Revised Budget Estimates Proposed (by UPSC) 
(iii) Accepted by DOP&T/ Ministry of Finance 
(iv) Actual Expenditure 
1993-94 
(i) Budget Estimates 
(ii) Revised Budget Estimates Proposed (by UPSC) 
(iii) Accepted by DOP&T/ Ministry of Finance 
(iv) Actual Expenditure 
13.33 
14.93 
14.57 
14.54 
14.00 
16.70 
15.50 
15.46 
16.00 
21.04 
16.96 
16.95 
18. From the perusal of the above figures, it will be seen that there is an increasing cut of 
Rs. 36 lakhs in 1991-92, Rs. 1.20 crores in 1992-93 and Rs. 4.08 crores in 1993-94 in the 
budget of the Commission. The Commission nevertheless has been discharging its 
Constitutional duties within the funds made available to it by the Government. 
19. The Committee finds no reason whatsoever for discrimination of the UPSC with other 
Constitutional bodies, namely the Election Commission and the Comptroller and Auditor­
General of India in financial matters and feels that in this respect UPSC should enjoy the 
same status as other Constitutional bodies. Needless to mention, the intention behind Article 
322 of the Constitution which provides that the expenses of the Commission, including any 
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the members or staff of the Commission, shall 
be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India is to ensure the independent status of the 
Commission. 
(iii) Language Policy: 
20 .. When asked about the status of the Report of the Expert Committee set up in 1988,. 
under the Chairmanship of Prof. Satish Chandra which went into the question of 
introduction of Hindi and other Indian languages in the scheme of examinations conducted 
by the UPSC, the Ministry in its communication dated 28.3.94 stated as under: 
"The Satish Chandra Committee submitted its Report on 11.5.90 and the Government 
received the Report along with the views of UPSC on 28.9.90. After detailed 
examination, including by Committee of Secretaries, a draft note was submitted to 
Cabinet, which came up for discussion at its meeting held on 30.10.92. However, as a 
question arose on the legality of a certain issue, the Cabinet note was withdrawn to 
examine the relevant issue in consultation with the Ministry of Law. The legal advice 
has since been obtained and action is in hand to resubmit the proposal to the Cabinet .... 

6 
The full repo rt of the Committee along with the views of UPSC will be presen 
before Parliamen t along with Government's decision oil the recommendations of 
Report. Committee's Report is presently under consideration." 
21. In this connection, the Committee wishes to point out that as early as 1968 b 
·Houses of Parliament -had adopted a resolution regarding the use of Hindi and ot 
languages included in th~ Eighth Schedule to the Constitution in the All-India and big 
Central Services Examination. it is very unfortunate that a policy decision in this regan 
yet to be taken by the Government even after a lapse of more than 26 years. It is only v 
respect to the Civil Services Examinations that the candidates have the option to write tl 
answers for the Civil Services (Main) Examination in all the Indian Languages included 
the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, besides English. A decision with regard 
extending this option to other examinations conducted by UPSC is yet to be taken. 
22. The Committee impresses upon the Government to treat the wishes of Parliamen 
right perspective and expedite forthwith its decision on such an important issue. 
23. The Committee has also been informed that as per the present scheme, at the C 
Services (Main) Examination the candidates who opt for an Indian language included in 
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, as the medium for the writ.ten examination are allO\: 
the option of being interviewed in the "same Indian language or in English. However, 
candidates who opt for English as the medium for the written examination are required 
take the interview in English only. 
24. The Committee is of the view that a candidate who opts for English as the medium 
the written examination should also have the option to take the interview either in Eng 
or in any Indian language of his choice. This is because a candidate may be good in writ 
English but· may not be so in verbal expression and may like to take his interview in an) 
the Indian Languages of his choice in which he is able to express more easily • 
conveniently. 
(iv) Layin& of ~nnual Report: 
25. Under Article 323 of the Constitution, the Annual Report of the UPSC is requirec 
be laid before both Houses of Parliament along with a Government memorandum explain 
reasons for disagreement with the Commission's advice in respect of non-acceptance of c.: 
included in the Commission's Report. . . 
· 26. It has been observed that some of these Annual Reports wete laid on. the Table: 
Rajya Sabha on the dates mentioned against ·each: 
Reports Date of la)l 
39th 8.1.1 
(1988-89) 
40th 25:7.1 
(1989-90) 
41st 6.8.1' 
(1990-91) 
42nd 17.8.1' 
(1991-92) 
43rd 28.7.1' 
(1992-93) 
27. It will be seen from the above that these Reports were laid after one to two ye 

6 
The full repor t of the Committee along with the views ~f UPSC will be presented 
before Parliame nt along with Government's decision oil the recommendations of the 
Report. Committee' s Report is presently under consideration." 
21. In this connection, the Committee wishes to point out that as early as 1968 both 
·Houses of Parliament -had adopted a resolution regarding the use of Hindi and other 
languages included in th~ Eighth Schedule to the Constitution in the All-India and higher 
Central Services Examination. it is very unfortunate that a policy decision in this regard is 
yet to be taken by the Government even after a lapse of more than 26 years. It is only with 
respect to the Civil Services Examinations that the candidates have the option to write their 
answers for the Civil Services (Main) Examination in all the Indian Languages included in 
the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, besides English. A decision with regard to 
extending this option to other examinations conducted by UPSC is yet to be taken. 
22. The Committee impresses upon the Government to treat the wishes of Parliament in 
right perspective and expedite forthwith its decision on such an important issue. 
23. The Committee has also been informed that as per the present scheme , at the Civil 
Services (Main) Examination the candidates who opt for an Indian language included in the 
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, as the medium for the writ.ten examination are allowed 
the option of being interviewed in the 'same Indian language or in English. However, the 
candidates who opt for English as the medium for the written examination are required to 
take the interview in English only. 
24. The Committee is of the view that a candidate who opts for English as the medium for 
the written examination should also have the option to take the interview either in English 
or in any Indian language of his choice. This is because a candidate may be good in written 
English but may not be so in verbal expression and may like to take his interview in any of 
the Indian Languages of his choice in which he is able to express more easily and 
conveniently. 
(iv) Layin& or ~nnual Report: 
25. Under Article 323 of the Constitution, the Annual Report of the UPSC is required to 
be laid before both Houses of Parliament along with a Government memorandum explaining 
reasons for disagreement with the Commission's advice in respect of non-acceptance of cases 
included in the. Commission's Report. 
· 26. It has been observed that some of these Annual Reports were laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on the dates mentioned against ·each: 
Reports Date or laying 
39th 8.1.1991 
(1988-89) 
40th 25.7.1991 
(1989-90) 
41st 6.8.1992 
(1990-91) 
42nd 17.8.1994 
(1991-92) 
43rd 28.7.1994 
(1992-93) 
27. It will be seen from the above that these Reports were laid after one to two years 

7 
from the close of the financial year and there has been no uniformity in their laying. The 
Committee would , therefore , appreciate if a .time-limit in this regard is fixed and the same is 
strictly adhered to: The Committee suggests a period of one year for laying of the Reports 
before each House of Parliament. 
(v) Non-observance of existing guidelines in submitting proposals for the Commission's 
approval: 
28. The Commission in its 41st Report for the year 1990-91 states: 
"More than half the proposals received during the year were submitted without 
complete information or were not in the prescribed format . There was thus an 
avoidable time lag between first receipt of a case and its eventual clearance ." 
29. The Ministry, in reply, mentioned : 
"Time to time, instructions have been issued to Ministries/Departments emphasising 
need for ensuring that proposals sent to UPSC are complete in all respects and are in 
the formats prescribed in this regard." 
30. From the reply of the Ministry, it is obvious that the instructions issued by the 
Ministry have· not been scrupulously followed by the Ministries/Departments submitting the 
proposals to the Commission. The Committee would impress upon the Ministries / 
Departments to comply with the instructions issued in this regard for smooth and speedy 
disposal of proposals submitted by them to the Commission. 
(vi) Projection of vacancies: 
31. The Commission has been repeatedly mentioning in its Annual Reports that there 
were wide variations between number of vacancies indicated initially by the recruiting 
Ministries/Departments to the Commission and those finally reported showing lack of 
proper assessment. 
32. The Committee is conscious that there may be good reasons, such as non-joining of 
candidates of previous examinations, -creation/abolition of posts during the year, change in 
recruitment rules, etc. for the disparity in the reported vacancies. The Committee, however, 
feels that with systematic manpower planning and little foresightedness on the part of the 
Ministries, this problem can be overcome to a considerable extent . 
(vii) Offers of appointment: 
33. The Commission in its 42nd Report for 1991-92 bas mentioned that there were 1321 
cases where offers of appointment to the candidates recommended by it on the basis of 
results of various examinations were delayed by the Ministries/Departments . These offers 
were delayed for periods varying from one to three years. 
34. The Committee is not at all happy with this situation. Delay in offering appointment 
to sel<rcted candidates is not only unfair to such candidates but also affects the concerned 
organisation adversely. Not only this, such delay results in the placement of the selected 
candidates elsewhere and their not becoming available for appointment under Government 
thus making the whole exercise of selection infructuous. 
35. The Committee, while expressing its displeasure recommends that a time limit.be fixed 
in this regard to ensure that the selected candidates are issued offers of appointment without 
any delay. 

8 
(viii) Ad-hoc appointments: 
36. The position of ad-hoc appointments as per the figures compiled by the UPSC is as 
under:-
Report 
38th (1987-88) 
39th (1988-89) 
40th (1989-90) 
41st (1990-91) 
42nd (1991-92) 
Ad-hoc appointments 
continuing above 
one year 
1443 
955 
711 
680 
346 
Ad-hoc appointments 
continuing beyond 
three years 
813 
454 
398 
379 
103 
37. The Ministry has stated that as a result of the instructions issued by it in 1988 
restrictiq the maximum tenure of ad-hoc appointments to one year where resorting to such 
appointJDeat becomes unavoidable, there is a steady decline in the number of ad-hoc 
appoiatiDellts. It has aliO been stated that the number of cases where ad-hoc appointments 
coatiDucd for more than ten yeus has alsO declined from over 75 in 1990-91 to 4 in 1991-92. 
11le Miaiitry is optimistic that this downward trend would continue. 
38. The Committee expresses its satisfaction as far as these figures are concerned. It is, 
however, apprehensive that these figures might not reflect the correct position as the 
~ft bas ·~ mentioning in its Reports that complete monitoring of such 
~ntments has not been possible because of non-receipt of regular returns despite clear 
Government instructions in this regard. 
39. The Committee, would, therefore, like to urge upon the Government to reiterate the 
exiitina instructions reprding furnishing of periodic returns to the UPSC regularly and also 
take other ..Utable . steps for strict compliance of those instructions. 
(ix) Procesillc el tlsclpliJlary cases: 
..0. The Commission in its 42nd Report has mentioned that delay in passing the order by 
the Government after advice had been tendered by it continued to occur. At the end of 
1991-92, orders were yet to be passed in 226 disciplinary cases out of which 115 cases were 
pending for over six months. 
41. In its 41st Report the Commission has drawn attention to another disturbing trend. 
This relates to sending of disciplinary cases just a few days before the retirement of the 
delinquent officer or where · the deadline set by the Courts.ICA Ts was due to expire very 
soon, making it difficult for the Commission to tender its considered advice in time. 
42. The Committee exp1=esses its strong displeasure over this state of affairs as it feels that 
delay in disposal of disciplinary cases is neither in the interest of Government nor of the 
Government servant. Moreover, any undue delay in this regard affects the morale of the 
Government servant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review 
the position in view of the position stated by the Commission in its aforesaid Report. 
(x) Non-notification of approved Recruitment l{ules: 
43. As per the existing instructions the Recruitment Rules, as finally approved by the 
Commission, should be notified by the concerned Ministry/Department within a period of 10 
weeks of receipt of Commission's advice letter. Non-notification or delay in the notification 

of Recruitment Rules results in recruitments either not taking place of remaining on an 
hoc basis. As per the Commission's 42nd Report, 359 Rules had not been notified as 
31.3.92. In 1990-91, in 94 cases the delay had crossed 5 years. 
44. The Ministry has stated that in many cases the rules had already been notified 
were not intimated to the Commission in time. In other cases, reasons for delay 
notification were mainly due to reconsideration of the provisions on the advice of Legi sla 
Department who are required to vet the rules before they are notified or on accoun1 
abolition/encadrement of posts. 
45. The Committee feels that the reasons given by the Ministry can be taken care of 
proper monitoring, better coordination and advance planning. The Committee desires 1 
the cases of non-notification or delay in notification of recruitment rules be put to the ba 
minimum to avoid any scope for arbitrariness or favouritism in appointments. 
(xi) Non-acceptance of Commission's advice: 
46. The Committee finds that the number of cases of non-acceptance of the Commissi< 
advice constitute a minuscule percentage of the total cases in which the Commission 
rendered its advice as may be seen from the figures of last few years given below: 
Year Total number of Total number of 
1986-87 
1987-88 
1988-89 
1989-90 
1990-91 
1991-92 
cases in which 
UPSC rendered 
advice 
17533 
16389 
14705 
14740 
19024 
20305 
disagreement case 
30 
22 
15 
10 
8 
7 
47. It will also be observed from the above figures that there is a declining trend in 
disagreement cases over the years. The Committee notes and appreciates the Governme 
efforts to keep such cases to the barest minimum. 
48. The Committee, however ; notes that in none of the seven cases of non-acceptanc< 
Commission's adviCe in 1991-92, reasons for the same were communicated by 
Government to the UPSC. The Committee would, therefore, urge upon the Governmen 1 
follow its instructions under which it is obligatory that the reasons for non-acceptance 
every case should be communicated to the Commission and the Commission given 
opportunity to justify its recommendations. 
(xii) Non-acceptance of appointments: 
49. The Committee has come across several instances particulary in engineering 
medical services where candidates selected by UPSC for appointment are reluctant to ace 
the offer of appointment especially in cases where a candidate belongs to one State and h, 
offered appointment in another State. This may possibly be due to two reasons. One 
candidate may not like to migrate to another State for personal reasons. Two, he may not 
conversant with the language of the State where he is to be appointed. As per the exist 
practice, it is only after 6 to 9 months when a candidate does not join or the offer is 
accepted by him the concerned Ministry/Department approaches the UPSC to give name~ 
other candidates who are on the 'reserve list'. The 'reserve list' is a Jist of those candida 
who have done otherwise well in the examination/interview but not as well as the ot 
selected candidates. They are offered appointment only after the selected candidates ab< 

10 
them are not available for appointment. On receipt of the names from the UPSC, t 
concerned Ministry sends offer of appointment to such candidates. All this exercise tak 
considerably long time and in some cases even a couple of years. During this period t 
organisation suffers adversely. 
50. The Committee feels that the existing practice needs to be reviewed. The Committe 
with a view to cutting the delay, suggests that a selected candidate can be given a reasonab 
time, say 3 months, instead of 6 to 9 months as at present to accept the offer of appointme . 
and in case he ~ils to do so within that period the next candidate on the 'reserve list' shou. 
be issued the offer of appointment by the concerned Ministry/Department, which should t 
in possession of the complete list of selected candidates including the candidates on th 
'reserve Jist'. Thi$ would save the time of the Ministries/Departments in approaching th 
UPSC for getting the names from the 'res;rve lint' and then sending the offer c 
appointment to such candidates. To overcome the problem of migr.ation, the concerne• 
Ministry can also take into consideration the- usual place of reSidence of the selecte< 
candidates and can, accommodate them in the same region/State to which they belong 
subject to vaeancies in that region/State. 
(xiii) Excluded cate~ory: 
51. As part of reducing its increasing workload, the Commission has over the last few 
years shed certain categories from its purview. It no longer holds the Stenographers ' 
Examination or the Assistants' Grade Examination and concerns itself to holding primarily 
of examinatioru for Group 'A' posts. 
52. The Committee would appreciate if an exercise is undertaken by the UPSC and the 
Government to review the categories of posts for promotions, seniority and recruitment! 
appointment where the Commission need not be involved and the powers can be delegated 
to the Departmental Promotion Committees of the respective Ministries to further reduce 
the workload of the Commission. 
(xiv) Monitorin& Agency for UPSC: 
53. A suggestion was mooted that there should be an independent body to critically 
examine, scrutinize, monitor and supervise the functioning of the UPSC and to deal with all 
complaints and representations against it as the present arrangement authorising the UPSC 
to examine its own failures may lead to inefficiency and mis-Carriage of Justice. The 
Committee having considered all aspects of the suggestion found it to be impracticable. The 
UPSC is a Constitutional body and in the scheme of the Constitution relating to UPSC, 
there is no provision for an independent body to examine and monitor its functioning. 
However, under Article 323, the Commiss.i!)_n is required to present annually to the 
President a Report as to the work done by it and the President causes a copy of the Report 
to be laid before each House of ·Parliament, thus providing ample scope for thorough 
discussion of the Commission's functioning by Parliament. The Parliament through the 
discussion can also make suitable observations. 
(xv) Interview System: 
54. An apprehension was raised that the interviews in the Civil Services Exami"nation 
favoured the candidates coming from higher background and weeded out the candidates 
belonging to the lower strata of the society, who do not generally have public school 
background. It was suggested that either the interviews be stopped or marks for the 
interviews be kept to the minimum. 
55. In this context, the Committee notes the submission of the Secretary of the Ministry 
that candidates from all stratas of the society are selected in the Civil Services Examination 

11 
and ·the process of desirability of having interviews is decided keeping in view the job 
requirement/specifications by the Exports' Committees. Moreover, the weightage of marks 
for interview is only 13.04% for Civil Services Examination while the same is 50% for the 
National Defence Academy and Combined Defence Services' Examinations. Besides this, in 
Civil Services Examination merit list is prepared on the basis of marks secured both in 
written test and the interview. The Committee, nevertheless, feels that there is always a 
scope for improvement in any system and this aspect needs to be examined. 
(xvi) Membership of the Commission: 
56. Presently, out of 9 members of the Commission, 3 are non-officials and the rest are 
retired bureaucratS'technocratslcducationists, etc. A suggestion was made that bulk of the 
membership should be from non-bureaucrats and the limit for retired Government servants 
should be restricted to 25%. ln this regard, reference was made in the Committee to the 
Supreme Court judgement and also to Article 316 of the Constitution. The Committee feels 
that the spirit underlying the proportion of members is 50:50, although the Secretary of the 
Ministry submitted that it was not always possible to maintain the proportion of 50:50. In 
view of this position, the Committee recommends that sincere efforts be made to maintain 
the equal proportion of official and non-official members in the Commission. 
(xvii) Recruitment System: 
57. Thus, in view of the fuel that the country is moving fust on road to liberalisation, it is 
necessary that high man-power management can alone keep us in good steam. As the UPSC 
is charged with the duty of supplying competent persons to every department of the 
Government, it has to evolve sound recruitment system. The present system of recruitment 
has become obsolete. Economically-advanced countries have abandoned the two tier system 
of academic test, followed by interviews. Since this is an age of specialisation, the UPSC 
should e.volve a comprehensive system suited to the ethos-social and economic--of the 
country. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th May, 1993 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Gaya Singh 
5. Shri Rafiq ue Alam 
6. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
7. Shri Subramanian Swamy 
8. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
LOK SABHA 
9. Dr. C. Silvera 
10. Shri Sudhi Sawant 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Shri A. Venkatosh Naik 
15. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
16. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
17. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
18. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
19. Dr. Girija Vyas 
20. Shri Dharampal Singh ·Malik 
21. Maj . Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
22. Shri Ram Singh 
23. Shri Shyam La! Kamal 
24. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
25. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
26. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
27. Shri Ram Sharan Y adav 
28. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Shovana Narayan-Director 
2. • 
•••Relates to other matter. 
12 

13 
After some discussion, the Committee decided to have further detailed discussion on the 
following issues to begin with and hear the views of the respective heads of the 
departments:-
(i) • * * 
(ii) • * * 
(iii) U.P.S.C. & * * * 
3. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to obtain further information from the 
Ministry on the issues identified by the committee for its consideration. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M . 
***Relates to other matter. 

XXVI 
TWENTY -SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 11th February, 1994 in Commitee 
Room No. 53, First -Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
3. Shri Gaya Singh 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Rafique Alam 
6. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
7. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
9. Shri Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
10. Dr. C. Silvera 
11. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
14. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
15. Shri Dhanuskodi Athithan 
16. Dr. Girija Vyas 
17. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
18. Shri Ram Singh 
19. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
20. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
21. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
22. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
23. Shri Rabi Ray 
24. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
25. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
26. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
27. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
28. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
Rerpresentatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions: 
1. Shri N.R. Ranganathan, Secretary 
2. Shri J.S. Mathur, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Y.G. Parande, Director 
Representatives of the U.P.S.C: 
1. Shri S.K. Purkayastha, Addl. Secretary 
14 

15 
2. Shri R. Narayanaswamy, Addl. Secretary 
3. Dr. V. Subramanian, Director 
2. The Committee held general discussion on the working of the UPSC. Thereafter, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions made a brief presentation 
on the subject and clarified the points rais-ed by the Members . 
3. • • • 
4. • • • 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2.15 P.M. 
•••Relates to other matter. 

FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 26th May, 1994 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, -Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M.M. Jacob - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Mufti Mohd. Sayeed 
7. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Gaya Singh 
9. Shri Madh avsinh Solanki 
LOK SABHA 
10. Prof. M. Kamson 
11. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
12. Slui Shantaram Potdukhe 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
14. Shri Narain Singh Chauclhari 
15. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
16. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
17. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
18. Shri Ram Singh 
19. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
20. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
21. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
22. Shri Rabi Ray • 
23. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
24. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
25. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions: 
1. Smt. Sarit a Prasad, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri. Y. G. Parande, Director 
Representatives of the U.P.S.C.: 
1. Shri S.K. Malik, J_oint Secretary 
2. Shrimati P. Gopinath, Joint Secretary 
2. 
3. The Committee, then, took-up further discussion on the working of the U.P.S.C. and 
•**Relates to other matter. 
16 

17 
sought clarifications from the representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances 
and Pensions and the U.P.S.C. on the various issues. 
4. • • 
s. • • * 
6. • • * 
7. • • • 
8. • • 
9. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. 
•••Relates to other matter. 

lS 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 19th July, 1994 in Committee Roon 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
7. Shri Gur.ucharun Singh Galib 
8. Prof. M. Kamson 
9. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
10. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
11. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
12. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
13. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Dhuwan Ch;!ndra Khancluri 
14. Shri Ram Singh 
15. Slui Shyam Lal Kamal 
16. Shri Vinaya Katiy<.tr 
17. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
18. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
19. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
20. Shri B. Raja Ravi Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions: 
1. Slui N. R. Ranganathan, Secretary 
2. Shri J. S. Mathur, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Y.G. Parande, Director 
> 
Representatives of the U.P.S.C.: 
1. Shri S.K. Purkuyastha, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R. Narayanaswamy, Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. V. Subramanyan, Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman briefed the Committee about the discussion that has been 
held so far on the working of the UPSC. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications from the 
representatives of the UPSC. The Committee then directed the representatives to furnish 
information on certain points. 
3. The Committee then sought clarifications from the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, 

19 
Public Grievances and Pensions on the said subject. The Committee also asked the Secretary 
to furnish information on certain points. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 
Wednesday, the 20th July, 1994. 

XXI 
TWENTY -FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 28th November, 1994 in Committe 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Makhan Lal Fotedar 
3. Sllr~ Murasoli Maran 
4. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
5. Shri· Gaya Singh 
6. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
8. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
9. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
10. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
11. Kumari Mamta Banerjee 
12. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
13. Maj. a ·en. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
14. Shri Ram Singh 
15. Shri Shya.n Lal Kamal 
16. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
J7. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
18. Shri Ram Sharan · Yadav 
19. Shri Saifuddin Chou.clhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R. C. Soperna, Deputy Se<.:retary 
Shri Tapan Chatter jee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Comn1ittee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman briefed the Committee about the discussion held so far, 01 
the working of the Uniou Public Service Commission. He also requested the Members t< 
express their viewpoints on the subject for inclusion in the draft report. Thereafter 
Members gave certain suggestions. The Secretariat was directed to prepare the draft repor 
on the subject. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 p.m. to meet again at 10.30 a:m. on Tuesday 
the 29th November, 1994. 
20 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 13th June, 1995 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Ari'nexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairma11 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
4. Slui Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ramnath Kovind 
6. Slui Ramnachandran Pillai 
7. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABIJA 
8. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
9. Slui G urw.:hara n Singh Galib 
10. Prof. M. Kam sun 
11. Shri A. Venkatcsh Naik 
12. Shri Shantaram Potdukhc 
13. Slui Narain Singh Chaudhari 
14. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari De vi 
15. Dr. Girija Vyas 
16. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) l3huwan Chandra 
17. Shri Ram Singh 
18. Shri Rabi Ruy 
19. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
20. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
21. Shri Pt~m Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Slui R.C. Soperna, Director 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri C.D. Rai, Committee O!Ticcr 
2. 
3. 
• 
Khanduri 
• * 
4. The Cor:~mittee reassembled after tea break to consider and adopt its Twent ieth Report 
on the working of the Union Public Service Commission. The Committee after some 
discussion adopted the same, with some changes. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 5.15 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 n.m. on Wednesday, the 
14th June, 1995. 
•• • Relates to other matter. 
21 