 
 
 
DRAFT/CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
April, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO.  
203  
TWO HUNDRED THIRD REPORT 
 
BORDER SECURITY: CAPACITY BUILDING AND 
INSTITUTIONS 
 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 11 th  APRIL 2017) 
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 11 th  APRIL 2017) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also availabl e         
 
C.S. (H.A.)-______      
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRD THIRD REPORT 
 
BORDER SECURITY: CAPACITY BUILDING AND INSTITUTIONS 
 
 
                                     
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 11 
th  APRIL 2017) 
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 11 th  APRIL 2017) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
April, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ACRONYMS  
 
 
AIS Automatic Identification System 
AR Assam Rifles 
BADP Border Area Development Programme 
BFSR Battle Field Surveillance Radar 
BGF Border Guarding Forces 
BM Border Management 
BOP Border Outposts  
BPG Border Protection Grid 
BRO Border Road Organisation 
BSF Border Security Force 
BTAD Bodoland Territorial Area District 
CAPFs Central Armed Police Forces 
CCS Cabinet Committee on Security 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CGHS Central Govrnment Health Scheme 
CIBMS Comprehensive Integrated Border Management Sy stem 
COB Company Operating Basis 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CSS Coastal Security Scheme 
DLC District Level Committee 
DoT Department of Technology  
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DSPTs Digital Satellite Phone Terminals 
FICN Fake Indian Currency Notes  
FMR Free Movement Regime 
GoM Group of Ministers 
GS General Staff 
HLC High Level Committee 
IB Intelligence Bureau 
IBB India-Bangladesh Border 
IBhB India-Bhutan Border 
ICB India China Border 
ICG Indian Coast Guard 
ICPs Integrated Check Posts 
IIS Island Information System 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IMB India Myanmar Border 
IN Indian Navy 
INB India Nepal Border 
IPB India Pakistan Border 
IR Indian Reserve  
ITBP Indo-Tibetan Border Police 
JTFI Joint Task Force on Intelligence 
LPAI Land Ports Authority of India 

 
 
LTE Limited Tender Enquiry 
LWE Left Wing Extremist  
MAC Multi Agency Centre 
MACP Modified Assured Career Progression 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NATGRID National Intelligence Grid 
NCTC National Centre for Counter Terrorism 
NCTC National Counter-Terrorism Centre 
NDPS Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act  
NHO Naval Hydrography Office 
NIA National Investigation Agency 
NM Nautical Miles 
NMB National Memory Bank 
NSAZ Naga Self Administration Zone 
NSG National Security Guard 
PMSP Paramilitary Service Pay 
QRT Quick Reaction Team 
RoW Right of Way 
SMACs Subsidiary Multi Agency Centres 
SSB Sashastra Seema Bal 
SWA South West Asian 
TMS Threat Management System 
UA User Agencies 
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
UGS Unattended Ground Sensor 
VCOAS Vice Chief of Army Staff 
 
 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
                        PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      
                                                                  
i 
2.  PREFACE  
 
ii-iii  
3.  REPORT  
 
1 - 36 
 CHAPTER – I 
            
     
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 
1 
 CHAPTER – II  
      
    CAPACITY BUILDING ON BORDERS 
 
 
 
2 - 24  
 CHAPTER - III  
 
    INSTITUTIONS  FOR STRENGTHNING SECURITY 
 
 
 
25 - 29 
 CHAPTER – IV 
    
    OTHER ISSUES  
           
 
 
30 - 36 
4.  OBSERVATIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
37  - 51  
5.  *RELEVANT MINUTES OF MEETINGS OF 
COMMITTEE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended at the stage of printing 

i 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Shri P. Chidambaram   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan 
3. Shri V. Maitreyan 
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
5. Shri Majeed Memon 
6. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
7. Shri Derek O'Brien 
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
9. Shri R.K. Sinha 
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan  
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
15. Shri Ramen Deka 
16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav 
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge 
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar 
21. Shri P. Nagarajan  
22. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
23. Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda 
24. Shri Dilip Patel 
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
26. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
27. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil 
28. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP 
29. Shri Bishnupada Ray 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Assistant Director 

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit t he Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two 
Hundred Third Report on Border Security: Capacity Building and Institutions. 
 
2.0 The erstwhile DRSC on Home Affairs (1 
st  September 2014 to 31 st  August 2015), in its sitting 
held on 16 th  September, 2014, had identified the Subject 1 ‘Border Management’ for detailed study. The 
Committee, in its sittings held on 5 th , February, 2015 and 11 th  June, 2015 heard the views of the Home 
Secretary on the subject.  
 
3.0 The Committee after reconstitution on 1
st  September 2015, in its sitting held on 16 th  September, 
2015,  identified the Subject 2 ‘Border Management: Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Pakis tan Borders – 
Issues and concerns’ for detailed study. This Subje ct was largely in continuation of the Subject taken  up 
by the previous Committee but with a special focus on India-Bangladesh and India-Pakistan borders. 
The Committee, in its sitting held on 10 th  September, 2015, heard the presentation of Home Secretary on 
Border Management: Border Fencing and Floodlighting  Projects on Indo-Bangladesh Border and 
Working of Integrated Check Posts. In its next sitt ing held on 22 nd  September, 2015, the Committee 
heard the Home Secretary on ‘Border Management: Iss ues and concerns on Western Border including 
Fencing, Floodlighting, Cross Border Terrorism, Inf iltration’. The Committee visited Siliguri, Cooch 
Behar, Jalpaiguri, Swarupnagar, Sundarbans and Kolkata along the India-Bangladesh Border from 2 nd  to 
7th  November, 2015 to assess the progress of border fe ncing, flood lighting, border road and Border 
outpost projects. The Committee also visited Jodhpu r, Jaisalmer, Amritsar, Gurdaspur and Pathankot 
from 7 th  to 12 th  February, 2016 and Jammu and Kashmir from 20 th  to 24 th  June, 2016 on the India-
Pakistan border to monitor the progress of border f encing, flood lighting, border roads and Border 
Outpost projects on the Western border.  
 
4.0 The present Committee, in its sitting held on 2 8 
th  September, 2016, identified the subject 3 
‘Border Security: Capacity Building and Institution s’ for detailed study as the evidence collected 
through on-the-spot study visits clearly indicated several grey areas concerning capacity building and  
institutions. The Committee, in its sitting held on  6th  October, 2016 heard the Home Secretary and other 
representatives of the Ministry along with the offi cials of the other concerned Ministries/Departments .     
The Committee in its sitting held on 14 th  October, 2016 further heard the Home Secretary alo ngwith the 
Officers concerned. In both the meetings, the offic ers responded to queries of the Chairman and 
Members of the Committee.  The Committee, in its me eting held on 7 th  November 2016, deliberated 
upon the issues pertaining to the said subject matt er in the context of queries of the Members and 
responses thereon by the Ministry of Home Affairs.   During the meeting, the Committee also decided to 
make use of the inputs received by the previous Com mittee and give a comprehensive report.  The 
Committee also heard the views of Home Secretary on  the recent terror attack on an army base in 
Nagrota, Jammu & Kashmir as part of examination of this subject.   
                                                 
1 Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 52390 dated 25 September, 2014 
2 Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 54568 dated 15 September, 2015 
3 Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 55853 dated 30 September, 2016 

iii 
 
 
5.0 The Committee has made use of the following doc uments in preparing the Report:- 
(i) Background Notes furnished by the Ministry for various meetings and study visits of the 
Committee; 
(ii) Inputs received during Study visits of the ers twhile Committee to India-Bangladesh and 
India-Pakistan Borders; 
(iii) Presentations made by Home Secretary and othe r officials during the meetings of the 
Committee; 
(iv) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Aff airs to the questionnaires on the subject 
sent by the Secretariat;  
(v) Proceedings and minutes of the meetings of the Committee;  
(vi) Replies to the queries/comments/suggestions of  the Members, raised during the 
Committee's meetings, as furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs  
6.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 10 
th  April, 2017 considered and adopted the Report. 
7.0 The observations and recommendations of the Com mittee have been given at respective narrative 
part of the Report in bold letters. However, for th e sake of convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee at a glance have been given at the end of the report.  
 
 
 
10 
th  April, 2017 
 New Delhi                                                                                 
P. Chidambaram  
Chairman  
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 India is located in a strategic position in Sou th Asia and occupies a dominant position in the 
northern Indian Ocean. India has a coastline of 751 6.6 km and its land borders exceed 15,000 km which 
it shares with seven countries. India’s internal se curity challenges are invariably linked with the se curity 
of the country’s borders due to the hostile attitud e of some of the India’s neighbours and their tende ncy 
to exploit India’s persistent national challenges. The challenge of long-standing boundary and territo rial 
disputes, some of which are legacy issues, coupled with difficult terrain, extreme climatic conditions and 
porosity of borders, has rendered India’s Borders v ulnerable to several external and internal security  
threats and made efficient and effective border man agement a foremost priority for the Indian 
Government.  
  
1.2 India’s entire coastline is extremely vulnerabl e to various kinds of illegal and anti-national 
activities. Numerous cases of smuggling of goods, g old, narcotics, explosives, arms and ammunition 
have been reported over the years. The physical pro ximity of India’s coast to Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, 
Pakistan and Gulf countries adds to its vulnerabili ty. The Indian coast has a number of strategic and 
industrial installations such as naval bases, nucle ar power plants, satellite and missile launching ra nges, 
offshore oil and gas platforms, Special Economic Zo nes and ports. These strategic installations are vi tal 
for the security, development and prosperity of the  country, but they are also high value targets for the 
terrorists. 
 
1.3 The major border security challenges of India a re: cross-border terrorism, infiltration and ex-
filtration of armed militants and insurgents, narco tics and arms smuggling; illegal migration; left-wi ng 
extremism and separatist movements aided by externa l powers. To tackle these challenges, India has 
actively pursued the strategy of strengthening of b order policing & guarding, creation of border 
infrastructure like roads, fencing & flood lighting on the borders, implementation of the Coastal Security 
Scheme to strengthen coastal security infrastructur e, implementation of Border Area Development 
Programme and development of Integrated Check Posts  (ICPs) on the land borders of the country 
including setting up of Land Ports Authority of Ind ia (LPAI). However, despite creation of a huge 
capacity to counter border security challenges, the re is a persistent necessity for the Government to 
engage in constant capacity building initiatives to  realign the border and internal security strategy 
according to the dynamically changing circumstances.  
 
1.4 Due to vulnerable borders, India has witnessed numerous cross-border terrorist attacks. The 
Committee took up this subject due to its crucial i mportance particularly because borders have now 
become most vulnerable from the security point of v iew.   During 2016, there were hundreds of 
instances of ceasefire violations and several secur ity forces personnel and civilians were killed. Thu s, in 
the prevailing situation, border security is highly  vulnerable. The Committee, during the course of 
examination, detected certain major systemic inadeq uacies which are of cumulative nature, emerging 
over a period of time. The Committee in this report  has dealt with many issues pertaining to capacity 
building and strengthening of borders and the insti tutional mechanisms that are functioning for the 
security of the country.  
         

2 
 
CHAPTER – II 
CAPACITY BUILDING ON BORDERS 
 
2.1 Introduction 
 
2.1.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that in o rder to secure the borders and to create 
appropriate infrastructure in the border areas of t he country, Department of Border Management of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs has undertaken several ini tiatives. These include construction of fencing, 
floodlighting & roads along India-Pakistan and Indi a-Bangladesh borders, development of Integrated 
Check Posts (ICPs) at various locations on the inte rnational borders of the country, construction of 
strategic roads along India-China, India-Nepal & In dia-Bhutan borders. In addition, various 
developmental works in the border areas have been u ndertaken under the Border Area Development 
Programme as a part of the comprehensive approach to border management.  
 
2.1.2 India has extensive land and coastal borders.  The Committee, during the course of the 
examination, took note of the various risks and vul nerabilities associated with India’s land and coast al 
borders. The capacity building measures concerning these two types of borders have been dealt with 
separately in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
LAND BORDERS 
 
 
2.1.3 The Country shares a land boundary with six C ountries situated in varied topography and 
climatic zones.  
 
2.1.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the fo llowing details about deployment of Border 
Guarding Forces (BGF) on six different borders of the Country: 
 
Border Border  Guarding 
Force 
No. of 
Battalions 
No. of Border 
Out Posts 
India-Bangladesh (IBB)  Border Security Force  82 1011 
India-Pakistan (IPB) Border Security Force 57 656 
India-China (ICB) Indo-Tibetan Border 
Police 
32 172 
India-Nepal (INB) Sashastra Seema Bal 31 473 
India-Bhutan (IBhB) Sashastra Seema Bal 16 157 
India-Myanmar(IMB) Assam Rifles 15 83 (CoBs)* 
*COBs: Company Operating Basis  
 
INDIA-BANGLADESH BORDER (IBB) 
 
2.2 The Committee was informed that the India-Bangl adesh border is India’s longest border 
measuring 4,096.7 km and passes through the States of West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and 
Mizoram. The entire border consists of varied geogr aphical features like plains, hills, riverine stret ches, 
and forests with hardly any natural obstacles. The area is densely populated and people cultivate thei r 

3 
 
farms right up to the border. The India-Bangladesh border is highly porous and a hotspot of illegal 
immigration, cattle smuggling and human trafficking.  
 
2.3 Border Outposts along IBB 
 
2.3.1 The Committee learnt that, at present, 1011 B order Outposts (BOPs) exist along the IBB. In 
order to reduce the inter-BOP distance to 3.5 km, t he government had approved a proposal for the 
construction of additional 509 BOPs (total BOPs alo ng IPB and IBB), at an estimated cost of Rs 
1,832.50 crore in the year 2009. The Ministry further stated that in the year 2016 the scope of the project 
was revised by the Cabinet Committee on Security fr om 509 BOPs to 422 BOPs and the cost of project 
was revised from Rs.1832.5 Cr. to Rs.2494.76 Cr. Ou t of this, 326 BOPs were to be constructed along 
IBB.  
 
2.3.2 The Committee, however, found that out of the  revised 326 Border Out-Posts to be constructed 
along IBB, only 97 BOPs had been completed (upto 31.12.2016) and the work was under progress in the 
remaining 207 BOPs. The Ministry informed the Commi ttee that due to delay in land acquisition, the 
project has suffered cost and time overrun. However , in order to overcome this issue, it has now been 
decided to construct BOPs in the available land in Right of Way of Fence and Road. This has given the 
required thrust and the project is now targeted for  completion at a cost of Rs. 2494.76 Crore by July,  
2018. 
 
2.3.3 The Committee, in the first instance, takes a  serious note of the fact that the proposal of 
constructing 509 BOPs along IPB and IBB to reduce t he inter-BOP distance to 3.5 Kilometres has 
been revised and reduced to 422 BOPs. Reducing inte r-BOP distance is very crucial for the 
security of the country and to keep a tab on the ac tivities going on at the border.   But even the 
reduced target was not achieved and only 97 BOPs ou t of 326 BOPs have been completed by the 
end of 2016 along IBB. The Committee takes a seriou s view of the cost and time overrun due to 
delay in land acquisition. The government should ha ve taken advance action to overcome all such 
difficulties for timely implementation of the proje ct. Now that the Ministry has found a workable 
solution in the form of utilizing land available in  the Right of Way of Fence and Road, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the project shou ld be completed by the targeted date of 
July, 2018 and there should be no further time and cost overrun. The Committee notes that no 
reasons were furnished by the MHA why the number of  BoPs was reduced from 509 to 422. In the 
circumstances, the Committee recommends that the or iginal plan of constructing 509 BOPs to 
reduce the inter-BOP distance to 3.5 kilometres may be reconsidered in the interest of the security 
of the nation.     
 
2.4 Border Fencing along IBB 
 
2.4.1 The Ministry submitted to the Committee that 3006.48 km length (out of a total 4096.7 Km) of 
IBB has been covered by physical barrier and the re maining 1090.22 km of border will be covered with 
physical and non-physical barriers by March, 2019.  
 
2.4.2 When the Committee sought to know the further  progress in the matter, the Ministry informed 
the Committee that under Phase-I of the project of construction of barbed wire fencing along IBB, out of 
a sanctioned length of 857 km of fence, 854 km was completed in 2000 while the remaining length was 
found non-feasible. The Ministry also submitted tha t under Phase-II, out of 2468 km of sanctioned 
length of fence, 1875 km fence was completed by 31. 12.2016 and work is in progress on 90.6 km 
length.  
 

4 
 
2.4.3 The Committee was also apprised that on a 423 .34 km stretch along India-Bangladesh Border, 
construction of any physical barrier is not feasibl e due to geographical constraints like riverine are a, 
low-lying area, nala area etc and some problems like habitations within 150 yards of the border, pending 
land acquisition cases and protests by the border p opulation.  The Committee further learnt that, in t his 
stretch, the Ministry proposed to deploy technologi cal solutions which include deployment of cameras, 
sensors, radars, lasers and High Mast Light. It was  further stated that, presently, available technolo gies 
are being tested through a pilot project. 
 
2.4.4 The Committee notes with anguish the extremel y slow pace of construction of fencing along 
IBB. The Ministry was able to complete only 21 km o f fencing in 17 months since July, 2015. The 
Committee also notes that a long stretch of 423.34 km has remained unfenced due to non-
feasibility of physical barrier and deployment of n on-physical barriers is still in its testing phase 
and will require time before its implementation. The Committee feels that, at the current pace, the 
Ministry would not be able to seal the India-Bangladesh border by its target date i.e. March, 2019. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should find solutions to the problems that beset the 
fencing project and erect physical barriers at all feasible locations at the earliest. The Committee 
also recommends that in the areas that are hotspots  for FICN and cattle smuggling, fencing 
projects should be prioritised and, if fencing in s uch areas is not feasible, then the Ministry must 
increase the deployment of forces and intensify rou nd-the-clock surveillance till such areas are 
secured through implementation of non-physical barriers.  
 
2.4.5 The Committee, during its study visit to IBB,  observed that there were several houses that were 
touching the India-Bangladesh International Boundar y line and in several places there were habitations  
beyond the border fencing. On being enquired about this issue, the Ministry submitted that 148 village s 
are located completely ahead of the fence while 137  are located partially ahead of the fence. The 
Ministry also informed that there are 126 houses th at touched the zero-line. The BSF had requested the  
MHA to shift the villages ahead of the fence to the  hinterland. However, the Ministry is examining the  
possibility of shifting the fence ahead of the villages instead of shifting the villages.  
 
2.4.6 The Committee sought to know from the Ministr y if there was any provision in Border Area 
Development Programme (BADP) to allow funding of sh ifting of villages to which the Ministry replied 
that Rehabilitation and Resettlement of displaced p eople does not come under the purview of the 
guidelines of Border Area Development Programme (BA DP). If the State Government feels that some 
social infrastructure is required to be raised in t he settlement of displaced people within 0-10 km, t hat 
can be considered by the District Level Committees (DLCs) as per the guidelines of BADP and included 
in Annual Action Plan of the BADP. 
 
2.4.7 The Committee feels that the issue of shiftin g the villages or the fence is an intricate one 
and the Ministry must not adopt a one-size-fits-all  approach on this issue. The Committee feels 
that the Ministry must try to shift the fence in as  many areas as possible to prevent any 
inconvenience to the people. However, wherever the houses are located right on the International 
Boundary line, the Ministry will have to shift them  to the hinterland and rehabilitate the affected 
households. The Committee recommends that the Minis try should carry out a review of all such 
areas within six months and come up with specific s olutions in all such cases.  The Committee 
desires to be apprised about the progress in this regard.  
 
2.4.8 The Committee also notes that while rehabilit ation and resettlement of displaced people 
does not come under the purview of BADP Guidelines,  the BADP funds can be utilised to create 
social infrastructure. The Committee feels that the  people residing on the border line will be 
willing to shift easily if they are provided with proper housing and other facilities. The Committee, 

5 
 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should persuade the State Government to provide BADP 
funds for community housing projects, which fall wi thin the definition of social infrastructure, in 
the hinterland and shift all the households living beyond the fencing into such buildings.  
 
 
2.5 Border Floodlighting  along IBB 
 
2.5.1 The Ministry informed that the Government had  approved the proposal for installation of 
floodlighting along IBB for over 2840 km at a cost of Rs.1327.77 crore in November, 2007 which was 
subsequently revised to 2617.6 km in October, 2016.  The Ministry apprised that 2089 km floodlighting 
has been completed and work is in progress on 207.01 km of length. 
 
2.5.2 The Committee notes that almost 528 km of bor der, where floodlighting is feasible and has 
been sanctioned, is yet to be floodlit. The Committ ee also noticed lack of floodlights along several 
stretches during its study visit to the India-Bangl adesh Border. Lack of floodlights on the border 
allows the smugglers to perpetrate their devious activities during night. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must fast-track the fl oodlighting project and complete it at the 
earliest. The Committee also recommends that, as a short-term measure, the Ministry must 
provide adequate long-range night-vision equipment to all the Border Outposts situated in areas 
that lack floodlights.  
 
2.6 Cattle-Smuggling along IBB 
 
2.6.1 When the Committee sought to know the primary  reasons for proliferation of cattle smuggling 
along IBB, the Ministry replied that following factors are attributed to cattle smuggling: 
(i) Densely populated areas and presence of nearly 300 villages within 150 yards of the 
International Boundary.  
(ii) The cattle seized by the BSF are handed over t o the Custom authorities who dispose them 
of by auction and very often the cattle so auctioned find their way back to the smugglers.  
(iii) A section of local population in the borderin g districts is deeply entrenched in smuggling 
activities.  
 
2.6.2 The Ministry articulated that no authentic fi gures were available about the number of cattle being 
smuggled out of India. It, however, provided the fo llowing details of cattle seized by the BSF during the 
period 2012 to 2015:- 
 
Year Cattle seized by BSF 
2012 1,20,724 
2013 1,22,000 
2014 1,09,999 
2015 1,53,602 
2016 
(Upto Oct, 2016) 1,46,967 
 
2.6.3 The Ministry also informed that cattle smuggl ers and their agents from Haryana, Rajasthan, MP, 
Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar & WB and local car riers are the main perpetrators and some section 
of the border population also finds smuggling a sou rce of livelihood. The most affected areas of cattl e 
smuggling are Nadia, Murshidabad, Malda, Dakshin Di najpur, Uttar Dinajpur, Raiganj, Silliguri in the 
State of West Bengal and  Dhubri in Assam.  

6 
 
 
2.6.4 The Committee also discussed the issue of cat tle smuggling in its meeting held in Kolkata during 
its study visit to IBB. BSF representative asserted  that no restriction of cattle movement upto haats in 
border areas, inadequate legal deterrence, adoption  of non-lethal strategy along IBB and no provision to 
send the seized cattles back to hinterland are othe r major reasons for proliferation of this illegal a ctivity. 
He informed that BSF had taken several measures lik e use of fast patrolling boats in riverine areas, 
augmentation of strength at vulnerable areas, const ruction of ditch in fenced or unfenced patches alon g 
border, strengthening of existing fences with GI pi pes, intensified day and night patrolling, joint an d 
special operations with sister agencies, and use of  advanced surveillance equipment and intruder alarm s 
systems.  
 
2.6.5 The Chief Secretary, West Bengal Government i nformed the Committee that there were 15 cattle 
haats situated within 8 km from IBB that were very old and were sanctioned long time ago. A haat in 
Murshidabad had been shifted while steps were being taken to shift the others.    
 
2.6.6 The Committee is distressed to note that desp ite several measures taken by the BSF the 
problem of cattle smuggling persists along IBB. The  Committee is particularly anguished to note 
that the West Bengal State Government has failed to  implement its own order dated 01.09.2003 
that outlaws existence of any cattle haats within 8 km of border area. The Committee recommends 
that the State Government of West Bengal should tak e steps to cancel the licenses of all cattle 
haats that are illegally functioning within 8 km of  border area and hold the officials responsible 
for illegally issuing/renewing licenses to these ha ats. The Committee also recommends that mass 
movement and trading of cattle should be prohibited within 15 km of the border and steps may be 
initiated to move all cattle haats located within 15 km of the border to the hinterland.  
 
2.6.7 The Committee notes that the auction of seize d cattle by Customs officials is misused by the 
cattle smugglers who keep buying the auctioned catt le again and again. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommends that auctioning of seized cattle  must be banned in the states bordering IBB 
and Customs Department may be requested to arrange for transportation of the seized cattle to 
states other than the border states and hold auctio ns there. The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry must pursue the Customs Department to raise the minimum bench mark price of the 
seized cattle to prevent their re-selling to the pe rsons involved in smuggling of cattle and also 
make it mandatory for cattle auctioneers to submit their Pan Card and Aadhaar Card details 
while bidding. 
  
2.6.8 The Committee also learnt about the involveme nt of the local people living near the border 
in cattle smuggling and feels that lack of any lega l deterrence and ineffective law enforcement 
seem to have emboldened such persons. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the West 
Bengal State Government should be requested to take strict action against persons who are known 
or suspected to be involved in cattle smuggling.  
  
2.6.9 The Committee agrees that mass movement of ca ttle occurs from all the states towards 
West Bengal and Assam and once they reach the borde r areas it becomes extremely difficult to 
stop their movement across the border. The Committe e feels that Police forces of various States 
have failed to stop this mass movement of cattle to border states and West Bengal Police has failed 
to intercept or stop the movement of the cattle. Th e Committee feels that there is a wide and 
deeply entrenched nexus due to which this menace ha s proliferated and the Government needs to 
strike at the roots of this nexus if it has to completely curb this problem.  
 
INDIA-PAKISTAN BORDER 

7 
 
 
2.7 Border outposts along IPB 
 
2.7.1 Presently, 656 BOPs already exist along the I ndia-Pakistan border. The Government had 
sanctioned construction/upgradation of 126 BOPs (in cluding up gradation of 38 BOPs in Jammu) to 
reduce the inter-Border Out Post (BOP) distance to 3.5 km and this was supposed to be completed by 
2013-14. However, the Ministry stated that public p rotests, delay in the land acquisition and statutor y 
clearances etc., have delayed the project.  
 
2.7.2 However, after the revision of the scope of t he project by the Cabinet Committee on Security, 96  
BOPs were to be constructed along IPB.   The Commit tee was informed that after the decision to 
construct BOPs in available land in Right of Way of  Fence and Road, 76 BOPs have been completed 
and work is in progress in 14 BOPs along IPB.   
 
2.7.3 The Committee is concerned about the delay in  construction of Border Out Posts on India’s 
most sensitive border. The issues of public protest s, land acquisition, clearances should have been 
anticipated at the proposal stage itself. The Commi ttee takes exception to the delay as it hampers 
surveillance and domination of IPB and the target o f 3.5 km of inter-BOP distance has not been 
achieved. Now that the Ministry has resolved the issue and significant progress has taken place for 
completion of construction of BoPs, the constructio n of the remaining BoPs should be completed 
at the earliest.  
 
2.8 Border Fencing, Floodlighting and Roads along I PB 
 
2.8.1 On India-Pakistan border, 2003.06 km (out of a total sanctioned length of 2063.06 km) has been 
covered by fencing and the remaining 60.00 km of fe ncing is proposed to be erected. The work of 
installation of floodlights along the 2043.76 km of  the India-Pakistan border is under progress out of  
which 1943.76 km has been completed.  
 
2.8.2 The Ministry in its Annual Report for the yea r 2016 stated that 118 km of floodlights are non-
functional due to damage caused by floods. The Comm ittee sought to know the steps being taken to 
repair 118 km of floodlights that are non-functiona l due to damage caused by floods. The Ministry 
submitted that the work of restoration of damaged f loodlights was started by the CPWD in August/ 
September, 2015 and is likely to be completed by Ma rch, 2017.  Presently, the area is being guarded by  
physical presence along with use of search light/ night vision devices etc. 
 
2.8.3 The Committee recommends that there should be  regular maintenance of flood lights so 
that damage is minimal. In the flood prone areas, p re-emptive and protective steps should be 
taken to ensure that flood lights are not affected.  The Committee hopes that the work of 
restoration of damaged flood lights, entrusted to C PWD, would have been completed as per target 
by March, 2017.   
 
2.8.4 The Ministry also apprised the Committee that , on the entire India-Pakistan border, it has 
completed infrastructure works in almost all sector s except for a small part of the Gujarat sector whi ch 
suffers from persistent water logging. However, a p ilot project for construction of roads, fence, and 
installation of floodlights along the length of 1 k m of water logged area by using improved technology  
was sanctioned by the Ministry which was completed on 31 
st  December, 2014. Subsequently, the 
estimate for balance stretch was prepared by the co nstruction agency concerned and the same was under 
examination of Technical Committee headed by the DG , CPWD. Meanwhile, a High Level Committee 
(HLC) under Chairmanship of Shri Madhukar Gupta, Re td. Home Secretary had recommended that 

8 
 
requirement of fence, roads and floodlights along I PB in Gujarat may be reviewed and the balance work 
may be dropped. The HLC suggested the use of an alt ernative cost effective way for surveillance in thi s 
stretch.  
 
2.8.5 The Committee takes note of the recommendatio n of the High Level Committee to drop the 
balance work of construction of fence, roads and fl oodlights on India Pakistan border in Gujarat 
and look for an alternative cost effective way of s urveillance. The Committee feels that significant 
amount of time has been wasted on this small stretc h of border in Gujarat which suffers from 
persistent water logging. The Committee recommends that early efforts may be made to put in 
place a cost effective alternative mechanism for su rveillance in this stretch. There should be no 
further delay in this regard. Advanced technological solutions may be considered for this purpose. 
 
2.8.6 The Committee also visited the India-Pakistan  border in Rajasthan State   and had first-hand 
information about the fencing that got seriously af fected due to the phenomenon of shifting sand dunes  
on the Rajasthan border. The Committee discussed th is matter with the CPWD and they submitted that 
they were working on finding a solution to this pro blem. The MHA informed that CPWD has been 
asked to carry out Geo-Technical survey in the Bord ering area of Rajasthan while the Ministry was also  
examining the possibility of a study to be done by a premier agency like IIT for this purpose. 
 
2.8.7 The Committee finds that the fencing in the T har Desert region of Rajasthan Border area 
has proved to be ineffective in serving its intende d purpose due to the problem of shifting sand 
dunes.  The Committee also notes that the MHA is ex amining the possibility of conducting a study 
through a premiere agency like IIT.  The Committee is also aware that BSF is considering the 
option of dense plantation in Jaisalmer Border area  to stabilize sand dunes.  The Committee in 
this connection would like to draw the attention of  the Ministry to a fence erected by the USA, on 
its border with Mexico having geographical terrain similar to Thar Desert, which can be 
repositioned mechanically to appropriate border lin e and in effect floats on top of the shifting 
sand dunes.  The Committee recommends that the MHA should form a working group or a 
Committee comprising of technical experts to examin e all the possible solutions to this problem. 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress in this regard. 
 
2.9 Border Roads along IPB 
 
2.9.1 During its study visit to the Western Border,  the Committee found that, in Punjab State, the roa d 
connectivity in the border areas was very poor. Whe n the Committee enquired about this, the Ministry 
replied that the BSF had conducted a survey along t he IPB in Punjab and had come out with a 
requirement of 481.58 km lateral and 219.45 km axia l roads in Punjab (Total: 701.034 km). The lateral 
roads would be constructed in the Right of Way (RoW ) of fence already constructed along the border 
and axial roads will be constructed along the alrea dy available Kucha tracks by acquiring land along t he 
tracks to connect Border out Posts (BoPs) with lateral roads.  The Committee was informed that the total 
cost implication of the project was Rs. 902.02 Cror e and the project was under consideration for 
approval of the competent authority.  
 
2.9.2 The Committee, during its study visit to bord er areas of Punjab, found extremely poor 
roads which can significantly slow down the movemen t of Forces and cause hardship to them 
during an emergency.  The Committee, therefore, str ongly recommends that approval to the 
project of construction of lateral and axial roads in Punjab may be granted without any further 
delay and construction work should begin at the ear liest.  The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry must prioritise construction of latera l roads as they are essential for patrolling and 
surveillance purposes.   

9 
 
 
2.9.3 The Committee also noticed the lack of all-we ather road connectivity to BoPs in Jammu sector 
and sought to know about the steps being taken for providing link/connecting roads to BoPs in Jammu 
sector. The MHA informed that it had approached the  J&K Chief Secretary to consider the proposal 
under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana. The Ministr y also informed that the CCS during March, 
2011 had approved construction of earthen bunds, me talled roads and Naka-Cum-Machan-Cum fighting 
bunkers, along the existing security fence (includi ng land acquisition of 135 ft. wide strip) over 179  km 
length of border at an estimated cost of Rs. 341 cr ore in Jammu sector along IPB. As on 31.12.2016, an  
amount of Rs.40.41 crore had been released for Land Acquisition for the project.  
 
2.9.4 The Committee feels that the Ministry is not seriously taking up the issue of poor road 
connectivity in the Jammu sector and is leaving the  matter to the discretion of the State 
Government. The Committee is also anguished to note  the sluggish progress of the project to 
construct bunds, metalled roads and bunkers along the fence in the Jammu sector. The Committee 
feels that lack of adequate all-weather connectivity in border areas will keep the border in Jammu 
region vulnerable to external threats like infiltration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should fast-track the project to const ruct roads, bunds and bunkers along the fence 
and start the construction work at the earliest. Th e Committee also recommends that the State 
Government of J&K must be constantly exhorted to im prove road connectivity in the Jammu 
sector by constructing good all-weather roads that will provide connectivity to all the BoPs. 
 
2.9.5 The Committee feels that Border Roads Organis ation is very ill-equipped for the purpose 
of delivering border roads in a timely manner. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should make efforts to revive the idea of creating a joint venture through public-private 
partnership between the Government and a private co mpany having wide experience and 
expertise in road projects.  
 
INDIA-CHINA BORDER (ICB) 
 
2.10 Border Infrastructure along ICB 
 
2.10.1  The Committee was given to understand that on the India-China border, the BOPs are 
located at a very high altitude of above 9000 feet.  81 BOPs are located at a height of more than 12000  
feet and 20 BOPs at a height of more than 15000 ft.  Limited patrolling by ITBP is possible due to 
excessive gap, hilly terrain and lack of roads.  
 
2.10.2  The Committee was apprised that in order to  redress the situation arising out of lack of 
infrastructure along the India-China border, the Go vernment undertook construction of 73 roads of 
operational significance. Out of these, 27 roads me asuring 804.91km at an estimated cost of Rs. 1937 
crore are being funded in phase-I, by the MHA, for effective movement of the ITBP. The Ministry 
apprised that 8 roads have been completed, 4 roads have been converted to General Staff (GS) roads to 
be constructed by Ministry of Defence (MoD) and wor k is in progress on the remaining roads. 
Construction of 16 roads is under progress and tentatively expected to be completed by March 2019. 
 
2.10.3  Under Phase-II, 48 roads measuring 1032 km have been operationally cleared by the 
MoD and approved by the MHA for construction and Detailed Project Reports are being prepared by the 
CPWD.   
 
2.10.4  The Committee takes note of the fact that t he infrastructure on the Chinese side of 
the India-China border is far better than that on t he Indian side and to, achieve comparable 

10 
 
results, the Government has to intensify its effort s and fast-track the projects. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should strive to compl ete the construction of all the roads under 
Phase-I by March, 2019 as targeted and should also start the Phase-II construction at the earliest.  
 
2.10.5  When the Committee sought to know about oth er infrastructure works, being taken up 
under the Scheme to improve border infrastructure o n ICB, the Ministry submitted that the following 
border infrastructure development projects on ICB are being undertaken: 
 
(a) For provision of suitable warm and comfortable accommodation for the troops, the Government 
has approved the concept of permanent integrated bu ilding with central heating and freeze proof 
toilets for jawans who are posted at high altitude Border out Posts (BOPs). Construction of such 
a BOP at Lukung, Leh (J&K) for Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) is in progress while the 
proposal for construction of permanent integrated buildings at 11 BOPs is under consideration. 
(b) Efforts are being made for provision of basic f acilities like water supply, electricity, telephone , 
bridges, tracks and foot suspension bridges whereve r possible in existing BOPs. Installation of 
123 Mobile Towers has been sanctioned to enhance communication facility in 156 ITBP BOPs.  
(c) Air support is being provided by Indian Air For ce/BSF to ITBP BOPs which remain cut off 
during winter season. Besides, to increase operatio nal efficiency of ITBP, proposal for more 
helipads in the forward locations is under consideration of the Government. 
 
2.10.6  The Committee feels that the permanent inte grated buildings at high altitude BoPs 
is the need of the hour to improve operational effi ciency.  Construction of the Lukung BOP may 
be completed at the earliest and an early decision may be taken for the other 11 BOPs which are 
under consideration.      
 
2.10.7  The Committee also recommends that the prop osal of construction of more helipads 
in forward locations may be approved without any de lay. The Ministry of Home Affairs may also 
chalk out a plan to create a dedicated air wing of ITBP and procure a minimal fleet of helicopters 
and planes, as per the requirements of ITBP, for the purpose. 
 
INDIA-NEPAL BORDER (INB) 
 
2.11  Deployment of BGF along INB 
 
2.11.1 
 The Committee was apprised that in order to check anti-national activities and to improve 
the security on the India-Nepal border, 31 battalio ns of the Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) have been 
deployed as the Border Guarding Force.  The raising  of additional 32 battalions (18 operational and 14  
Reserve) has been sanctioned. Out of 18 operational  battalions sanctioned, 9 battalions will be deploy ed 
on the India-Nepal Border. On the Committee’s query  regarding status of the plan to raise these 
additional battalions, the Ministry informed that 26 battalions are fully functional, 2 are being raised and 
4 will be raised in 2017-18. 
 
2.12  Border Infrastructure along INB 
 
2.12.1  The SSB has established 473 BOPs on India-Nepal bor der. The Ministry submitted that 
the construction and up-gradation of 1,377 km. of s trategic roads along the India-Nepal border in the 
States of Uttarakhand (173 km.), Uttar Pradesh (640 km.) and Bihar (564 km.) at an estimated cost of Rs 
3,853 crore has been approved. The construction wor k of these roads was to be completed over a period 
of five years commencing from 1 
st  April, 2011.  
 

11 
 
2.12.2  Out of an approved length of 552.30 km for the upgradation/construction of roads in 
Bihar, only 177.33 km of formation work and 35.75 k m of surfacing work of roads was completed (upto 
31.12.2016). In Uttar Pradesh, the Government had a pproved construction of 256.95 km of roads but 
only 88.06 km of formation and 45.21 km of surfacin g work was completed (upto 31.12.2016). In 
Uttarakhand, the approved length of 12 km of upgrad ation of Kakrali Gate-Thulighat road has been 
completed. Construction of Pancheshwar Dam Project has been proposed on Tanakpur-Jauljivi Road 
(India-Nepal Border road) in Uttarakhand along Rive r Mahakali which affects the alignment of the 
border road.  
 
2.12.3  The Committee is constrained to note the in ordinate delay in the construction and 
upgradation of 1377 km of strategic roads along the India-Nepal Border in the States of UP, Bihar 
and Uttarakhand due to pending land acquisition and forest clearances. The Committee notes that 
the Ministry has sought an extension of time up to March, 2019 for completion of these projects.   
The Ministry should have made serious efforts in re solving the issues.  Though the construction 
should have been completed in 2016 as per the original plan, only very little has been completed so 
far. The Committee deplores this delay and desires that atleast by March, 2019 it should be 
completed. 
 
INDIA-BHUTAN BORDER (IBhB) 
 
2.13  Border Infrastructure along IBhB 
 
2.13.1  The Ministry informed the Committee that Sa shastra Seema Bal has established 153 
BOPs along the India-Bhutan border. The Government of India has approved the construction of 313 km 
of border roads along the India-Bhutan border at a cost of Rs 1259 crore. The construction work on 
these roads has not yet started due to pending land  acquisition. The Ministry also informed that the 
proposal for border fencing on the India-Bhutan Bor der from Border Pillar No. 150 to Border Pillar No.  
174 in Kokrajhar District (Assam) having a length of 35.90 Kms, excluding  5.10 Kms riverine area, has 
been approved in principle and Rs. 4.81 crore has b een approved by the HLEC for land cost. It was also  
stated that the estimate of Rs. 68.28 crore for fen cing work will be sanctioned after land clearance. 
Process for transfer of forest land is under process. 
 
2.13.2  When the Committee sought to know the measu res being taken to remove bottlenecks so 
that the land acquisition can be completed, the Min istry replied that a major portion of the revised 
alignment of India-Bhutan border road passes through Bodoland Territorial Area District (BTAD) which 
consists of reserve forest.  Recently, the Secretar y (BM) held a meeting with DG, Forest and DG, SSB 
along with representatives of the State Government concerned for expediting transfer of forest land to  
the State Government.  The Ministry further stated that the Assam PWD has been assigned to carry out 
detailed survey of proposed alignment and to prepar e a Detailed Project Report (DPR), and the   survey  
work was under progress. 
 
2.13.3  The Committee takes a serious view of the f act that though the project of 
construction of 313 km of border roads along the India-Bhutan border has been approved, it is yet 
to take off due to pending land acquisition.   The Committee is also concerned that transfer of 
forest land in such cases has become a major cause of delay. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this issue with the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
at the highest level and frame a Standard Operating  Procedure to be followed by both the 
Ministries in all such cases where transfer of fore st land is required for border infrastructure 
projects.  
 

12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDIA-MYANMAR BORDER (IMB) 
 
2.14  Deployment of BGF along IMB 
 
2.14.1  Presently, the Assam Rifles (AR) has been d eployed on India-Myanmar Border.  15 
Battalions of the AR are deployed for the border guarding duties, and out them 06 Battalions are on dual 
role of border guarding and counter insurgency duties.  
 
2.14.2  The Committee was given to understand that Assam Rifles is not specialized to perform 
the role of a BGF and hence sought to know if deplo yment of any other force on IMB was being 
contemplated. The Ministry submitted that Assam Rifles is not a dedicated BGF like other BGFs, as it is 
also involved in counter insurgency operations. It operates in formation of Company Operating Bases 
(COB) and not on Border Out Posts (BOP) basis as ot her BGFs do. COB requires more men than BOP 
and the inter-COB distance is large in comparison t o BOP pattern. Further COBs are located far behind 
the international border. The Ministry informed tha t it was exploring the possibility of effectively 
guarding the India-Myanmar Border by way of deploym ent of a dedicated force for border guarding 
near to zero line and to reduce the inter-base distance of the force.  
 
2.14.3  Since the Assam Rifles is not a dedicated B GF and the Ministry is exploring the 
possibility of deploying a dedicated BGF for guarding the India-Myanmar Border, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take an early d ecision on this matter and put an end to the 
confusion.  
 
2.15 Border Infrastructure along IMB 
 
2.15.1  The Ministry informed the Committee that to  secure the India-Myanmar Border, the 
Government has undertaken creation of Border Infras tructure along this border, comprising of 
construction of 4585 Km roads, 113 helipads and 02 helibases. The CPWD was asked to take up the 
pre-feasibility study for construction of 1417 Km of Roads, 56 helipads and 02 helibases.  
 
2.15.2        The Committee also learnt that in ord er to check the problem of infiltration, smuggling of 
contraband and illegal activities in the IMB area, the Government of India had initiated fencing between 
Boundary Pillar No. 79 and Boundary Pillar No. 81 o n this Border (approx. 10 km). The Government 
allocated a fund of Rs 30.96 crore for the fencing work, acquired the required land and obtained 
necessary clearances from the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Government released a fund of 
Rs 16.38 crore to Border Road Organization (BRO) which is the executing agency and the fencing work 
on the stretch of 4.02 km has been completed. The f encing work was then stopped due to the protests 
from local people and a re-survey of boundary line between Border Pillar Nos. 79-81 was to be done by 
the Ministry of External Affairs in consultation wi th the Government of Myanmar. The Ministry 
informed the Committee that the views of MEA on this matter are still awaited by MHA.  
 
2.15.3         The Ministry also submitted that, to  improve border infrastructure on India-Myanmar 
Border, a comprehensive border infrastructure proje ct, envisaging upgradation of existing roads and 
construction of new roads and helipads in the State s of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland & 

13 
 
Mizoram along the border, is under consideration/ex amination by the MHA. It was further stated that 
modern weapons and equipment like Unmanned Aerial V ehicle (UAV), Battle Field Surveillance Radar 
(BFSR), Laser Range Finder, Hand Held Thermal Image r, Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) and 
Unattended Ground Sensor (UGS) are also being procured for the border management. 
 
2.15.4  The Committee expresses its concern over th e delay in the re-survey of the 
boundary line on IMB for construction of fencing. T he Committee is aware that this border is one 
of the most porous borders and insurgent groups are  quite active in the border area. The attack 
on the Armed Forces convoy in 2015 was a gruesome reminder that India needs to secure the IMB 
and eliminate cross-border insurgency in the region . The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue the Mini stry of External Affairs for completing the 
re-survey at the earliest so that the fencing work could begin. The Committee also recommends 
that the proposed comprehensive border infrastructu re project for IMB should be approved 
without any delay. The procurement of modern weapon s and equipment for border management 
should also be completed at the earliest. 
 
2.16  Vulnerabilities on IMB 
 
2.16.1  The Ministry informed the Committee that In dia and Myanmar share an unfenced border 
of 1643 Km which runs through the States of Nagalan d, Manipur, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh with 
a Free Movement Regime (FMR) up to 16 Km across the  International border. Each of the 15 Border 
Guarding Battalions of Assam Rifles is responsible to guard almost 110 km of hostile and porous border  
with no barrier or fence to prevent crossing of Int ernational Border as against 40 kms per Battalion 
mandated by the Group of Ministers' report. The Com mittee learnt that the gaps in the deployment are 
wide which are prone to be exploited by the insurge nts to carry out sabotage activities against the In dian 
security forces. The Ministry submitted that it is almost impossible to achieve 100% sealing of the 
border. However, the Force is relentlessly carrying  out operations against the insurgents and has been  
instrumental in overall decline in the insurgent-related incidents over the last three years. 
 
2.16.2  The Committee noted that with the ethnic, c ultural and physiological similarities of locals 
with inhabitants of Naga Self Administration Zone ( NSAZ) of Myanmar, there exists a liberal trans-
border regime along the India-Myanmar Border known as the Free Movement Regime (FMR) which 
allows a free movement up to 16 Km across the India-Myanmar Border.     
 
2.16.3      Explaining the steps being taken by the  government, the Ministry said that in order to 
rationalize and regularize the facility of free mov ement and with the objective of confining this faci lity 
to genuine and bonafide residents on both sides living in areas up to an agreed depth, a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between India and Myanmar on mo vement of people across IMB was proposed. 
The MHA informed that the MEA has shared the MoU on  FMR with the Myanmar side and the 
response from the Myanmar side is awaited. 
 
2.16.4  The Committee takes a serious note of the f act that the gaps in the deployment are 
wide and are prone to be exploited by the insurgent s to carry out sabotage activities against the 
country and its security forces.   The Committee is  also constrained to learn that the system of 
FMR along with porous and unfenced border is being exploited by the anti national elements for 
unhindered movement of insurgent groups across the border.   The Committee also expresses its 
concern that the implementation of FMR is not unifo rm across the states along the IMB which is 
exploited by insurgents and anti-national elements.   The exploitation of FMR is also facilitated by 
the thick jungles, heavy undergrowth, riverine and mountainous terrain in the region.   The 
Committee takes note of the MOU being proposed by I ndia to Myanmar for rationalising and 

14 
 
regularising the FMR and recommends that steps may be taken for early signing of the MOU.   
The Committee also recommends that steps may be tak en to ensure uniform implementation of 
the FMR by all the states bordering Myanmar to check its misuse.  
 
GENERAL BORDER MANAGEMENT ISSUES  
 
2.17 Working Conditions of Border Guarding Forces ( BGF) Personnel  
 
2.17.1  The Committee was informed that the normal duty hours of SSB Personnel are 8 hours.   
The duties of Standing Guard/Sentry are changed aft er every two hours of continuous duty and they are 
given rest of 4-6 hours. There is no fixed hour dut y system for Naka/patrolling; however, the Jawans are 
given adequate rest. 
 
2.17.2  The Committee was apprised by the Ministry that BSF Jawans are given six hours of 
uninterrupted sleep in every cycle of 24 hours. Bes ides, every Jawan is given one day off in a week 
wherein he remains within the BoP to attend to pers onal needs while remaining available for emergency 
duties.   
 
  
2.17.3  The Committee in its study visits to variou s locations on India-Bangladesh and India-
Pakistan Borders enquired about the duty hour syste m being followed on the forward locations.  The 
Committee was given to understand that there was a fixed duty hours system for patrols wherein a 24 
hours cycle is divided into four shifts of six hour s each.  A Jawan is sent for patrolling on two alte rnate 
shifts of 6 hours in a cycle and gets 6 hours of time between every two duty shifts for rest and relaxation. 
However, while interacting with the personnel, the Committee observed that a Jawan, apart from 
performing his patrolling duty, has to attend to ot her miscellaneous duties related to working parade and 
roll call parade. He also has to take meals and per form his other daily routine personal work.  Moreover, 
in most of the areas, he has to commute from the Bo P to the place of patrolling which requires 
significant amount of time depending on the distance he has to travel.   
 
2.17.4  In some areas like Rajasthan, the Jawans ha ve to travel for more than an hour to reach the 
patrolling location and another hour for coming bac k to BoP after the end of his patrol duty.  Thus, h e is 
left with no more than 2 to 3 hours of time for get ting continuous rest before he gets ready to leave for 
his second shift.  The Committee was also informed that this system had failed to provide adequate res t 
to the Jawans and was having a toll on their health , apart from leaving them fatigued during their 
patrolling duty. This along with 6 hours of continu ous patrolling may also affect the surveillance 
operations in critical areas on IBB and IPB that require constant vigil and alertness.  
 
2.17.5  The Ministry's submission that a Jawan gets  minimum of 6 hours uninterrupted 
sleep in every cycle of 24 hours is at variance wit h the facts observed and learnt by the Committee 
during its study visits. The Committee is anguished  to observe that the flawed system leaves 
grossly insufficient time for Jawans to get decent rest and sleep. The Committee is concerned to 
note that due to shortage of manpower, jawans are forced to perform 16-18 hours of duty in a day.  
The BSF needs to revise its duty hours system so as  to ensure atleast one gap of 8 to 10 hours 
between two consecutive shifts.  Moreover, a patrol ling shift of 6 hours is unduly long and without 
adequate rest a Jawan cannot be expected to remain alert throughout the shift. The Committee 
recommends that this system should be rationalized by creating six shifts of 4 hours each during a 
24 hours cycle wherein a Jawan performs two shifts of 4 hours each in a day with a gap of 8 to 10 
hours between these two shifts. It must be ensured that the Jawan gets 8 hours of sleep plus two 
hours to attend to his personal needs. The Committe e also recommends that the Ministry should 

15 
 
assess the amount of additional man power required to adopt this system and should have 
sufficient number of Reserve Battalions.  
  
2.17.6  The Committee, during its study visit to th e India-Bangladesh Border, observed that 
Jawans commuted to their patrol locations from thei r respective BoPs on foot. This adds to their fatig ue, 
takes away significant amount of time from their re sting hours and affects their performance while 
patrolling.   The Committee, during its interaction s with the Jawans, learnt that they were not provid ed 
bicycles by BSF and many of the Jawans had hired bi cycles for commuting out of their own expenses, 
whereas some of them travel on foot.     
 
2.17.7  The Committee expresses its deep anguish ov er the neglect of basic necessities to the 
Jawans by the commanding officers. The Committee feels that a Jawan must not be made to travel 
on foot for his daily commute if the duty location is far away from the BoP. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the BSF must procure suf ficient number of bicycles and every Jawan 
must be provided with one for the purpose of commut ing wherever cycling is possible. The 
Committee also recommends that in areas where there  are no roads, like deserts and hilly areas, 
the Commanding officers must be directed to estimat e the commute duration, consider them as 
part of the duty hours of jawans and accordingly re vise their duty hours so as to minimize their 
fatigue and provide them adequate time for rest.   
   
2.17.8  The Committee, during its study visit to th e Western Border, was also apprised by the 
Commanding Officers that construction of Observatio n Posts and ambush-cum-patrol shelters will help 
in providing brief periods of rest to jawans during their patrols and strengthen the surveillance system on 
the border. The Committee was informed that a proposal for the same had been already submitted by the 
BSF to MHA.  
 
2.17.9  The construction of Observation Posts and a mbush-cum-patrol shelters along the 
India-Bangladesh and India-Pakistan Borders is a go od proposal and is in the right direction to 
improve the working conditions of personnel and als o to strengthen the surveillance on the 
border. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take an early decision on this 
proposal during this financial year itself.  
  
2.17.10 During the visit of the Committee to J&K fo rward locations, the Committee interacted 
with BSF personnel posted in forward BoPs in areas that were somewhat inaccessible and did not have 
proper connectivity. The personnel informed the Com mittee that there was no mobile connectivity 
available in their BoPs and the only available mean s of communication with their friends and families 
was through satellite phones. They informed that th e Government had recently increased call rates for 
calls made through satellite phones by personnel de ployed in remote areas from Re 1 to Rs. 5/- per cal l 
due to which they were unable to frequently contact  their families and were incurring huge expenses ou t 
of their own income. The Ministry submitted that in December, 2015 they had requested the Department 
of Telecommunications (DoT), New Delhi to extend th eir agreement for a further period of 5 years at 
the subsidized rate of Re.1/- per minute, as 135 DS PTs allotted to BSF are being used by troops in 
remote areas of the country where these equipment a re the only means of communication for operations 
as well as welfare of troops deployed in far flung areas. The Union Home Secretary had also written a 
DO letter to the Secretary, DoT in May 2016 on this issue.  
 
2.17.11 The Committee is concerned by the insensiti ve approach of the Government 
towards the jawans posted in difficult and harsh co nditions. The Committee strongly recommends 
that the Ministry must pursue this matter with the Department of Telecommunications on a 
priority basis and ensure that subsidized call rate s are made available on all the 135 DSPTs 

16 
 
allotted to  the BSF being used in remote areas. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry 
must bear the expenses of all calls made through th ese DSPTs or subsidise the calls made by 
jawans, out of its own funds, until the DoT takes a decision on this matter.  
 
2.18 Deployment of BGF Battalions to duties other t han Border Guarding 
 
2.18.1  The Ministry submitted to the Committee tha t the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) 
were raised to perform specific duties and to meet specific challenges. Duties of CAPFs are assigned 
keeping in view their primary tasks so that their d octrine of training, rotational changeover plan, re st & 
recuperation process etc. may not be disturbed. However, internal security requirements do require some 
flexibility in deployment. In order to reduce the i mpact of diversion of battalions to other duties an d to 
reduce the dependence of States on CAPFs for deploy ment of additional forces, the Ministry has 
sanctioned a number of Indian Reserve battalions (I R) to State Governments. The Committee sought the 
details of BSF battallions performing duties other than border guarding. The Ministry submitted the 
details as under:  
 
Role/Deployment No of BSF Bns 
Line of Control 14 
Anti Infiltration 02 
Vital Areas & Vital Points 03 
Counter Insurgency 05 
Anti Naxalite Operations 16 
ICP Attari 01 
Reserve Bn 10 
Marine Bn 01 
NDRF Bns 03 
Total 45 
 
2.18.2  The Committee, during its study visits, als o found that the number of Reserve battalions 
in the BSF were very less and inadequate. The Commi ttee was informed that reserve battalions are 
meant for training, rest and relief of operationall y deployed troops and can be deployed for a short 
duration during an exigency. The Committee was also informed by the Ministry that there were a total of 
186 battalions in BSF out of which 70 were deployed  in the Western Theatre, 83 were deployed in the 
Eastern Theatre and 30 were Reserve battalions. The  Committee was also informed that there were 
proposals, under consideration of the Ministry, for  raising 4 Battalions for guarding ICPs and 21 
Battalions for 2 
nd  Tier deployment, training and rest and relief of the troops. The Ministry also submitted 
the details of the total number of Reserve Battalions of BSF as follows: 
 
Reserve Battalions 
LWE Operations 16 Bns (Odisha & Chhattisgarh) 
Counter Insurgency 03 Bns (02 Manipur & 01 in Meghalaya) 
Integrated Check Post 01 Bns 
Reserve 10 Bns (25-Chhawala, 32-Hissar, 77-Bangalore, 162-
Thrissur, 118-Coimbatore, 95-Bhondsi, 69-Nagaur, 
169-Bikaner, 175-Hazaribag, 176-Pune/Solapur) 
Total 30 Bns 
 
2.18.3  The Committee is concerned to observe that while 30 out of a total of 186 battalions 
were designated as Reserve Battalions, only 10 out of 30 were actually kept as Reserve and even 

17 
 
they have been deployed in various locations for mi scellaneous duties. The Committee feels that 
the raison d'être of having Reserve Battalions has been lost and this has become the root cause for 
overburdening of border guarding personnel leaving them with no time for sleep, rest, 
recuperation and training activities. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should urgently raise additional battalions in the respective forces for the purpose of handling 
LWE and Counter Insurgency operations and to ensure  that battalions from BGFs are not 
diverted for the purpose. The Committee also recomm ends that the Government should raise the 
required number of Indian Reserve Battalions for th e States to ensure their self-sufficiency in law 
and order, elections and other miscellaneous duties  instead of making them dependent on the 
CAPFs.  
 
2.18.4  The Committee feels that the number of Rese rve Battalions at present is too low and 
it has to be augmented urgently. The Committee, the refore, recommends that all the proposals of 
BGFs to raise additional number of battalions shoul d be considered on a priority basis and 
approval must be granted at the earliest. The Minis try should establish a strong institutional 
mechanism to ensure that the Reserve battalions do not get deployed under any circumstances for 
any other duty except in times of extreme exigencie s and should be kept for the purpose of 
training, rest and relief of existing troops. The M inistry should also ensure that any such 
deployment in times of exigencies should be tempora ry and must not become permanent at any 
cost.   
 
2.19 Pending Procurement of Weapons and Essential E quipment 
 
2.19.1  During its study visits, the Committee obse rved deficiency of some surveillance 
equipment, like Hand-held Thermal Imagers, which ar e essential for surveillance during night.  On 
enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry informed tha t to address the deficiency of essential equipment,  
the procurement of required surveillance equipment is under process. 
 
2.19.2 The Committee feels that adequacy of modern equipment for surveillance during day as 
well as night is a pre-requisite to detect any atte mpt of infiltration or illegal migration.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should immediately procure all essential 
surveillance equipment especially those required fo r surveillance during night, like Hand-held 
Thermal Imager and PNV Monocular, at the earliest and apprise the Committee of the progress in 
the matter. 
2.20  Composite BOPs 
 
2.20.1  The Committee, during its study visits to I BB and IPB, found that the conventional 
border outposts of BSF lacked several basic facilit ies. The staying and sleeping arrangements of jawan s 
in barracks were poor, there was no separate space for jawans to store their luggage and in some BoPs 
there was no clean drinking water. Some of the barr acks were in dilapidated condition with no proper 
roof and some were not having even fans. On being e nquired, the Ministry informed that at present BSF 
is manning 1901 BOPs out of which 422 are Composite  BOPs and the remaining 1479 are BOPs having 
five or less basic elements. In order to provide al l basic elements in the non-composite BOPs, work is  
being taken up in a phased manner.   The Committee was also informed that proposals for providing 
piped water to all BOPs, wherever feasible, had bee n received in MHA during July 2015, out of which 
28 proposals have been cleared and remaining propos als are still under consideration of the MHA for 
sanction/allotment of funds. 
 
2.20.2  The Committee is anguished to observe the p oor condition of the border out posts. 
The Committee notices that only 422 out of 1901 BOP s on India-Bangladesh and India-Pakistan 

18 
 
Borders are composite and others lack various basic  elements. The Committee is constrained to 
observe that several BOPs do not have even the most  essential facilities like provision for filtered 
drinking water or proper barracks. It is inhuman to  make Jawans to live and sleep without a fan 
in the BOPs. The Committee, therefore, recommends t hat the Ministry should intensify its efforts 
for converting all BOPs into composite ones and app rise the Committee, periodically, about the 
progress of this project. The Committee also recomm ends that all the proposals for provision of 
piped water in BoPs should be approved at the earli est and till then orders may be issued for 
procurement of water filter/RO systems for all BoPs  and for proper maintenance of existing ones.  
The Ministry should take an immediate decision in t his regard and inform the Committee about 
the decision taken. 
 
2.21  Service Conditions and Pay Related Issues of BGFs 
 
2.21.1  The Committee sought to know the measures that are proposed to bring the service 
conditions, pay, allowances and other benefits of B order Guarding Forces on par with the Army. The 
Ministry informed that CAPFs had demanded higher Gr ade Pay for various non-gazetted ranks and also 
sought increase of Modified Assured Career Progress ion (MACP) to four times in a career along with 
reduction in eligibility period ranging from six to  eight years. The CAPFs had also demanded grant of 
Paramilitary Service Pay akin to the Military Service Pay as admissible to Defence Personnel. The MHA 
submitted that they had supported these demands but the 7 
th  CPC did not agree to the above demands.    
  
2.21.2  Subsequently, the proposal for grant of Par amilitary Service Pay (PMSP) to all CAPFs 
personnel was recommended by the MHA to the Empower ed Committee of Secretaries constituted to 
study the 7 
th  CPC recommendations.  The recommendations of the 7 th  Central Pay Commission relating 
to pay, pension and related issues have been implem ented w.e.f 01.01.2016, vide Resolution dated 
25.07.2016. However, the recommendation of MHA for grant of PMSP to all CAPF personnel was not 
incorporated in the said Resolution.  
 
2.21.3  During the deliberations of the Committee, some Members raised the issue of disparity in 
the pay and perks of CAPFs vis-a-vis Armed Forces e ven though both of them having similar working 
conditions.  The Committee, during the study visits , also found that BSF personnel were working in 
some of the most difficult and hostile locations an d were yet discriminated in terms of pay and 
allowances. The Committee was also informed by the personnel, during the visits to border areas that, 
despite being deployed much ahead of the Armed Forc es at forward locations on International Border in 
harsh weather and difficult terrain, the quantum of  hard area allowance received by them was much less  
as compared to that received by their counterparts in the Army. 
 
2.21.4  The Committee, during its study visits, als o found that promotional avenues in the lower 
ranks of BGFs were scarce and there was excessive s tagnation at the level of constable so much so that  
some of the constables retire without any further p romotion and most of the personnel in lower rungs 
received no more than a single promotion throughout  their service.  The committee was informed that 
this stagnation forced many personnel to opt for ea rly voluntary retirement and was also a cause for 
attrition in the forces. 
 
2.21.5  The Committee is disappointed to note that the personnel of the CAPFs are unfairly 
treated as compared to their counterparts in the Ar med Forces.  The committee feels that this will 
have an adverse impact on the morale of the Forces who work tirelessly to secure the borders of 
our country. The Committee is aware that the Commit tee on the Allowances recommended by the 
7
th  CPC is yet to give its report and recommends that the MHA must make another effort to 
enhance the hard area allowances of CAPFs and bring  them at par with the Armed Forces.  The 

19 
 
Committee also feels that changes in the Modified A ssured Career Progression scheme is under 
the jurisdiction of the Ministry and recommends that the proposals of CAPFs for the same may be 
considered expeditiously and a suitable decision taken.   
 
2.21.6  The Committee also recommends that hard are a allowance should be exclusively 
decided on the basis of geographical and climatic c onditions of the area of deployment and should 
be uniform for personnel of all the forces, be it CAPFs or Army.  
 
2.21.7  The Committee is however, considering a sep arate subject on CAPFs in which it will 
deal with service conditions, living conditions, pa y & allowances and housing and will give a 
comprehensive report on the subject.  The issues pe rtaining to BGFs will be dealt with extensively 
in that report.   
 
2.22  Medical Facilities for BGF Personnel 
2.22.1  The Committee, during its interaction with the personnel deployed in forward areas on 
Western Border, was informed that medical facilitie s for personnel posted on the border were severely 
inadequate. The personnel had to be transferred to Frontier Headquarters for even basic treatment 
whenever there were injuries due to cross-border firing and shelling. Facilities for secondary and tertiary 
care were also inadequate.  
2.22.2  The Committee sought details of medical fac ilities available for personnel of Border 
Guarding Forces. The Ministry informed that there w ere 8 BSF Composite Hospitals available in 
Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan, South Bengal, North Ben gal, Tripura, Shillong and Guwahati Frontier 
Headquarters. In Gujarat, Jammu, Silchar, Chhatisga rh and Bangalore, Unit hospitals are available. At 
Sector Headquarter locations, hospital of a co-loca ted Unit is functioning as Sector Hospital. The 
Ministry further stated that all essential equipmen t and medicines are available for providing primary  
medicare at these centres. All BSF BOPs/COBs have been provided with First Aid Boxes with sufficient 
emergency medicines and qualified Nursing Assistant s. Composite Hospitals of other CAPFs are also 
providing medicare at various locations. CGHS/CS(MA )/State Government recognized hospitals have 
been empanelled with BSF at various locations for f acilitating secondary/ tertiary medicare to BSF 
beneficiaries. Troops and their families availed of  all Medical facilities admissible under CS (MA) 
Rules- 1944 and CGHS whenever they are posted to ar eas covered under CGHS. Service of 
Ambulances/Helicopters are used as and when require d and as per availability for evacuating patients t o 
the nearest Medical facility. The Committee was fur ther informed that the BSF has introduced Tele-
Medicine project in the year 2015 for consulting va rious specialists over this facility and obtain 
necessary advice on the treatment. Risk to the live s of BSF troops while on duty have been covered 
under “Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kavach” group insurance scheme.  
2.22.3  The Committee feels that despite the medica l facilities provided for Border 
guarding Forces personnel, the Jawans are not satis fied particularly at the forward locations. The 
Committee observed during the visit that while BSF personnel are availing of facilities under 
CGHS, most of the border districts are not covered under this Scheme rendering it completely 
futile. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must urge the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare to cover all border distr icts, especially on hostile borders, under 
CGHS in view of the presence of a large number of B GF personnel on the border. The Committee 
also recommends that the Ministry must make efforts  to construct composite hospitals in all 
Frontier Headquarters and Unit Hospitals in all the  Sectors.  The Committee desires that on the 
medical front, the Forces should not feel dissatisfied.     
 
2.23  Border Area Development Programme (BADP) 
 

20 
 
2.23.1  During the study visit of the Committee, th e Public representatives in Rajasthan, Punjab 
and J&K voiced their concerns on the inadequacy of funds allocated under BADP and demanded 
allocation of higher amount of funding to ensure proper development of border area districts.  
 
2.23.2  Discussion was also held with the State Gov ernment of Rajasthan and the local Member 
of Parliament on the performance of Border Area Dev elopment Programme in Rajasthan and the 
Committee found several gaps in the provision of es sential and basic facilities to border area populat ion 
including lack of clean drinking water at many places.  
 
2.23.3  Since the Border Guarding Forces are more a ware of the problems and the issues of the 
border area population living in the forward areas,  the Committee sought to know if the limit of 10% o f 
BADP funds for which they are mandated to suggest s chemes could be enhanced. The Ministry 
submitted that the main objective of the BADP is to  meet the special developmental needs and well-
being of the people living in remote and inaccessib le areas situated near the international border and  to 
saturate the border area with the entire essential infrastructure through convergence of 
Central/State/BADP/Local schemes and participatory approach. Under the guidelines, the Border 
Guarding Forces (BGFs) can suggest the schemes for the benefit and betterment of the local population 
upto 10% of the allocation of State. The BGFs are a lso members of District Level Committees (DLCs), 
which are responsible for planning and implementation of the BADP. The BGFs can suggest schemes in 
the strategic villages (as suggested by them) conce rning the issues of border area population, in the 
DLC. If the State Government feels that the schemes are feasible and beneficial for the well being of the 
border population, in addition to mandated schemes for 10% of BADP funds, they may consider those 
schemes for inclusion in the Annual Action Plan of the BADP. 
 
2.23.4  The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s submission and feels that the objective 
of Border Area Development Programme to saturate th e border areas with all the essential 
infrastructure remains unfulfilled even after three  decades of the inception of this programme. 
The Committee, during its study visits, found wides pread illiteracy, backwardness and poverty 
along with severe lack of amenities in the border a reas of West Bengal and Rajasthan. On the 
other hand, border areas in Punjab and J&K are suff ering from poor infrastructure and lack of 
connectivity and transportation. The Committee feel s that there is a need to strengthen the 
monitoring of the projects under BADP and conduct a  review of performance of this programme 
to find out its lacunae. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should carry out 
an Impact Assessment of BADP to ascertain the measu res that can be undertaken to make this 
programme a success. The Committee, keeping in view  the scope and mandate of BADP, 
recommends that the Ministry should enhance the allocations being made under  the BADP.  
 
2.23.5  During the study visit of the Committee to Punjab border, the representative of the 
Punjab Government submitted that the State Police F orce is the second line of defence for border 
security. However, there was an urgent need to mode rnise the State Police Force and the police 
personnel, posted in border areas for stopping the cross-border crimes and infiltration, deserved facilities 
at par with the BGF personnel. He submitted that th e MHA should incorporate a security component for 
funding under the BADP guidelines and provide funds  to State Police Forces under that component for 
improving police infrastructure and facilities in border areas.   
 
2.23.6  The Committee notes the submission of Punja b Police and agrees that state police 
infrastructure needs to be improved to match the se curity requirements. Though it is primarily 
the responsibility of States to improve police infr astructure, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take up the above suggestion in its  next review of BADP guidelines and make 
efforts to incorporate it to the extent possible.  

21 
 
 
2.24  Border Protection Grid (BPG) 
 
2.24.1  The Ministry informed the Committee that th e Government is gradually moving to the 
concept of Border Protection Grid (BPG) of each bor der from the past practice of erection of physical 
barriers and patrolling of the border by the Border  Guarding Forces. This will entail setting up the B PG 
in the States to detect and tackle intrusions, to k eep watch on other related suspicious activities an d to 
have a proper response mechanism. The Grid will com prise elements ahead of the fence, on the 
fence/border and behind the border, technology elem ents (Hardware & Software) which include border 
guarding structures, deployment, systems, instituti onal arrangements, BGF, state police, army, 
Intelligence agencies and other state agencies. 
 
2.24.2  The Ministry also asserted that, by install ing the mechanism of BPG, it is envisaged that 
State Police of Border Districts may establish bord er police out posts at some designated/earmarked 
places. Better coordination among BSF and state pol ice of districts concerned will bring better 
surveillance, patrolling and intelligence inputs. At present few technology equipment are being used i n a 
standalone mode to support the troops deployed on d uties. By implementation of Comprehensive 
Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS), the existing mechanism of surveillance of Border will 
be replaced and surveillance of the area will be do ne by various sensors deployed on the border. 
Immediately on detection of threat, Commander at Co mmand and Control centre will analyze the 
emerging situation and send their manpower deployed  in the area as a Quick Reaction Team (QRT) to 
respond accordingly.  
 
2.24.3  The Committee notes the ambitious plan of t he Government to move to the concept 
of putting in place technological barriers instead of the present practice of erection of physical 
barriers on all the borders. The Committee recommen ds that the technology solutions 
implemented as part of the proposed Border Protecti on Grid (BPG) in every border State should 
be mission critical and not merely on a best effort  basis. The Ministry must also carry out 
extensive research on similar systems deployed inte rnationally by countries like USA and Israel 
before finalising the major constituents of the BPG  and technologies to be used. The Committee 
also recommends that the Ministry should come out w ith a specific timeline for finalising the 
design of the proposed BPG  and a time line for implementing the same. 
 
2.25  Illegal Sand Mining in Punjab Border Areas 
 
2.25.1  The Committee, during its interaction with the farmers living in border areas, was 
informed that there was rampant illegal sand mining  going on in the border areas of Punjab and this ha d 
worsened the condition of all the roads along the b order. One of the Members of the Committee also 
raised this issue in the discussion held with the r epresentatives of Punjab State Government during th e 
visit and put forth the complaint of the farmers th at the BSF and the Punjab Police were in connivance  
with the perpetrators of this illegal sand mining.  
 
2.25.2  The Committee is anguished to note the ille gal sand mining on the Punjab border 
and the allegations of connivance of the BSF and th e Punjab Police in this crime. The Committee 
recommends that an investigation should be carried out by the Ministry jointly with the Punjab 
Government to expose the truth and the culprits. Th e Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry must also convey the views of the Committe e to the State Government of Punjab and ask 
them to curb this menace. 
 
COASTAL BORDER  

22 
 
 
2.26  Coastal Security Scheme  (CSS) 
 
2.26.1  The Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-I) was i mplemented from 2005-06 with an initial 
outlay of Rs.646 crores over a period of 6 years. U nder the Scheme, coastal States/UTs were provided 
with 73 coastal police stations, 97 check posts, 58 outposts, 30 barracks, 204 interceptor boats, 153 jeeps 
and 312 motor cycles.       
 
2.26.2  The Ministry submitted that presently phase -II of the Coastal Security Scheme is under 
implementation w.e.f. 1 
st  April, 2011 with an outlay of Rs.1580 crore. Under  the Phase-II, the coastal 
States/UTs are to be provided with 131 Marine Polic e Stations, 60 jetties, 10 Marine Operation Centres , 
150 boats (12 Tons), 75 special category boats/RIBs, 131 four wheelers and 242 motorcycles.    
 
2.26.3  Under CSS phase-II, as on date, 109 Marine Police Stations were operationalized, 22 
jetties are under construction, 4 Marine Operation Centers are functional, 127 four wheelers and 234 
motorcycles were procured. The Committee was inform ed that the MHA has initiated action for 
procurement of 225 boats, through Limited Tender En quiry (LTE) to all Defence and other PSUs which 
are manufacturers of such boats. The procurement of  boats would take about four years.  The Home 
Secretary submitted in his evidence before the Comm ittee that the implementation of CSS has been 
tardy over the last many years; the Ministry is, ho wever, making efforts to expedite the same and a 
solution has been worked out now for the purchase of the boats.  
  
2.26.4  The Ministry informed that a total of Rs.12 8.93crore was released to the coastal 
States/UTs. The Phase-II of the Coastal Security Sc heme was to be completed by 31.03.2016. However, 
the Ministry was unable to do so and is considering  a proposal for extending the implementation period  
for Phase II of the CSS. 
 
2.26.5  The Committee expresses its displeasure tha t the Ministry was unable to complete 
the implementation of phase II of the CSS as per th e target and has sought extension for the same.   
The Ministry is unable to implement critical projects within the set timeframe and this is bound to 
have ramifications on the overall intended coastal security system.  The Committee strongly 
recommends that the phase II of coastal security sc heme should be extended in the first instance 
and completed at the earliest.  The procurement of motor boats has suffered an inordinate delay 
and the Ministry should make sincere efforts to complete their procurement at the earliest.  
 
2.26.6  Explaining about the coastal command chain and coordination between various agencies 
mandated with responsibility to ensure coastal secu rity, the Ministry stated that coastal security is 
provided by Coastal Police, Indian Coast Guard (ICG) and Indian Navy (IN). The jurisdiction of Coastal 
Police is up to 12 nautical miles (NM) from the bas eline. ICG is also designated as the authority 
responsible for coastal security in Territorial Wat ers including areas to be patrolled by Coastal Poli ce. 
Beyond 12 NM, both ICG and IN ensure the security o f Maritime Zones of India. The IN has been 
designated as the authority responsible for overall maritime security, which includes coastal security and 
offshore security. The Director General, Coast Guar d has been designated as Commander, Coastal 
Command and will be responsible for overall coordin ation between Central and State agencies in all 
matters relating to coastal security. This arrangem ent of IN, ICG and Coastal Police will function in a 
coordinated manner and have synergy in their operation.     
 
2.26.7  The Committee, during its deliberations, wa s apprised about the serious 
infrastructural inadequacies of Indian Coast Guard and Coastal police forces. Lack of a clear 
coordination mechanism between Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard and coastal police that are 

23 
 
guarding the three respective layers of our sea fro nt is also another serious issue. The Committee 
recommends that there should be a clear command cha in and defined SOPs with reference to 
coastal security and the DG, Coast Guard, who is de signated as the head of the coastal command, 
must be empowered adequately and be given authority  to command other sister agencies in 
matters of coastal security.  
 
2.26.8  The Committee also expresses its displeasur e on the fact that the Ministry did not 
implement several recommendations of the Committee given in its 177 
th  Report on Coastal 
Security Scheme. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should have a relook into the 
Committee’s 177 th  Report and make efforts to implement the recommendations given therein. 
 
2.27 Other Initiatives to Improve Coastal Security 
 
2.27.1  The Ministry apprised the Committee that In dian Coast Guard is undertaking community 
interaction programmes for the fishermen to bring i n awareness about safety issues at sea and to 
sensitize the fishing community on the prevailing s ecurity situation and engage with them for 
intelligence gathering.   
 
2.27.2  On the front of issuing biometric identific ation cards to coastal area residents, the 
Ministry informed that RGI has captured biometric d etails of 67,50,719 persons of age 18 years and 
above living who are in the coastal areas, and distributed 65,72,523 NPR ID cards. Also, the Department 
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has pro duced 11,71,616 Fishermen ID Cards and 
delivered 11,52,146 cards to the fishermen. 
  
2.27.3  All the sailing vessels above 20 metres len gth are mandatorily required to be fitted with 
Automatic Identification System (AIS) equipment. Sa iling vessels below 20 metres (mainly fishing 
vessels) are statutorily not required to install AIS, which poses a threat to the security of the coastal area. 
The Ministry informed that, for boats less than 20 metres, appropriate technology for installation of 
tracking system has been identified on the basis of the pilot study in the Ministry of Defence/Shipping. 
 
2.27.4  The Committee notes that boats, less than 2 0 meters length are not mandatorily 
required to have AIS and this is certainly a securi ty threat to coastal areas.  The Committee takes 
note of the Ministry’s submission that an appropria te technology for installation of tracking 
system for boats less than 20 metres has been ident ified. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should ensure timely installation of this system in all the boats at the earliest.  
 
2.28  Security of Islands 
 
2.28.1  There are 1382 small and big offshore islan ds. Several of these islands are uninhabited 
making it imperative to take measures for safety an d security of the islands. Government initiated a 
‘Holistic Development of Island’ scheme for 1382 of fshore islands.  The Ministry had issued 
recommendations for Security of Islands to all stak e-holders including Coastal States/UTs, besides 
making a plan for development of few selected islands which is at the initial stage. 
 
2.28.2  The Ministry informed that the Island Infor mation System (IIS) geo-portal has been 
developed by the National Remote Sensing Centre, IS RO, using satellite imageries, Survey of India 
inputs, and inputs from Naval Hydrography Office (N HO) as a coordinated effort on behalf of MHA.  
This System is configured as a secure geo-portal wi th selected user access for only relevant Ministrie s. 
The geo-portal helps in carrying out dynamic analys is on changes, if any, in addition to providing any  
specific inputs on the islands using recent satelli te imageries.  The database also helps in planning and 

24 
 
development of islands for tourism, ecological and economic purposes.  At the same time, the database 
can be used for strategically located islands for s pecial surveillance as required by the Government, for 
close monitoring of such islands. The Ministry, dur ing the meetings of the Committee, also informed 
that IIS enables surveillance of island upto a reso lution of 2.5 m. However, the Home Secretary 
apprehended that transportation to certain far-flun g islands, like Minicoy, remained a problem even 
today and visit by ships/vessels is not possible for almost 5 months every year.   
 
2.28.3  The Ministry also informed that the Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard are involved 
in security of offshore islands by maintaining aeri al surveillance and surface patrol especially in re spect 
of far flung and vulnerable uninhabited islands. In  respect of 26 islands identified for holistic 
development, IN & ICG have been directed by the Min istry of Defence to provide security to both 
uninhabited and inhabited islands by sending landing parties to these islands.  
 
2.28.4  As and when credible information regarding poaching or any other activity is received 
about any of the uninhabited islands, the Marine Po lice Force staff along with sufficient local police  is 
deputed to such uninhabited islands for patrolling,  surveillance and anti-poaching operations.  Beside s, 
sufficient assets and manpower are provided to the Coastal Police Stations who also maintain vigil in the 
remote and far flung Islands and intervene in the contingent issues. 
 
 
2.28.5  The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry in developing the Island 
Information System geo-portal and Holistic Developm ent of Island Scheme for security and 
development of vulnerable islands. The Committee desires that the Ministry may enhance security 
of the remote islands and also develop them with th e help of the geo-portal.  The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry should make efforts, i n collaboration with the Ministries of 
Shipping and Defence, to find a solution to ensure round-the-year sea connectivity to and 
patrolling of all the uninhabited and remote islands like Minicoy. 
 
2.28.6  Coastal security is an important challenge the country is facing on the external 
front. Funds are being provided to the states for m arine policing and coastal security but several 
states have failed to spend the funds fully while s ome projects under Coastal Security Scheme are 
facing delayed implementation. The States do not se em to be fully alive to the enormity of the 
challenge or to the huge responsibility that they h ave agreed to share regarding Coastal security. 
There should be regular meetings with State governm ents to sensitize them and joint hand with 
the Central government in monitoring all coastal se curity related projects so that our security 
system could be strengthened. 

25 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED IN SECURING BORDERS 
 
3.1    Introduction  
 
3.1.1   The Committee during its deliberations disc ussed about the institutional mechanisms that are i n 
place and the measures adopted by several instituti ons involved in securing various borders as well as  
any proposed institution that would fit into the ov erall plan of enhancing border security. The 
Committee examined all important issues concerning each of these institutions and made 
recommendations which are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report. 
 
3.2 National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID) 
 
3.2.1 The Committee noted from the background note submitted by the Ministry that the NATGRID 
was set up as an attached office of the Ministry of Home Affairs on 1.12.2009, in the wake of the 26/1 1 
attack, with the mandate to connect 10 approved User Agencies (UAs), leading Central Intelligence and 
Law Enforcement Agencies, and 21 Data Providing Org anisations (DPOs) such as airlines, banks, 
railway, telecom etc. with a view to enhance the ca pacity of the country to counter terrorism and crim e. 
A Detailed Project Report (DPR), outlining the NATGRID project to be implemented in four Horizons, 
was accorded ‘in-principle’ approval by the Cabinet  Committee on Security (CCS) on 6.6.2011. The 
Ministry stated that on 14.6.2012 the CCS approved the implementation of Horizon I and some 
elements of Horizon II envisaged in the DPR at a co st of Rs 1002.97 crore. An amount of Rs 346.05 
crore was also approved by the CCS on 28.11.2013 to wards creation of necessary infrastructure i.e. 
Data Centre and Business Continuity Plan at New Delhi and Disaster Recovery Centre at Bengaluru. 
 
3.2.2  The Ministry informed that the civil constru ction of Disaster Recovery Centre at 
Bengaluru is nearing completion and the Data Centre  and Business Continuity Plan at New Delhi is 
expected to be completed by March 2018. The committee was further informed that a note on extension 
of project infrastructure timelines and budgetary r esources was under submission for approval of the 
CCS. When the Committee sought to know the reasons for delayed implementation of NATGRID, the 
Home Secretary replied that there were several chal lenges in the implementation of the project. By the  
time, these challenges were overcome and the techno logy implementation plan was ready, the existing 
technology had become outdated and the new technolo gy was available due to which technology 
implementation plan had to be revised. The Home Sec retary assured the Committee that the Ministry 
was hoping to adhere to the current deadline and op erationalise NATGRID by September, 2018. The 
Committee, however, apprehends that there are sever al issues that remain unaddressed till date and by 
2018 only the building would be completed while the  actual operationalisation may take a longer time.  
Essential equipment has still not been procured and  there are a large number of vacancies of technical  
consultants. The CEO, NATGRID responded to the Memb ers' apprehensions by assuring that the 
building will be completed both in Bengaluru as wel l as in Delhi by March, 2018 while connectivity 
between user and providing agencies alongwith certa in amount of basic analytics and data sharing is 
expected to be in place by September, 2018.  
 
3.2.3 The Ministry also submitted the yearly alloca tion and expenditure details of the NATGRID 
project (upto 30.9.2016) as follows: 
 
Fin Year BE allocation Actual expenditure Actual ex p 

26 
 
Capital Revenue Total Capital  Revenue Total as % of BE 
allocation 
2010-11 0.03  39.11  39.14  0.03  10.17  10.20  26.04%  
2011-12 28.97  178.96  207.93  7.63  10.99  18.62  8.95%  
2012-13 70.85  364.15  435.00  0.00  9.68  9.68  2.22%  
2013-14 100.00  56.50  156.50  16.61  12.42  29.03  18.55%  
2014-15 114.81  24.97  139.78  15.06  15.56  30.62  21.91%  
2015-16 106.56  33.44  140.00  48.58  14.76  63.34  45.24%  
2016-17 (till 
30.9.16) 77.00 
 27.00  104.00  37.87  7.31  45.18  43.44%  
Total expenditure incurred till 30.09.2016  206.67  
 
3.2.4 The Committee is dismayed to learn that even though allocation was made by Cabinet 
Committee on Security on 28 
th  November, 2013 for creating infrastructure, the in frastructure is 
nowhere in place. Only civil construction is expect ed to be completed in Delhi by March, 2018.  
Though DPR was approved on 6 th  June, 2011 and the implementation approved on 28 th  
November, 2013, the project is still at the nascent  stage.  There are several vacancies of technical 
consultants to be filled and no action has been tak en in this regard. Most subject matter experts 
hired in the previous year have quit NATGRID and th e vacancies have not yet been filled. It is 
difficult for the Committee to believe that NATGRID  will become operational by September, 2018 
when the civil construction is expected to be completed only by March, 2018. The Government has 
not taken prompt decisions and actions to ensure ea rly operationalisation of NATGRID.  This 
shows the ambiguity and uncertainty prevailing in t he government and its inability to take quick 
decisions. Even when it is claimed that NATGRID is expected to be operational by September, 
2018, the fact is that there will only be certain a mount of basic analytics and minimal data sharing 
by that date.  
 
3.2.5 The Committee also reiterates its recommendation made in its 201 
st  Report that the Ministry 
should clear the confusion looming large over the N ATGRID's future by completing the 
construction work of its main building at the earli est.  The Committee also reiterates that the 
Ministry must re-publicise the posts as widely as p ossible along with offering remuneration 
package commensurate to that being offered in the p rivate sector to attract the most qualified 
professionals for this technology-driven project.   
 
3.2.6 The Committee observes that the Ministry has not been able to utilise the funds allocated 
for NATGRID since its inception. The Committee expr esses its displeasure at this perennial poor 
utilisation of budgetary allocations wherein not ev en one-half of the allocation was utilised in any 
single financial year from 2010-11 to 2015-16. The Committee is totally disillusioned with the pace 
of the implementation of the NATGRID project and the utilisation of funds. The Committee hopes 
that the Ministry will be able to expedite the implementation of this project and will also be able to 
achieve significant utilisation of funds during 2017-18.  
 

27 
 
 
3.3 Multi-Agency Centre (MAC)  
 
3.3.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that afte r Pakistan’s attack on Kargil in the year 1999, the  
Government of India set up the Kargil Review Commit tee and formed a Group of Ministers (GoM) to 
review the apparatus of National Security in the co untry comprehensively. The GoM recommended that 
MHA should put informal arrangements in place to re alize the concept of a Joint Task Force on 
Intelligence (JTFI), in which the IB would play a l ead role and, along with the representatives from t he 
intelligence branches of the States and Central Par a Military Forces (CPMFs), will determine 
intelligence priorities as well as intelligence nee ds, requirements and training facilities country-wi de. In 
the light of the recommendations of the Group of Mi nisters, the Multi Agency Centre (MAC) was 
created at Delhi. Subsequently, Subsidiary Multi Agency Centres (SMACs) were set up in various states 
comprising representatives from various security ag encies for streamlining intelligence efforts. The 
MAC was thus set up as a multi-agency intelligence coordination mechanism for counter terrorism, 
whose mandate is to share terrorism related inputs on a day to day basis. 
 
3.3.2 Later, the Ministry issued the Multi Agency C entre (Functions, Powers and Duties) Order, 2008 
on December 31, 2008 to re-operationalize MAC-SMAC with effect from 2009. As a follow up of the 
above order, 24x7 Control Rooms were set up at Mult i Agency Centre (MAC) at New Delhi and the 
Subsidiary Multi Agency Centres (SMACs) at State Le vel and at Headquarters of Intelligence Wings of 
other agencies to ensure timely sharing of informat ion and better co-ordination between intelligence 
agencies. Since then, a dedicated, secure electroni c network for real-time sharing has been extended 
across the country, with two custom-built software platforms viz. Threat Management System (TMS) 
and National Memory Bank (NMB) for sharing and data basing intelligence. 
 
3.3.3  MAC has also been designated as the nodal po int for sharing of intelligence with Bangladesh 
and Myanmar and regularly shares inputs on terrorism with counterparts in these countries. 
 
3.3.4 MAC has established connectivity between the national capital, twenty-five Central member 
agencies and all the State capitals. In the State c apitals, the network links the SMAC, State Police 
Special Branch, and offices of all central and othe r counter-terror agencies. Accordingly, a total of 374 
locations are presently on the network. The Ministr y informed that in phase III, the network is being 
extended to district headquarters selected in consultation with State police chiefs.  
 
3.3.5 The network hosts two software platforms:  
 
(i) Threat Management system (TMS), a sharing tool whic h was developed in-house by the 
technical staff of Intelligence Bureau; and 
(ii) National Memory Bank (NMB), database software which  was developed by the C-DAC, 
Pune on specifications provided by the IB and is deployed on all State Police servers.  
 
3.3.6  On an average day, the MAC gathers, collates , stores, shares and disseminates about 150 
inputs to the agencies concerned. Special alerts are issued as and when required. The inputs are broad ly 
divided under four heads - J&K, North-East, Left Wi ng Extremism and Rest of India. The major 
contributors of inputs in 2016 (till September) are  Defence Intelligence Agency (24.05%), Research & 
Analysis Wing (20.75%), Central Reserve Police Forc e (14.46%), Intelligence Bureau (14.22%), 
Border Security Force (5.98%), Directorate General of Military Intelligence (3.06%) and National 
Technical Research Organisation (3.66%). Contribution from State Special Branches has been 11.05%.  
 

28 
 
3.3.7  The Committee sought to know the reasons for  extremely low contribution of State 
Special Branches, i.e. only 11%, in the overall num ber of inputs. The Ministry replied that the State 
Special Branches have wider intelligence networks a nd are one of the direct responders to any threat 
and intelligence. In order to improve their counter  terrorism capability, due focus has been given by 
MAC to improve their connectivity and share all rel ated and connected inputs on real time basis. It is  a 
fact that contribution from State Special Branches is low and they were advised vide D.O. letter 
(March, 2016) to enhance their contribution and emerge as a force multiplier for all agencies. However, 
the reasons for their low contribution are being fu rther ascertained in consultation with the States/U Ts 
concerned. 
 
3.3.8  The Committee takes note of the low contribu tion of State agencies in overall inputs 
received by the Multi Agency Centre. The Committee feels that this points towards certain 
weaknesses in the intelligence gathering capacity o f the States. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should hold consultati ons with the States and find out the reasons 
for this low contribution. The Committee also recommends that an assessment be done of various 
State Intelligence agencies and Special Branches to  ascertain their bottlenecks and efforts be 
made to resolve them.  
 
3.3.9  The Committee takes note of the MAC/SMACs ne twork and appreciates that this may 
have enabled seamless integration of intelligence c ollected by different agencies. The Committee 
recommends that there should be a strong mechanism to perform extensive reliability and 
validity checks on intelligence that comes in from various Provider Agencies before its 
dissemination.    
 
3.4  National Counter-Terrorism Centre (NCTC) 
 
3.4.1  The Ministry submitted to the Committee that  the Mumbai attacks in November 2008 
brought to light several intelligence and operation al failures and a need for an organization that cou ld 
carry out joint and concerted anti-terror measures was realized. The Second Administrative Reforms 
Commission in its report titled ‘Combating Terroris m’ (8th Report, 2008) recommended that the MAC 
be converted into a National Centre for Counter Ter rorism (NCTC) with the personnel drawn from 
different intelligence and security agencies. The C abinet Committee on Security (CCS) approved the 
proposal of setting up of NCTC on 12.01.2012 and notified the NCTC on 03.02.2012.  
 
3.4.2  Subsequently, the Chief Ministers of some St ates raised concerns about NCTC violating the 
federal structure and encroaching upon the domain o f the States and suggested further consultations 
with the State Governments before NCTC is operationalised.   
 
3.4.3  The Department related Parliamentary Standin g Committee on Home Affairs in its meeting held 
on 21 
st  February, 2012 also took cognizance of the Governm ent O.M. notifying operationalisation of 
NCTC and unanimously passed a resolution to request  the Government that unless a consensus was 
reached between the Centre and the States and all p olitical parties, the operationalization of NCTC may 
be kept in abeyance. The Committee in its 161 st  Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry  
of Home Affairs recommended as follows: 
“The Committee takes note of the fact that the Chie f Ministers of several States have 
objected to the proposed constitution of NCTC witho ut consulting them. According to the 
State Governments, the proposed NCTC would infringe  on the federal structure of the 
Constitution. The Committee is also given to understand that in a recent meeting of the Chief 
Ministers, this issue also was slated for discussio n and some Chief Ministers objected to it 
being included in the larger agenda and desired tha t it be discussed separately threadbare. 

29 
 
The issue is now reportedly slated for discussion o n 5 May, 2012. In view of the objections 
raised by several Chief Ministers, the Committee is  of the view that the matter may be 
discussed threadbare with the Chief Ministers in th e next meeting and arrive at a consensus 
before taking a final decision in the matter.” 
 
3.4.4 Thereafter, the Prime Minister held a meeting  on 05.05.2012 with all the chief 
Ministers/Administrators/Lt. Governors of States/UT s and the concerns of the States were discussed. 
Operationalisation of NCTC was also discussed durin g the conference of Chief Ministers held on 5th 
June, 2013. The discussion remained inconclusive wi th regard to structure, functions, mandate and 
ultimate utility of creating this counter terrorism  body. As such, it was decided to keep the 
operationalization in abeyance. The Ministry informed that the matter is still under examination. 
 
3.4.5 The Committee observes that Article 355 of th e Indian Constitution casts a duty upon the 
Union to protect every State against external aggre ssion and internal disturbance. This duty 
assumes more importance in the present scenario whe re terrorism, insurgency and Left Wing 
Extremism have affected almost every State of India . While there are agencies like NIA, IB, MAC 
and NSG and some in the pipeline like NATGRID that are cumulatively capable of addressing 
these menaces, there is no single unified authority  to coordinate the operations of these agencies 
and ensure a quick response in times of crisis like  the 26/11 attack. The Committee understands 
that several States have objected to NCTC and other  agencies also might have their reservations. 
However, the larger issue of national security shou ld be given paramount importance. Adequate 
consultations have been held between the central go vernment and the states. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should imme diately revive the idea of NCTC as a single, 
unified and premier counter-terrorism agency and re -issue the notification laying down the 
power, functions and duties of the NCTC.     
 
3.4.6   The Committee observes that the notificatio n of NCTC which was issued in 2012 has 
neither been rescinded nor operationalised as yet. The Committee feels that the Ministry must not 
keep this notification in abeyance endlessly and re commends that a decision to re-issue the 
notification be taken immediately. 
   

30 
 
 
CHAPTER-4 
 
OTHER ISSUES 
 
4.1 Acquisition of Border Land 
  
4.1.1 The Committee during its study visits was app rised by the farmers residing in the border areas 
that their lands which are situated near the fences  are being used by the Government but they have not  
got any compensation for the same. The Committee in quired from the Ministry regarding the measures 
that are being taken to resolve this issue of acqui sition of border land and compensating the farmers 
concerned. The Ministry replied that the acquisitio n of cultivable land lying ahead of Border Security  
Fencing may not be feasible, as fertile land will b e vacant which will be a loss to the farmers and th e 
nation. However, one of the Members suggested, duri ng the meeting of the Committee, that the farmers 
would be willing to give their land if the Ministry takes the land on a lease basis.  
 
4.1.2 The Committee is aware of the land issues and  the demand for compensation for the 
acquired land in border areas. The Committee agrees  with the Ministry’s assertion that 
acquisition of fertile and cultivable land lying ahead of fencing will be a loss to the farmers and the 
Nation. However, the Committee feels that, in certa in areas, there may be compelling reasons for 
which the forces might need to use the land ahead o f the fencing. In such circumstances, the 
Committee recommends that effort may be made to acq uire and utilize the land on a lease basis 
and farmers may be given adequate compensation for the same.  
 
4.1.3 The MHA also informed the Committee that it i s monitoring all the land acquisition cases and 
holding regular meetings with officials of State Go vernments. Through meetings with Chief Secretaries 
of the States concerned and Working Groups constitu ted to pursue the cases of land acquisitions the 
Ministry is trying to expedite pending land acquisi tion cases. The Government of Meghalaya has been 
authorized to acquire land under Urgency Clause of new Land Acquisition Act, 2013 and Government 
of West Bengal has been authorized to provide the l and under their Land Purchase Policy.  The 
Department of Border Management, MHA has constitute d a Working Group in the States on the India-
Bangladesh border and in Punjab along the India- Pakistan border under the Chairmanship of Additional 
Chief Secretary (Home)/ Principal Secretary (Home)/ Secretary (Home) to expedite the process of land 
acquisition related to border infrastructure.  The Working Groups have been asked to convene weekly 
meetings. Recently, Secretary (BM) convened separat e meetings with Chief Secretary, Govt. of UP and 
Chief Secretary, Govt. of Uttarakhand and a State Level Committee has been formed to track all pending 
cases of land acquisition.  Similarly, another meet ing was held by the Secretary (BM) with the DG, 
Forest and the DG, SSB along with representatives o f the State government concerned for expediting 
transfer of forest land for SSB’s infrastructure, b order roads, fencing and other related projects.  F unds 
are released by the MHA as per the demand received from State Governments towards land costs. 
 
4.1.4 The Committee notes that State administration s are facing serious difficulties in acquiring 
land because of legal and other impediments and  vi ews that  the same has caused delay in 
execution of border roads, fencing and flood lighti ng projects. Absence of such basic 
infrastructure has an adverse impact on our border security. Besides this, project cost of 
constructing border roads also increases manifold d ue to time and cost over-run. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommends that problematic road  patches should be identified and 
‘Alternate Dispute Resolution Mechanism’ should be immediately established for expediting 
disposal of all land acquisition related disputes.  
 

31 
 
4.2 Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICN) 
 
4.2.1 When the Committee sought to know about the s muggling of FICN notes on various borders and 
about measures which are being taken to curb this m enace. The MHA submitted the following details of 
FICN seized along the respective borders during the last three years: 
 
       (Amount in Rs.) 
Border 2014 2015 2016 
India-Pakistan border 1,79,20,000 6,56,500 0 
India -Bangladesh border 1,94,52,000 40,69,800 1,26 ,56,000 
India -Nepal border 5,83,700 13,16,500 6,89,050 
India -Bhutan border Nil 4,61,955 1,84,500 
India -Mayanmar border 5,220 2,36,000 1,00,000 
India -China border Nil Nil Nil 
 
4.2.2 As regards measures to stop smuggling of FICN , the MHA informed the Committee that they are 
working in tandem with the Ministry of Finance, the  Reserve Bank of India, Security and Intelligence 
Agencies and the State Governments concerned to pre vent the smuggling of FICN into the country. The 
CBI and National Investigation Agency are the Centr al Agencies for investigation of FICN cases.  The 
Government has also constituted a cell to investiga te cases of Terror Funding & Fake Currency in NIA 
which has registered 24 cases relating to FICN sinc e 2009. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
has been signed between India and Bangladesh to pre vent and counter smuggling and circulation of 
Fake Currency Notes.  The objective of this MoU is to promote bilateral cooperation in the field of 
combating the production, smuggling and circulation  of fake currency notes, taking into account the 
applicable laws and legal provisions of the two countries. 
 
4.2.3 It was also submitted to the Committee that t he staff posted at border posts have been sensitize d 
from time to time, which has resulted in significan t hauls of FICN in these locations. Besides, Border  
Guarding Forces are taking action to stop smuggling  of FICN by regularly carrying out various 
operational activities like patrolling and naka-ban di along the border and checking of persons crossin g 
the border both randomly as well as on the basis of  inputs received from own sources/related agencies.  
Continual monitoring is being done in this regard. Field formation and intelligence set ups have been 
sensitized.  Co-ordination meetings with counterpar ts are being held by field Commandants to share 
inputs and plan strategy to prevent illegal activit ies in the International borders. Besides, regular joint 
operations with State Police and other security agencies are also being undertaken. 
 
4.2.4 Intelligence inputs are being actively collec ted to ensure effective surveillance taking the hel p of 
local human intelligence.  All available Surveillan ce Equipment are also being utilized.  Liaison with  
Police, Intelligence Agencies and local Government Agencies is carried out on a regular basis. 
 
4.2.5 The Committee is aware of the reports of post  demonetization seizure of high quality Fake 
Indian Currency Notes of the denomination of the ne w Rs. 500 and the new Rs. 2000 in Malda 
District area along the India-Bangladesh Border.  T he Committee is concerned to note such 
incidents that belie the tall claims made that FICN  will be eliminated after demonetization.  The 
Committee is also worried to note that no measures have been taken by the Ministry to replace the 
existing FICN detection machines, available with th e Border Guarding Forces to detect the 
smuggled fake currency or to make it compatible for  detecting new denomination notes. The 
Committee feels that the fake currency manufacturer s and smugglers will exploit this situation 
and may be able to flood the country with new FICN before the Ministry is able to come up with a 

32 
 
plan to foil these attempts. The Committee therefor e, recommends that the Ministry should take 
urgent notice of this issue and formulate a strateg y to disrupt smuggling of new FICNs into the 
country through the land and coastal borders.  The Committee, in view of rising number of 
seizures of FICNs along the India-Bangladesh Border , also recommends that the Ministry should 
take up this issue with Bangladesh Government in th e Home Secretary level talks and urge them 
to crack down on the printers and smugglers of FICNs situated in Bangladesh.    
 
4.3 Drug Trafficking in Border States 
4.3.1 India has been enduring the menace of drug tr afficking for many decades. The Ministry informed 
that on the Western border, South West Asian (SWA) Heroin gets trafficked into J&K and Punjab. Some 
instances of trafficking through Rajasthan and Gujarat have also been reported.  The component of SWA 
Heroin is almost 35-40% of the total seizures of he roin in India. All this heroin reaches the states 
through land border or by road, concealed inside co nsignments carried by trucks. Seizures from 
consignments in the goods trains have also been reported. 
 
4.3.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that the Eastern States of West Bengal, Tripura, 
Meghalaya, Assam and Mizoram share a land border wi th Bangladesh. The trafficking of cough syrups 
and pain killer injections remain the core issue be tween India and Bangladesh. The trafficked Codeine 
Based Cough Syrups, especially brands like Phensedy l, Corex, Recodex etc., are diverted from 
pharmaceutical usage to illicit channels. These are  mainly trafficked from the states of UP/Bihar to 
further east and north-east and through IBB they reach Bangladesh. Trafficking of synthetic drugs to and 
from Myanmar and from the North-Eastern states to W est Bengal and Bangladesh is also reported. 
There are also reports of trafficking of Cocaine fr om Bangladesh to India. The traffickers use 
Bangladesh route to get cocaine inside India from where it is further trafficked to other countries. 
4.3.3 The Committee gathered from the evidence avai lable that the following factors are responsible 
for drug trafficking: 
 
(i) Easy availability of drug couriers in the border villages. 
(ii) Cultivation of fields right upto zero line on both sides of border. 
(iii) Riverine nature of some segments of the IPB. 
(iv) Well knit smuggling syndicates to transfer the consignments upto International market. 
(v) Easy rail and road connectivity and robust communication system. 
(vi) Indian jails are the preferred place for these peop le to develop new networks/contacts among 
each other. 
(vii) Availability of SIM cards (both Pakistan & Indian) to smugglers near the border areas for 
communication. 
 
4.3.4 The Ministry informed that to control this me nace the Border Security Force has been given the 
powers under the NDPS Act, 1985 for drug enforcemen t. The Ministry submitted that installation of 
CCTV cameras can address this menace and MHA is in the process of deploying technology solutions 
along vulnerable segments of the India-Pakistan border. 
4.3.5 The Committee notes the rampant drug traffick ing problem in border areas especially 
along the India-Pakistan border in Punjab and J&K, and feels that, despite huge amount of 
seizures of drugs, the Government has comprehensive ly failed to address this issue. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must make se rious efforts to completely prevent the 
flow of drugs from across the border by adopting a zero tolerance approach in vulnerable areas.   
4.3.6 The Committee is anguished to know that culti vation beyond fencing was helping the drug 
couriers to transfer drugs from across the border t o the hinterland. The Committee is given to 
understand that persons going beyond the fence find the packets that come from across the border 
in their fields and throw them across the fence on the Indian side which are collected by drug 

33 
 
couriers during the night. The Committee recommends  that the Ministry must instruct BSF to 
create anti-trafficking teams of 4-5 personnel in e very Company who must scan the area beyond 
the fence every day in the morning before the farme rs are allowed to pass through the gates and 
also scan the area on the Indian side of the fence during the evening after all the farmers have 
returned from the fields. These teams must also be tasked with the duty of surveillance of the area 
under the  command of the respective companies duri ng night with Hand-held thermal imagers 
from the BoPs and should be encouraged to launch op erations in case of detection of any 
suspicious movement near the fence. The Committee a lso recommends that BSF personnel must 
be directed to frisk all the persons going beyond t he fence for any purpose both while going and 
returning.       
4.4 Infiltration and Cross-Border Terrorism 
 
4.4.1 The Committee sought to know about the increa sing trend of attacks on the establishments of 
Armed Forces in recent times and the reasons why in telligence inputs regarding these attacks were not 
received by the IB. The Home Secretary replied that  MHA was not the sole agency for intelligence 
gathering and Ministry of Defence also has its own intelligence agency and both make a collective effort 
to gather and share intelligence. The Committee als o enquired as to why no post-facto analysis of 
intelligence failure was done after the Pathankot attack and why the Government failed to learn from the 
past failures as the terrorists perpetrated success ive attacks during 2016. The Ministry, in its writt en 
replies, submitted that after the Pathankot terrori st attack, Ministry of Defence had constituted a fo ur 
member committee comprising senior officers from Ar my, Navy and Air Force to review security 
arrangements of Defence installations in the countr y. Security guidelines have been issued based on th e 
committee’s report and the investigations of Pathan kot, Uri  and Nagrota attacks have been handed over  
to NIA for investigation. 
 
4.4.2 The Committee takes note of the fact that mor e than a year has passed since the Pathankot 
attack occurred; however, the investigation of that  attack has not been completed by NIA. 
Moreover, no analysis seems to have been done into the failure of the intelligence agencies to 
provide credible and actionable inputs regarding th e attacks at Pathankot, Uri, Pampore, 
Baramulla and Nagrota. The Committee feels that the se attacks have exposed the deficiencies of 
our intelligence agencies. The Committee, therefore , recommends that the Ministry should 
instruct the NIA to complete the investigations of these attacks at the earliest so as to identify the  
loopholes in the intelligence setup in the border areas.   
4.4.3 Several Members of the Committee, during the deliberations on Border Security, expressed 
concern on the substantial rise in the number of te rrorist incidents and infiltration attempts in J&K 
border areas during 2016 which can be gathered from the table below:  
 
S.No.  Incidents  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  
1  Terrorist violence incidents  220  170  222  208   322  
2  Civilians killed 15 15 28 17  15  
3  Security Forces killed 15 53 47 39  82*  
4  Militants killed 72 67 110 108  150  
5  Infiltration Attempts 264 277 222 121  364  
6  Net Infiltration (Estimated)  121  97  65  33  1 12  
 
4.4.4 Some Members of the Committee, during the del iberations, felt that the increase in the number 
of infiltration attempts was primarily due to break down of ceasefire on the India-Pakistan border. The  
Home Secretary, during the Committee’s meeting in which Nagrota attack was discussed, submitted that 

34 
 
increased incidents of infiltration have been repor ted in 2016 and efforts are being made to contain 
infiltration to the extent possible.  
 
4.4.5 One of the Members enquired about the efforts  being made by the BSF to stem the flow of 
infiltrators and how many attempts were foiled by t hem in the recent years. DG, BSF replied that after  
the Pathankot incident, there have been a number of  infiltration attempts on the International Boundar y 
where BSF is exclusively deployed and no infiltration attempt has been successful. He also informed the 
Committee that the BSF had recently neutralised 3 i nfiltrators who crossed over from the other side 
through a tunnel.  
 
4.4.6 The Committee feels that such a huge rise in the number of infiltrations justifies the 
apprehension that the  Indian Army and the BSF may have failed to foil som e of these attempts. 
The Committee recommends that the Government must c arry out a thorough investigation into 
the sudden spurt in the increase in the infiltratio n attempts along the LoC from across the border 
and find out the vulnerabilities along the LoC that  are being apparently exploited by the 
infiltrators.  
  
4.4.7 The Committee also notes that there has been an increasing number of incidents of 
infiltration through tunnels from across the border . The Committee feels that in future this might 
become a major modus operandi of the infiltrators a nd the Government must take proactive 
measures to foil such attempts. The Committee recom mends that the Ministry must explore 
technological solutions for tunnel detection in bor der areas and should, in this regard, seek the 
help of other countries which have successfully developed tunnel detection systems.  
 
4.5 Nagrota Terror Attack 
 
4.5.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that on 2 9 
th  November, 2016 at around 0530 hours, a 
group of heavily armed  terrorists disguised in pol ice uniform targeted an Army Camp near the Corps 
Headquarters at Nagrota (166 Officers Mess Sector N agrota, Jammu).  The Quick Reaction Team, led 
by an officer from the local unit, was launched to control the situation.  In the initial counter acti on, one 
officer and three soldiers of the Army were martyre d.  The situation was quickly contained by inductio n 
of an additional Quick Reaction Team which cordoned  the affected area thereby confining the terrorists  
to a particular location. Thereafter, in a well-des igned operation involving room-to-room intervention  
and search of the area, all the hostages, including  four officers, eight soldiers, two women and two 
children, were successfully rescued.  However, in t his rescue attempt, one more officer and two jawans  
sacrificed their lives.  Bodies of three terrorists  were recovered from the incident site.  The terror ists 
were heavily armed and had come with the single poi nt motive of inflicting maximum casualties.  There 
were seven fatal casualties of Army personnel in the incident. 
 
4.5.2 The Committee was further apprised that the t errorists had a reasonably good makeover of police 
personnel as their coloured clothing was well conce aled inside loose khakhi shirts. So far, no credibl e 
leads have emerged regarding the likely route taken  by this group to reach its target.  The modus 
operandi of this attack points to the fact that the  group might have come from the Kashmir Valley side .  
Further, lack of any GPS or mobile phone with this group is a pointer that the group was guided till t he 
attack site by an Over Ground Worker (OGW)/guide, w ell versed with the local terrain and location of 
the camp.  
  
4.5.3 During the meeting of the Committee, the Comm ittee sought clarifications about the news 
reports that the Northern Army Command Chief descri bed it a major intelligence failure on the part of 
the intelligence agencies while admitting, at the s ame time, that there were no specific intelligence 

35 
 
inputs related to this attack. The Home Secretary r eplied that while there was intelligence of a broad  
nature, the exact date and location of the attack was not known.  
  
4.5.4 When the Committee sought to know if there we re any similarities in the attacks at Pathankot, 
Uri and Nagrota,  the Home Secretary replied that t here were some similarities indeed like timing of t he 
attack i.e. early morning, a limited number (3-4) o f fidayeeen  with the intention of inflicting maximum 
damage in terms of death and the breach of perimete r either by jumping the wall as happened in 
Pathankot or by cutting the fencing with wire cutte rs as happened in Uri and Nagrota. He also asserted  
that terrorists were now attacking the security for ces only and they are trying to challenge the autho rity 
of the Indian State. With respect to the Committee’ s query regarding the lessons learnt from these 
incidents, the Home Secretary replied that all the security forces, be it Army or CAPFs, need to ensur e 
impregnability of their own Headquarters and campuses.  
  
4.5.5 The Committee also sought to know the level o f security of Armed Forces establishments from 
the representatives of the Indian Army and also enq uired about the reasons for failure to prevent atta cks 
on these vital establishments. The then Vice Chief of Army Staff (VCOAS) replied that complete 
isolation from the movement of the local populace w as necessary to completely secure the 
establishments. However, it was practically not pos sible and, in case of the fidayeen attacks, who had  
come with the intention of inflicting maximum casua lties, the best way was to quickly neutralise them.  
He also informed that to further secure the perimet ers, technological surveillance needs to be deploye d 
in addition to the manual surveillance. He also cla rified that though intelligence was available, it w as 
available without much specificity. 
 
4.5.6 The Committee, while noting the similarities in the various attacks on security forces’ 
establishments, feels that all such fidayeen attacks indicate that they carefully select a target based 
on vulnerability and do meticulous planning and pre paration. The Committee also feels that 
attacks like the one on Nagrota could have been per petrated only by those receiving information 
and active guidance from the military establishment  across the border. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that all the small and big campuses of t he Armed Forces and CAPFs need to stay 
always on high alert and must make all efforts to e nsure fool proof security of the perimeters of 
their own establishments. The Committee further rec ommends that measures like providing some 
degree of isolation of the military establishment f rom the other habitations, strengthening of 
perimeter security by cutting the trees around it, raising the height of the walls, adequate lighting 
during night and providing night vision devices to guards must be implemented urgently.   
  
4.5.7 The Committee is also concerned that while th ere were intelligence inputs before the 
attacks, they were of a generic nature without any specific details regarding the date and exact 
location of the attacks. Intelligence agencies shou ld analyse the inputs carefully and to the extent 
possible isolate the actionable inputs.  
 
4.5.8 The Committee is of the view that the best wa y of preventing such attacks is to foil all 
attempts at infiltration. Detecting and neutralizin g the terrorists during an infiltration attempt 
will ensure minimum casualties of Indian security f orces. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Government must intensify the surveillance and patrolling on both LoC and International 
Boundary to detect and foil any attempt at infiltration.  
 
4.6 Ceasefire Violations 
 
4.6.1 There was a significant spurt in ceasefire vi olations during 2016. The Ministry, in its reply to  a 
Parliamentary Question in Lok Sabha submitted that after surgical strikes, 27449 people in J&K were 

36 
 
temporarily shifted to safer places/locations out o f which approximately 6 thousand persons stayed in 
relief camps and the remaining stayed with their re latives. The majority of the people have since 
returned to their homes. At present, about 220 fami lies comprising of around 700 persons are in 3 reli ef 
camps.  
4.6.2 The details regarding the number of ceasefire  violations during the last 5 years are as under: 
Number of Ceasefire violations 
Year Along the Line of Control in the State 
of J&K under operational control of 
Army 
Along the International Border in the 
State of J&K under operational 
control of BSF 
2012 93 21 
2013 199 148 
2014 153 430 
2015 152 253 
2016 216 (till 26 th  November) 221 (till 30 th  November) 
 
4.6.3 The Committee is constrained to note that, af ter the 1971 war, the present is the most 
vulnerable period for the borders of the country.  There have been a large number of cease fire 
violations and several jawans and civilians have been killed. According to some reports, more than 
a hundred cease fire violations took place within a  span of two months in 2016 and the year 2016 
can be considered as one of the most vulnerable per iods.  The Government should find a way to 
prevent the frequent and persistent violations of c easefire including using diplomatic channels. 
Ultimately, the answer lies in diplomacy. During ce ase fire, the worst sufferers are the people 
living in the border villages. The questions are wh ere will they go and where will they earn their 
living. The country today appears to have internal refugees and internal migrants. The only way 
the country can restore the ceasefire is to go back  to a situation where both India and Pakistan 
agreed to observe the ceasefire. For more than a de cade, the ceasefire held good.  But now, from 
both sides, the ceasefire appears to be virtually d ead on the LoC. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the government should make every ef fort, including activating diplomatic 
channels, towards preventing ceasefire violations a nd restoring the situation of a genuine 
ceasefire.  
 
4.7 GENERAL  
  
4.7.1 Border security has become very fragile and, as gathered from the evidence before the 
Committee, there are several gaps which need to be plugged. The inadequacies have become 
starkly visible over a period of time. Some inadequ acies have been addressed; some are being 
addressed, while others remain unaddressed.  Though there are internal security challenges, in the 
view of the Committee, the external security challe nges are very strong on the both the Eastern 
and Western borders. As already explained earlier i n the report, some institutional mechanisms 
have been created to address the security challenge s. But the Committee is dismayed over the 
ambiguous approach of the Government in strengtheni ng the institutions and feels strongly that a 
comprehensive intelligence infrastructure is imperative to address the security challenges.    
   
4.7.2 The Committee has dealt with all the issues r elating to capacity building for secure borders 
and the institutions in some detail in the preceding paragraphs and has given recommendations on 
each one of them. The Committee hopes that the gove rnment would implement all the 
recommendations in right earnest so that the extern al security challenges are addressed properly 
and the borders and institutions are strengthened and secured.   
 

37 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A 
GLANCE 
 
INDIA-BANGLADESH BORDER (IBB) 
 
Border Outposts along IBB 
 
 The Committee, in the first instance, takes a seri ous note of the fact that the proposal of 
constructing 509 BOPs along IPB and IBB to reduce t he inter-BOP distance to 3.5 Kilometres has 
been revised and reduced to 422 BOPs. Reducing inte r-BOP distance is very crucial for the 
security of the country and to keep a tab on the ac tivities going on at the border.   But even the 
reduced target was not achieved and only 97 BOPs ou t of 326 BOPs have been completed by the 
end of 2016 along IBB. The Committee takes a seriou s view of the cost and time overrun due to 
delay in land acquisition. The government should ha ve taken advance action to overcome all such 
difficulties for timely implementation of the proje ct. Now that the Ministry has found a workable 
solution in the form of utilizing land available in  the Right of Way of Fence and Road, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the project shou ld be completed by the targeted date of 
July, 2018 and there should be no further time and cost overrun. The Committee notes that no 
reasons were furnished by the MHA why the number of  BOPs was reduced from 509 to 422. In 
the circumstances, the Committee recommends that th e original plan of constructing 509 BOPs to 
reduce the inter-BOP distance to 3.5 kilometres may be reconsidered in the interest of the security 
of the nation.     
(Para  2.3.3)  
Border Fencing along IBB 
 
The Committee notes with anguish the extremely slow pace of construction of fencing along 
IBB. The Ministry was able to complete only 21 km o f fencing in 17 months since July, 2015. The 
Committee also notes that a long stretch of 423.34 km has remained unfenced due to non-
feasibility of physical barrier and deployment of n on-physical barriers is still in its testing phase 
and will require time before its implementation. The Committee feels that, at the current pace, the 
Ministry would not be able to seal the India-Bangladesh border by its target date i.e. March, 2019. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should find solutions to the problems that beset the 
fencing project and erect physical barriers at all feasible locations at the earliest. The Committee 
also recommends that in the areas that are hotspots  for FICN and cattle smuggling, fencing 
projects should be prioritised and, if fencing in s uch areas is not feasible, then the Ministry must 
increase the deployment of forces and intensify rou nd-the-clock surveillance till such areas are 
secured through implementation of non-physical barriers.  
(Para  2.4.4) 
 
 The Committee feels that the issue of shifting the  villages or the fence is an intricate one 
and the Ministry must not adopt a one-size-fits-all  approach on this issue. The Committee feels 
that the Ministry must try to shift the fence in as  many areas as possible to prevent any 
inconvenience to the people. However, wherever the houses are located right on the International 
Boundary line, the Ministry will have to shift them  to the hinterland and rehabilitate the affected 
households. The Committee recommends that the Minis try should carry out a review of all such 
areas within six months and come up with specific s olutions in all such cases.  The Committee 
desires to be apprised about the progress in this regard.  
(Para  2.4.7) 

38 
 
 
 The Committee also notes that while rehabilitation  and resettlement of displaced people 
does not come under the purview of BADP Guidelines,  the BADP funds can be utilised to create 
social infrastructure. The Committee feels that the  people residing on the border line will be 
willing to shift easily if they are provided with proper housing and other facilities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should persuade the State Government to provide BADP 
funds for community housing projects, which fall wi thin the definition of social infrastructure, in 
the hinterland and shift all the households living beyond the fencing into such buildings.  
(Para  2.4.8) 
 
 
Border Floodlighting  along IBB 
 
 The Committee notes that almost 528 km of border, where floodlighting is feasible and has 
been sanctioned, is yet to be floodlit. The Committ ee also noticed lack of floodlights along several 
stretches during its study visit to the India-Bangl adesh Border. Lack of floodlights on the border 
allows the smugglers to perpetrate their devious activities during night. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must fast-track the fl oodlighting project and complete it at the 
earliest. The Committee also recommends that, as a short-term measure, the Ministry must 
provide adequate long-range night-vision equipment to all the Border Outposts situated in areas 
that lack floodlights.  
(Para  2.5.2) 
 
Cattle-Smuggling along IBB 
 
 The Committee is distressed to note that despite s everal measures taken by the BSF the 
problem of cattle smuggling persists along IBB. The  Committee is particularly anguished to note 
that the West Bengal State Government has failed to  implement its own order dated 01.09.2003 
that outlaws existence of any cattle haats within 8 km of border area. The Committee recommends 
that the State Government of West Bengal should tak e steps to cancel the licenses of all cattle 
haats that are illegally functioning within 8 km of  border area and hold the officials responsible 
for illegally issuing/renewing licenses to these ha ats. The Committee also recommends that mass 
movement and trading of cattle should be prohibited within 15 km of the border and steps may be 
initiated to move all cattle haats located within 15 km of the border to the hinterland.  
(Para  2.6.6) 
 
 The Committee notes that the auction of seized cat tle by Customs officials is misused by the 
cattle smugglers who keep buying the auctioned catt le again and again. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommends that auctioning of seized cattle  must be banned in the states bordering IBB 
and Customs Department may be requested to arrange for transportation of the seized cattle to 
states other than the border states and hold auctio ns there. The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry must pursue the Customs Department to raise the minimum bench mark price of the 
seized cattle to prevent their re-selling to the pe rsons involved in smuggling of cattle and also 
make it mandatory for cattle auctioneers to submit their Pan Card and Aadhaar Card details 
while bidding. 
 (Para  2.6.7) 
 
 The Committee also learnt about the involvement of  the local people living near the border 
in cattle smuggling and feels that lack of any lega l deterrence and ineffective law enforcement 
seem to have emboldened such persons. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the West 

39 
 
Bengal State Government should be requested to take strict action against persons who are known 
or suspected to be involved in cattle smuggling.  
 (Para  2.6.8) 
 
 The Committee agrees that mass movement of cattle occurs from all the states towards 
West Bengal and Assam and once they reach the borde r areas it becomes extremely difficult to 
stop their movement across the border. The Committe e feels that Police forces of various States 
have failed to stop this mass movement of cattle to border states and West Bengal Police has failed 
to intercept or stop the movement of the cattle. Th e Committee feels that there is a wide and 
deeply entrenched nexus due to which this menace ha s proliferated and the Government needs to 
strike at the roots of this nexus if it has to completely curb this problem.  
(Para  2.6.9) 
 
INDIA-PAKISTAN BORDER 
 
Border outposts along IPB 
 
 The Committee is concerned about the delay in cons truction of Border Out Posts on India’s 
most sensitive border. The issues of public protest s, land acquisition, clearances should have been 
anticipated at the proposal stage itself. The Commi ttee takes exception to the delay as it hampers 
surveillance and domination of IPB and the target o f 3.5 km of inter-BOP distance has not been 
achieved. Now that the Ministry has resolved the issue and significant progress has taken place for 
completion of construction of BoPs, the constructio n of the remaining BoPs should be completed 
at the earliest.  
(Para  2.7.3) 
Border Fencing, Floodlighting and Roads along IPB 
 
 The Committee recommends that there should be regu lar maintenance of flood lights so 
that damage is minimal. In the flood prone areas, p re-emptive and protective steps should be 
taken to ensure that flood lights are not affected.  The Committee hopes that the work of 
restoration of damaged flood lights, entrusted to C PWD, would have been completed as per target 
by March, 2017.   
(Para  2.8.3) 
 The Committee takes note of the recommendation of the High Level Committee to drop the 
balance work of construction of fence, roads and fl oodlights on India Pakistan border in Gujarat 
and look for an alternative cost effective way of s urveillance. The Committee feels that significant 
amount of time has been wasted on this small stretc h of border in Gujarat which suffers from 
persistent water logging. The Committee recommends that early efforts may be made to put in 
place a cost effective alternative mechanism for su rveillance in this stretch. There should be no 
further delay in this regard. Advanced technological solutions may be considered for this purpose. 
(Para  2.8.5) 
 
 The Committee finds that the fencing in the Thar D esert region of Rajasthan Border area 
has proved to be ineffective in serving its intende d purpose due to the problem of shifting sand 
dunes.  The Committee also notes that the MHA is ex amining the possibility of conducting a study 
through a premiere agency like IIT.  The Committee is also aware that BSF is considering the 
option of dense plantation in Jaisalmer Border area  to stabilize sand dunes.  The Committee in 
this connection would like to draw the attention of  the Ministry to a fence erected by the USA, on 
its border with Mexico having geographical terrain similar to Thar Desert, which can be 
repositioned mechanically to appropriate border lin e and in effect floats on top of the shifting 

40 
 
sand dunes.  The Committee recommends that the MHA should form a working group or a 
Committee comprising of technical experts to examin e all the possible solutions to this problem. 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress in this regard. 
(Para  2.8.7) 
Border Roads along IPB 
 
 The Committee, during its study visit to border ar eas of Punjab, found extremely poor 
roads which can significantly slow down the movemen t of Forces and cause hardship to them 
during an emergency.  The Committee, therefore, str ongly recommends that approval to the 
project of construction of lateral and axial roads in Punjab may be granted without any further 
delay and construction work should begin at the ear liest.  The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry must prioritise construction of latera l roads as they are essential for patrolling and 
surveillance purposes.   
(Para  2.9.2) 
 
 The Committee feels that the Ministry is not serio usly taking up the issue of poor road 
connectivity in the Jammu sector and is leaving the  matter to the discretion of the State 
Government. The Committee is also anguished to note  the sluggish progress of the project to 
construct bunds, metalled roads and bunkers along the fence in the Jammu sector. The Committee 
feels that lack of adequate all-weather connectivity in border areas will keep the border in Jammu 
region vulnerable to external threats like infiltration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should fast-track the project to const ruct roads, bunds and bunkers along the fence 
and start the construction work at the earliest. Th e Committee also recommends that the State 
Government of J&K must be constantly exhorted to im prove road connectivity in the Jammu 
sector by constructing good all-weather roads that will provide connectivity to all the BoPs. 
(Para  2.9.4) 
 The Committee feels that Border Roads Organisation  is very ill-equipped for the purpose 
of delivering border roads in a timely manner. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should make efforts to revive the idea of creating a joint venture through public-private 
partnership between the Government and a private co mpany having wide experience and 
expertise in road projects.  
(Para  2.9.5) 
 
INDIA-CHINA BORDER (ICB) 
 
Border Infrastructure along ICB 
 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that the infr astructure on the Chinese side of the 
India-China border is far better than that on the I ndian side and to, achieve comparable results, 
the Government has to intensify its efforts and fas t-track the projects. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should strive to compl ete the construction of all the roads under 
Phase-I by March, 2019 as targeted and should also start the Phase-II construction at the earliest.  
(Para  2.10.4) 
 
 The Committee feels that the permanent integrated buildings at high altitude BoPs is the 
need of the hour to improve operational efficiency.   Construction of the Lukung BOP may be 
completed at the earliest and an early decision may  be taken for the other 11 BOPs which are 
under consideration.      
(Para  2.10.6) 
 

41 
 
 The Committee also recommends that the proposal of  construction of more helipads in 
forward locations may be approved without any delay . The Ministry of Home Affairs may also 
chalk out a plan to create a dedicated air wing of ITBP and procure a minimal fleet of helicopters 
and planes, as per the requirements of ITBP, for the purpose. 
(Para  2.10.7) 
 
INDIA-NEPAL BORDER (INB) 
 
Border Infrastructure along INB 
 
 The Committee is constrained to note the inordinat e delay in the construction and 
upgradation of 1377 km of strategic roads along the India-Nepal Border in the States of UP, Bihar 
and Uttarakhand due to pending land acquisition and forest clearances. The Committee notes that 
the Ministry has sought an extension of time up to March, 2019 for completion of these projects.   
The Ministry should have made serious efforts in re solving the issues.  Though the construction 
should have been completed in 2016 as per the original plan, only very little has been completed so 
far. The Committee deplores this delay and desires that atleast by March, 2019 it should be 
completed. 
(Para  2.12.3) 
 
 
INDIA-BHUTAN BORDER (IBhB) 
 
Border Infrastructure along IBhB 
 
 The Committee takes a serious view of the fact tha t though the project of construction of 
313 km of border roads along the India-Bhutan borde r has been approved, it is yet to take off due 
to pending land acquisition.   The Committee is als o concerned that transfer of forest land in such 
cases has become a major cause of delay. The Commit tee recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should take up this issue with the Ministry  of Environment and Forests at the highest level 
and frame a Standard Operating Procedure to be foll owed by both the Ministries in all such cases 
where transfer of forest land is required for border infrastructure projects.  
(Para  2.13.3) 
 
INDIA-MYANMAR BORDER (IMB) 
 
Deployment of BGF along IMB 
 
 Since the Assam Rifles is not a dedicated BGF and the Ministry is exploring the possibility 
of deploying a dedicated BGF for guarding the India -Myanmar Border, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take an early d ecision on this matter and put an end to the 
confusion.  
(Para  2.14.3) 
 
Border Infrastructure along IMB 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the delay  in the re-survey of the boundary line 
on IMB for construction of fencing. The Committee i s aware that this border is one of the most 
porous borders and insurgent groups are quite activ e in the border area. The attack on the 
Armed Forces convoy in 2015 was a gruesome reminder  that India needs to secure the IMB and 

42 
 
eliminate cross-border insurgency in the region. Th e Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue the Ministry  of External Affairs for completing the re-
survey at the earliest so that the fencing work cou ld begin. The Committee also recommends that 
the proposed comprehensive border infrastructure pr oject for IMB should be approved without 
any delay. The procurement of modern weapons and eq uipment for border management should 
also be completed at the earliest. 
(Para  2.15.4) 
 
Vulnerabilities on IMB 
 
 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact tha t the gaps in the deployment are wide 
and are prone to be exploited by the insurgents to carry out sabotage activities against the country 
and its security forces.   The Committee is also co nstrained to learn that the system of FMR along 
with porous and unfenced border is being exploited by the anti national elements for unhindered 
movement of insurgent groups across the border.   T he Committee also expresses its concern that 
the implementation of FMR is not uniform across the  states along the IMB which is exploited by 
insurgents and anti-national elements.  The exploit ation of FMR is also facilitated by the thick 
jungles, heavy undergrowth, riverine and mountainou s terrain in the region.   The Committee 
takes note of the MOU being proposed by India to My anmar for rationalising and regularising 
the FMR and recommends that steps may be taken for early signing of the MOU.   The 
Committee also recommends that steps may be taken t o ensure uniform implementation of the 
FMR by all the states bordering Myanmar to check its misuse.  
(Para  2.16.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL BORDER MANAGEMENT ISSUES  
 
Working Conditions of Border Guarding Forces (BGF) Personnel  
 
 The Ministry's submission that a Jawan gets minimu m of 6 hours uninterrupted sleep in 
every cycle of 24 hours is at variance with the fac ts observed and learnt by the Committee during 
its study visits. The Committee is anguished to obs erve that the flawed system leaves grossly 
insufficient time for Jawans to get decent rest and  sleep. The Committee is concerned to note that 
due to shortage of manpower, jawans are forced to p erform 16-18 hours of duty in a day.  The 
BSF needs to revise its duty hours system so as to ensure atleast one gap of 8 to 10 hours between 
two consecutive shifts.  Moreover, a patrolling shi ft of 6 hours is unduly long and without 
adequate rest a Jawan cannot be expected to remain alert throughout the shift. The Committee 
recommends that this system should be rationalized by creating six shifts of 4 hours each during a 
24 hours cycle wherein a Jawan performs two shifts of 4 hours each in a day with a gap of 8 to 10 
hours between these two shifts. It must be ensured that the Jawan gets 8 hours of sleep plus two 
hours to attend to his personal needs. The Committe e also recommends that the Ministry should 
assess the amount of additional man power required to adopt this system and should have 
sufficient number of Reserve Battalions.  
 (Para  2.17.5) 
 
 The Committee expresses its deep anguish over the neglect of basic necessities to the 
Jawans by the commanding officers. The Committee feels that a Jawan must not be made to travel 

43 
 
on foot for his daily commute if the duty location is far away from the BoP. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the BSF must procure suf ficient number of bicycles and every Jawan 
must be provided with one for the purpose of commut ing wherever cycling is possible. The 
Committee also recommends that in areas where there  are no roads, like deserts and hilly areas, 
the Commanding officers must be directed to estimat e the commute duration, consider them as 
part of the duty hours of jawans and accordingly re vise their duty hours so as to minimize their 
fatigue and provide them adequate time for rest.   
 (Para  2.17.7) 
  
 The construction of Observation Posts and ambush-c um-patrol shelters along the India-
Bangladesh and India-Pakistan Borders is a good proposal and is in the right direction to improve 
the working conditions of personnel and also to str engthen the surveillance on the border. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take an early decision on this proposal during 
this financial year itself.  
 (Para  2.17.9) 
 
 The Committee is concerned by the insensitive appr oach of the Government towards the 
jawans posted in difficult and harsh conditions. Th e Committee strongly recommends that the 
Ministry must pursue this matter with the Departmen t of Telecommunications on a priority basis 
and ensure that subsidized call rates are made avai lable on all the 135 DSPTs allotted to  the BSF 
being used in remote areas. The Committee also reco mmends that the Ministry must bear the 
expenses of all calls made through these DSPTs or s ubsidise the calls made by jawans, out of its 
own funds, until the DoT takes a decision on this matter.  
(Para  2.17.11) 
Deployment of BGF Battalions to duties other than Border Guarding 
 
 The Committee is concerned to observe that while 3 0 out of a total of 186 battalions were 
designated as Reserve Battalions, only 10 out of 30  were actually kept as Reserve and even they 
have been deployed in various locations for miscell aneous duties. The Committee feels that the 
raison d'être of having Reserve Battalions has been  lost and this has become the root cause for 
overburdening of border guarding personnel leaving them with no time for sleep, rest, 
recuperation and training activities. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should urgently raise additional battalions in the respective forces for the purpose of handling 
LWE and Counter Insurgency operations and to ensure  that battalions from BGFs are not 
diverted for the purpose. The Committee also recomm ends that the Government should raise the 
required number of Indian Reserve Battalions for th e States to ensure their self-sufficiency in law 
and order, elections and other miscellaneous duties  instead of making them dependent on the 
CAPFs.  
(Para  2.18.3) 
 
 The Committee feels that the number of Reserve Bat talions at present is too low and it has 
to be augmented urgently. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that all the proposals of BGFs 
to raise additional number of battalions should be considered on a priority basis and approval 
must be granted at the earliest. The Ministry shoul d establish a strong institutional mechanism to 
ensure that the Reserve battalions do not get deplo yed under any circumstances for any other 
duty except in times of extreme exigencies and shou ld be kept for the purpose of training, rest and 
relief of existing troops. The Ministry should also  ensure that any such deployment in times of 
exigencies should be temporary and must not become permanent at any cost.   
(Para  2.18.4) 
Pending Procurement of Weapons and Essential Equipment 

44 
 
 
          The Committee feels that adequacy of modern equipment for surveillance during day as well 
as night is a pre-requisite to detect any attempt o f infiltration or illegal migration.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should immediately procure all essential 
surveillance equipment especially those required fo r surveillance during night, like Hand-held 
Thermal Imager and PNV Monocular, at the earliest and apprise the Committee of the progress in 
the matter. 
(Para  2.19.2) 
Composite BOPs 
 
 The Committee is anguished to observe the poor con dition of the border out posts. The 
Committee notices that only 422 out of 1901 BOPs on  India-Bangladesh and India-Pakistan 
Borders are composite and others lack various basic  elements. The Committee is constrained to 
observe that several BOPs do not have even the most  essential facilities like provision for filtered 
drinking water or proper barracks. It is inhuman to  make Jawans to live and sleep without a fan 
in the BOPs. The Committee, therefore, recommends t hat the Ministry should intensify its efforts 
for converting all BOPs into composite ones and app rise the Committee, periodically, about the 
progress of this project. The Committee also recomm ends that all the proposals for provision of 
piped water in BoPs should be approved at the earli est and till then orders may be issued for 
procurement of water filter/RO systems for all BoPs  and for proper maintenance of existing ones.  
The Ministry should take an immediate decision in t his regard and inform the Committee about 
the decision taken. 
(Para  2.20.2) 
Service Conditions and Pay Related Issues of BGFs 
 
 The Committee is disappointed to note that the per sonnel of the CAPFs are unfairly 
treated as compared to their counterparts in the Ar med Forces.  The committee feels that this will 
have an adverse impact on the morale of the Forces who work tirelessly to secure the borders of 
our country. The Committee is aware that the Commit tee on the Allowances recommended by the 
7
th  CPC is yet to give its report and recommends that the MHA must make another effort to 
enhance the hard area allowances of CAPFs and bring  them at par with the Armed Forces.  The 
Committee also feels that changes in the Modified A ssured Career Progression scheme is under 
the jurisdiction of the Ministry and recommends that the proposals of CAPFs for the same may be 
considered expeditiously and a suitable decision taken.   
(Para  2.21.5) 
 
 The Committee also recommends that hard area allow ance should be exclusively decided 
on the basis of geographical and climatic condition s of the area of deployment and should be 
uniform for personnel of all the forces, be it CAPFs or Army.  
(Para  2.21.6) 
 
 The Committee is however, considering a separate s ubject on CAPFs in which it will deal 
with service conditions, living conditions, pay & a llowances and housing and will give a 
comprehensive report on the subject.  The issues pe rtaining to BGFs will be dealt with extensively 
in that report.   
(Para  2.21.7) 
Medical Facilities for BGF Personnel 
 The Committee feels that despite the medical facil ities provided for Border guarding 
Forces personnel, the Jawans are not satisfied part icularly at the forward locations. The 
Committee observed during the visit that while BSF personnel are availing of facilities under 

45 
 
CGHS, most of the border districts are not covered under this Scheme rendering it completely 
futile. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must urge the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare to cover all border distr icts, especially on hostile borders, under 
CGHS in view of the presence of a large number of B GF personnel on the border. The Committee 
also recommends that the Ministry must make efforts  to construct composite hospitals in all 
Frontier Headquarters and Unit Hospitals in all the  Sectors.  The Committee desires that on the 
medical front, the Forces should not feel dissatisfied.     
(Para  2.22.3) 
Border Area Development Programme (BADP) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s submiss ion and feels that the objective of 
Border Area Development Programme to saturate the b order areas with all the essential 
infrastructure remains unfulfilled even after three  decades of the inception of this programme. 
The Committee, during its study visits, found wides pread illiteracy, backwardness and poverty 
along with severe lack of amenities in the border a reas of West Bengal and Rajasthan. On the 
other hand, border areas in Punjab and J&K are suff ering from poor infrastructure and lack of 
connectivity and transportation. The Committee feel s that there is a need to strengthen the 
monitoring of the projects under BADP and conduct a  review of performance of this programme 
to find out its lacunae. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should carry out 
an Impact Assessment of BADP to ascertain the measu res that can be undertaken to make this 
programme a success. The Committee, keeping in view  the scope and mandate of BADP, 
recommends that the Ministry should enhance the allocations being made under  the BADP.  
 
(Para  2.23.4) 
 
 The Committee notes the submission of Punjab Polic e and agrees that state police 
infrastructure needs to be improved to match the se curity requirements. Though it is primarily 
the responsibility of States to improve police infr astructure, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take up the above suggestion in its  next review of BADP guidelines and make 
efforts to incorporate it to the extent possible.  
(Para  2.23.6) 
 
Border Protection Grid (BPG) 
 
 The Committee notes the ambitious plan of the Gove rnment to move to the concept of 
putting in place technological barriers instead of the present practice of erection of physical 
barriers on all the borders. The Committee recommen ds that the technology solutions 
implemented as part of the proposed Border Protecti on Grid (BPG) in every border State should 
be mission critical and not merely on a best effort  basis. The Ministry must also carry out 
extensive research on similar systems deployed inte rnationally by countries like USA and Israel 
before finalising the major constituents of the BPG  and technologies to be used. The Committee 
also recommends that the Ministry should come out w ith a specific timeline for finalising the 
design of the proposed BPG  and a time line for implementing the same. 
(Para  2.24.3) 
Illegal Sand Mining in Punjab Border Areas 
 
 The Committee is anguished to note the illegal san d mining on the Punjab border and the 
allegations of connivance of the BSF and the Punjab  Police in this crime. The Committee 
recommends that an investigation should be carried out by the Ministry jointly with the Punjab 
Government to expose the truth and the culprits. Th e Committee also recommends that the 

46 
 
Ministry must also convey the views of the Committe e to the State Government of Punjab and ask 
them to curb this menace. 
(Para  2.25.2) 
COASTAL BORDER 
 
Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) 
 
 The Committee expresses its displeasure that the M inistry was unable to complete the 
implementation of phase II of the CSS as per the ta rget and has sought extension for the same.   
The Ministry is unable to implement critical projects within the set timeframe and this is bound to 
have ramifications on the overall intended coastal security system.  The Committee strongly 
recommends that the phase II of coastal security sc heme should be extended in the first instance 
and completed at the earliest.  The procurement of motor boats has suffered an inordinate delay 
and the Ministry should make sincere efforts to complete their procurement at the earliest.  
(Para  2.26.5) 
 
 The Committee, during its deliberations, was appri sed about the serious infrastructural 
inadequacies of Indian Coast Guard and Coastal poli ce forces. Lack of a clear coordination 
mechanism between Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard a nd coastal police that are guarding the 
three respective layers of our sea front is also an other serious issue. The Committee recommends 
that there should be a clear command chain and defi ned SOPs with reference to coastal security 
and the DG, Coast Guard, who is designated as the h ead of the coastal command, must be 
empowered adequately and be given authority to comm and other sister agencies in matters of 
coastal security.  
(Para  2.26.7) 
 
 The Committee also expresses its displeasure on th e fact that the Ministry did not implement 
several recommendations of the Committee given in i ts 177 th  Report on Coastal Security Scheme. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should h ave a relook into the Committee’s 177 th  
Report and make efforts to implement the recommendations given therein. 
(Para  2.26.8) 
Other Initiatives to Improve Coastal Security 
 The Committee notes that boats, less than 20 meter s length are not mandatorily required to 
have AIS and this is certainly a security threat to  coastal areas.  The Committee takes note of the 
Ministry’s submission that an appropriate technolog y for installation of tracking system for boats 
less than 20 metres has been identified. The Commit tee recommends that the Ministry should 
ensure timely installation of this system in all the boats at the earliest.  
(Para  2.27.4) 
Security of Islands 
 
 The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Min istry in developing the Island 
Information System geo-portal and Holistic Developm ent of Island Scheme for security and 
development of vulnerable islands. The Committee desires that the Ministry may enhance security 
of the remote islands and also develop them with th e help of the geo-portal.  The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry should make efforts, i n collaboration with the Ministries of 
Shipping and Defence, to find a solution to ensure round-the-year sea connectivity to and 
patrolling of all the uninhabited and remote islands like Minicoy. 
(Para  2.28.5) 
 
 Coastal security is an important challenge the cou ntry is facing on the external front. 
Funds are being provided to the states for marine p olicing and coastal security but several states 

47 
 
have failed to spend the funds fully while some pro jects under Coastal Security Scheme are facing 
delayed implementation. The States do not seem to b e fully alive to the enormity of the challenge 
or to the huge responsibility that they have agreed  to share regarding Coastal security. There 
should be regular meetings with State governments t o sensitize them and joint hand with the 
Central government in monitoring all coastal securi ty related projects so that our security system 
could be strengthened. 
(Para  2.28.6) 
National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID) 
 
 The Committee is dismayed to learn that even thoug h allocation was made by Cabinet 
Committee on Security on 28 th  November, 2013 for creating infrastructure, the in frastructure is 
nowhere in place. Only civil construction is expect ed to be completed in Delhi by March, 2018.  
Though DPR was approved on 6 th  June, 2011 and the implementation approved on 28 th  
November, 2013, the project is still at the nascent  stage.  There are several vacancies of technical 
consultants to be filled and no action has been tak en in this regard. Most subject matter experts 
hired in the previous year have quit NATGRID and th e vacancies have not yet been filled. It is 
difficult for the Committee to believe that NATGRID  will become operational by September, 2018 
when the civil construction is expected to be completed only by March, 2018. The Government has 
not taken prompt decisions and actions to ensure ea rly operationalisation of NATGRID.  This 
shows the ambiguity and uncertainty prevailing in t he government and its inability to take quick 
decisions. Even when it is claimed that NATGRID is expected to be operational by September, 
2018, the fact is that there will only be certain a mount of basic analytics and minimal data sharing 
by that date.  
(Para  3.2.4) 
 
The Committee also reiterates its recommendation ma de in its 201 st  Report that the 
Ministry should clear the confusion looming large o ver the NATGRID's future by completing the 
construction work of its main building at the earli est.  The Committee also reiterates that the 
Ministry must re-publicise the posts as widely as p ossible along with offering remuneration 
package commensurate to that being offered in the p rivate sector to attract the most qualified 
professionals for this technology-driven project.   
(Para  3.2.5) 
 
 The Committee observes that the Ministry has not b een able to utilise the funds allocated 
for NATGRID since its inception. The Committee expr esses its displeasure at this perennial poor 
utilisation of budgetary allocations wherein not ev en one-half of the allocation was utilised in any 
single financial year from 2010-11 to 2015-16. The Committee is totally disillusioned with the pace 
of the implementation of the NATGRID project and the utilisation of funds. The Committee hopes 
that the Ministry will be able to expedite the implementation of this project and will also be able to 
achieve significant utilisation of funds during 2017-18.  
(Para  3.2.6) 
 
Multi-Agency Centre (MAC)  
  The Committee takes note of the low contribution of State agencies in overall inputs 
received by the Multi Agency Centre. The Committee feels that this points towards certain 
weaknesses in the intelligence gathering capacity o f the States. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should hold consultati ons with the States and find out the reasons 
for this low contribution. The Committee also recom mends that an assessment be done of various 
State Intelligence agencies and Special Branches to ascertain their bottlenecks and efforts be made 
to resolve them.  

48 
 
(Para  3.3.8) 
 
  The Committee takes note of the MAC/SMACs network  and appreciates that this may 
have enabled seamless integration of intelligence c ollected by different agencies. The Committee 
recommends that there should be a strong mechanism to perform extensive reliability and validity 
checks on intelligence that comes in from various Provider Agencies before its dissemination.    
(Para  3.3.9) 
National Counter-Terrorism Centre (NCTC) 
 
 The Committee observes that Article 355 of the Ind ian Constitution casts a duty upon the 
Union to protect every State against external aggre ssion and internal disturbance. This duty 
assumes more importance in the present scenario whe re terrorism, insurgency and Left Wing 
Extremism have affected almost every State of India . While there are agencies like NIA, IB, MAC 
and NSG and some in the pipeline like NATGRID that are cumulatively capable of addressing 
these menaces, there is no single unified authority  to coordinate the operations of these agencies 
and ensure a quick response in times of crisis like  the 26/11 attack. The Committee understands 
that several States have objected to NCTC and other  agencies also might have their reservations. 
However, the larger issue of national security shou ld be given paramount importance. Adequate 
consultations have been held between the central go vernment and the states. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should imme diately revive the idea of NCTC as a single, 
unified and premier counter-terrorism agency and re -issue the notification laying down the 
power, functions and duties of the NCTC.     
(Para  3.4.5) 
 
   The Committee observes that the notification of NCTC which was issued in 2012 has 
neither been rescinded nor operationalised as yet. The Committee feels that the Ministry must not 
keep this notification in abeyance endlessly and re commends that a decision to re-issue the 
notification be taken immediately. 
   
(Para  3.4.6) 
Acquisition of Border Land 
  
 The Committee is aware of the land issues and the demand for compensation for the 
acquired land in border areas. The Committee agrees  with the Ministry’s assertion that 
acquisition of fertile and cultivable land lying ahead of fencing will be a loss to the farmers and the 
Nation. However, the Committee feels that, in certa in areas, there may be compelling reasons for 
which the forces might need to use the land ahead o f the fencing. In such circumstances, the 
Committee recommends that effort may be made to acq uire and utilize the land on a lease basis 
and farmers may be given adequate compensation for the same.  
(Para  4.1.2) 
 
 The Committee notes that State administrations are  facing serious difficulties in acquiring 
land because of legal and other impediments and  vi ews that  the same has caused delay in 
execution of border roads, fencing and flood lighti ng projects. Absence of such basic 
infrastructure has an adverse impact on our border security. Besides this, project cost of 
constructing border roads also increases manifold d ue to time and cost over-run. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommends that problematic road  patches should be identified and 
‘Alternate Dispute Resolution Mechanism’ should be immediately established for expediting 
disposal of all land acquisition related disputes.  
(Para  4.1.4) 
 

49 
 
Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICN) 
 
 The Committee is aware of the reports of post demo netization seizure of high quality Fake 
Indian Currency Notes of the denomination of the ne w Rs. 500 and the new Rs. 2000 in Malda 
District area along the India-Bangladesh Border.  T he Committee is concerned to note such 
incidents that belie the tall claims made that FICN  will be eliminated after demonetization.  The 
Committee is also worried to note that no measures have been taken by the Ministry to replace the 
existing FICN detection machines, available with th e Border Guarding Forces to detect the 
smuggled fake currency or to make it compatible for  detecting new denomination notes. The 
Committee feels that the fake currency manufacturer s and smugglers will exploit this situation 
and may be able to flood the country with new FICN before the Ministry is able to come up with a 
plan to foil these attempts. The Committee therefor e, recommends that the Ministry should take 
urgent notice of this issue and formulate a strateg y to disrupt smuggling of new FICNs into the 
country through the land and coastal borders.  The Committee, in view of rising number of 
seizures of FICNs along the India-Bangladesh Border , also recommends that the Ministry should 
take up this issue with Bangladesh Government in th e Home Secretary level talks and urge them 
to crack down on the printers and smugglers of FICNs situated in Bangladesh.    
(Para  4.2.5) 
Drug Trafficking in Border States 
 The Committee notes the rampant drug trafficking p roblem in border areas especially 
along the India-Pakistan border in Punjab and J&K, and feels that, despite huge amount of 
seizures of drugs, the Government has comprehensive ly failed to address this issue. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must make se rious efforts to completely prevent the 
flow of drugs from across the border by adopting a zero tolerance approach in vulnerable areas.   
(Para  4.3.5) 
 
 The Committee is anguished to know that cultivatio n beyond fencing was helping the drug 
couriers to transfer drugs from across the border t o the hinterland. The Committee is given to 
understand that persons going beyond the fence find the packets that come from across the border 
in their fields and throw them across the fence on the Indian side which are collected by drug 
couriers during the night. The Committee recommends  that the Ministry must instruct BSF to 
create anti-trafficking teams of 4-5 personnel in e very Company who must scan the area beyond 
the fence every day in the morning before the farme rs are allowed to pass through the gates and 
also scan the area on the Indian side of the fence during the evening after all the farmers have 
returned from the fields. These teams must also be tasked with the duty of surveillance of the area 
under the  command of the respective companies duri ng night with Hand-held thermal imagers 
from the BoPs and should be encouraged to launch op erations in case of detection of any 
suspicious movement near the fence. The Committee a lso recommends that BSF personnel must 
be directed to frisk all the persons going beyond t he fence for any purpose both while going and 
returning.   
(Para  4.3.6) 
 
Infiltration and Cross-Border Terrorism 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that more tha n a year has passed since the Pathankot 
attack occurred; however, the investigation of that  attack has not been completed by NIA. 
Moreover, no analysis seems to have been done into the failure of the intelligence agencies to 
provide credible and actionable inputs regarding th e attacks at Pathankot, Uri, Pampore, 
Baramulla and Nagrota. The Committee feels that the se attacks have exposed the deficiencies of 
our intelligence agencies. The Committee, therefore , recommends that the Ministry should 

50 
 
instruct the NIA to complete the investigations of these attacks at the earliest so as to identify the  
loopholes in the intelligence setup in the border areas.   
(Para  4.4.2) 
 
 The Committee feels that such a huge rise in the n umber of infiltrations justifies the 
apprehension that the  Indian Army and the BSF may have failed to foil som e of these attempts. 
The Committee recommends that the Government must c arry out a thorough investigation into 
the sudden spurt in the increase in the infiltratio n attempts along the LoC from across the border 
and find out the vulnerabilities along the LoC that  are being apparently exploited by the 
infiltrators.  
 (Para  4.4.6) 
 
 The Committee also notes that there has been an in creasing number of incidents of 
infiltration through tunnels from across the border . The Committee feels that in future this might 
become a major modus operandi of the infiltrators a nd the Government must take proactive 
measures to foil such attempts. The Committee recom mends that the Ministry must explore 
technological solutions for tunnel detection in bor der areas and should, in this regard, seek the 
help of other countries which have successfully developed tunnel detection systems.  
(Para  4.4.7) 
Nagrota Terror Attack 
 
 The Committee, while noting the similarities in th e various attacks on security forces’ 
establishments, feels that all such fidayeen attacks indicate that they carefully select a target based 
on vulnerability and do meticulous planning and pre paration. The Committee also feels that 
attacks like the one on Nagrota could have been per petrated only by those receiving information 
and active guidance from the military establishment  across the border. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that all the small and big campuses of t he Armed Forces and CAPFs need to stay 
always on high alert and must make all efforts to e nsure fool proof security of the perimeters of 
their own establishments. The Committee further rec ommends that measures like providing some 
degree of isolation of the military establishment f rom the other habitations, strengthening of 
perimeter security by cutting the trees around it, raising the height of the walls, adequate lighting 
during night and providing night vision devices to guards must be implemented urgently.   
 (Para  4.5.6) 
 
 The Committee is also concerned that while there w ere intelligence inputs before the 
attacks, they were of a generic nature without any specific details regarding the date and exact 
location of the attacks. Intelligence agencies shou ld analyse the inputs carefully and to the extent 
possible isolate the actionable inputs.  
(Para  4.5.7) 
 The Committee is of the view that the best way of preventing such attacks is to foil all 
attempts at infiltration. Detecting and neutralizin g the terrorists during an infiltration attempt 
will ensure minimum casualties of Indian security f orces. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Government must intensify the surveillance and patrolling on both LoC and International 
Boundary to detect and foil any attempt at infiltration.  
(Para  4.5.8) 
 
Ceasefire Violations 
 
 The Committee is constrained to note that, after t he 1971 war, the present is the most 
vulnerable period for the borders of the country.  There have been a large number of cease fire 

51 
 
violations and several jawans and civilians have been killed. According to some reports, more than 
a hundred cease fire violations took place within a  span of two months in 2016 and the year 2016 
can be considered as one of the most vulnerable per iods.  The Government should find a way to 
prevent the frequent and persistent violations of c easefire including using diplomatic channels. 
Ultimately, the answer lies in diplomacy. During ce ase fire, the worst sufferers are the people 
living in the border villages. The questions are wh ere will they go and where will they earn their 
living. The country today appears to have internal refugees and internal migrants. The only way 
the country can restore the ceasefire is to go back  to a situation where both India and Pakistan 
agreed to observe the ceasefire. For more than a de cade, the ceasefire held good.  But now, from 
both sides, the ceasefire appears to be virtually d ead on the LoC. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the government should make every ef fort, including activating diplomatic 
channels, towards preventing ceasefire violations a nd restoring the situation of a genuine 
ceasefire.  
(Para  4.6.3) 
General  
 
 
 Border security has become very fragile and, as ga thered from the evidence before the 
Committee, there are several gaps which need to be plugged. The inadequacies have become 
starkly visible over a period of time. Some inadequ acies have been addressed; some are being 
addressed, while others remain unaddressed.  Though there are internal security challenges, in the 
view of the Committee, the external security challe nges are very strong on the both the Eastern 
and Western borders. As already explained earlier i n the report, some institutional mechanisms 
have been created to address the security challenge s. But the Committee is dismayed over the 
ambiguous approach of the Government in strengtheni ng the institutions and feels strongly that a 
comprehensive intelligence infrastructure is imperative to address the security challenges.    
  (Para  4.7.1) 
 
 The Committee has dealt with all the issues relati ng to capacity building for secure borders 
and the institutions in some detail in the preceding paragraphs and has given recommendations on 
each one of them. The Committee hopes that the gove rnment would implement all the 
recommendations in right earnest so that the extern al security challenges are addressed properly 
and the borders and institutions are strengthened and secured.   
 
(Para  4.7.2) 
***** 
 