 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
 
237 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
POLICE - TRAINING, MODERNISATION AND REFORMS 
 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 10
th February, 2022)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th February, 2022) 
                                     

 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available         
 
C.S. (H.A.)-466 
      
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
POLICE - TRAINING, MODERNISATION AND REFORMS        
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 10th February, 2022)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th February, 2022) 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                      (i) - (ii) 
2.  PREFACE (iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iv) - (vi) 
4.  REPORT      1-71 
 INTRODUCTION 1-3 
 
 Chapter – I   
The Background and Present Status 
 
4-7 
 Chapter – II 
Police Training 
8-22 
 Chapter - III           
Police Modernisation 
23-51 
 Chapter-IV 
Police Reforms-The Path Ahead 
52-71 
5.  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE – 
AT A GLANCE 
 
72-89 
6.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 91-114 
7.  ANNEXURES 116-141 
 
 
 
 
 

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. Dr. Anil Jain  
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
6. @ Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. % Vacant 
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
9. #Vacant  
10. $ Vacant 
 
      LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
21. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
27. Shrimati Sarmishta Sethi 
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
29. *Shri P.P. Mohammed Faizal 
30. Shri Ravneet Singh 
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri Akshay Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
__________________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 23 rd December, 2020 to fill the vacancy caused by expiry of his 
previous Rajya Sabha Term 
*Shri P.P. Mohammed Faizal, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 30 th December, 2020 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of  
Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya), MP, Lok Sabha  to Committee on Edu cation, Women, Children, Youth and Sports. 
# Consequent upon the resignation of Shri Dinesh Trivedi from the mem bership of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 12 th February, 2021. 
% and $ Consequent upon  joining of  Council of Ministers on 7 th July, 2021  by Shri Bhupender Yadav and Shri Ram Chandra 
Prasad Singh both MPs, Rajya Sabha. 
 
(i) 

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri Brijlal  
4. Dr. Anil Jain 
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
7. Shri Derek O’Brien 
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia  
12. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
15. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
16. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
17. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
18. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar 
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
21. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal  
22. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar  
23. Shri Mohammed Faizal P. P.   
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel  
26. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
27. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
28. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
29. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi  
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shrimati Vanga Geetha Viswanath  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri Akshay Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
  
(ii) 
 
 

 PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Home Affairs, 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on i ts behalf, do hereby present this Two 
Hundred Thirty Seventh Report on the “Police-Training, Modernisation and Reforms”. 
 
2. The Committee, in its meeting held on 14 th October, 2020 selected the subject 'Police - Training, 
Modernisation and Reforms’ for examination and held six meetings, i.e ., on 8 th July, 22 nd July, 04 th 
August, 27th October, 16 th November and 25 th November, 2021. In these meetings, the Committee heard 
the views of the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Gujarat, Odisha, Uttar Prad esh, Punjab, Haryana, West Bengal, Delhi 
Police, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy ( SVPNPA), and Bureau of Police Research & 
Development (BPR&D). The Committee also sought information from the remaining States on  the issues 
of training, modernisation and reforms in the policing system through a questionnaire. 
 
3. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, ha s mainly relied upon the 
following documents:- 
 
(i) Background Notes furnished and Presentations made by representatives of Mini stry of 
Home Affairs, State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil  Nadu, Telangana, 
Gujarat, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, West Bengal, De lhi Police, Sardar 
Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA), and Bur eau of Police Research & 
Development (BPR&D) and other officials during the meetings of t he Committee on the 
subject;  
(ii) Replies to the questionnaire sent by the Secretariat, furnished b y the State Governments of 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Mizoram, Jharkhand, Manipur, Karnataka, Ar unachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Himachal Pradesh and Tripura; 
(iii) Replies to the queries/comments/suggestions of the Members, raised during the 
Committee's meetings, as furnished by the Departments/Mini stries/State Governments and 
other stakeholders during various meetings of the Committee; and 
(iv) Verbatim transcripts of the meetings of the Committee held on 8 th July, 22 nd July, 04 th 
August and 27th October, 16th November and 25th November, 2021; and 
(v) BPR&D’s report on ‘Data on Police Organizations’, 2020 and NCRB’s report on‘C rime in 
India’, 2020 
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Report in its meeting hel d on 8 th February, 2022 and adopted 
the same. 
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. For  further convenience, 
abbreviations used in the Report have been compiled in a table under the acronyms section.  
 
 
 
8
th February, 2022 
New Delhi 
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka) 
Anand Sharma 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
(iii) 
  

ACRONYMS 
 
ACP Assured Carrier Progression  
ADGP Additional Director-General of Police 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
ADRIN Advanced Data Processing Research Institute  
AFIS Automated Fingerprint Identification System  
ALPR Automatic License Plate Recognition  
AR Assam Rifles 
ASI Assistant Sub-Inspector 
ASMP Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police  
APP Arunachal Pradesh Police 
BSF Border Security Force 
BSNL Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research & Development  
CAPFs Central Armed Police Forces  
CES Complete Equipment Schedule  
CCPWC Cyber crime Prevention against Women and Children  
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CCTNS Crime and Criminal Tracking Network & Systems  
CDTIs Central Detective Training Institutions  
CDR  Call Detail Records 
CAPT Central Academy for Police Training  
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CLG Community Liaison Group  
CIF Counter Insurgency Force  
CID Criminal Investigation Department  
CMAPS Crime Mapping Analytics and Predictive System  
CPSEs Central Public Sector Enterprises  
CPOs Central Police Organisations  
CP Commissioner of Police  
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force 
CSSs Centrally Sponsored Schemes  
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DAR District Armed Reserve  
DTC  District Training Centres 
DPC Departmental Promotion Committee  
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DSI Developing Specialist Investigators  
DGP Director-General of Police 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid 
FIR First Information Report 
ERSS Emergency Response Support System  
FSLs Forensic Science Laboratories 
FTIR Fourier Transform Infra-Red 
GPS Global Positioning System 
(iv)

 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GMS Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectra 
HIVE Highly Interactive Visualization Environment 
HR Human Resource 
HPC High-Powered Committee  
ICJS Inter-operable Criminal Justice System  
IVC Internal Vigilance Cell  
IFVP Iris, Finger, Voice and Photo 
IoT Internet of Things  
IT Information Technology 
iGOT-Karmayogi Integrated Government Online Training-Mission Karmay ogi 
IPS Indian Police Service 
IPC Indian Penal Code 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
I/Os Investigating Officers 
ITMS Integrated Traffic Management System  
JRMS Jail Release Monitoring System 
LNJN NICFS Lok Nayak Jayaprakash National Institute of Criminology & F orensic 
Science  
LEAs Law Enforcement Agencies  
LWE Left-Wing Extremism 
MACPS Modified Assured Carrier Progression Scheme  
MCP Megacity Policing  
MTNL Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MPF Scheme Scheme of Modernisation of State Police Forces  
NAFIS National Automated Fingerprint Identification System  
NFSU National Forensic Sciences University  
NDPS  Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances  
NDCRTC National Digital Crime Resource & Training Centre  
NEPA North-Eastern Police Academy  
NGO Non-Government Organisation 
NITI  National Institution for Transforming India 
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau 
NACs Notified Area Councils  
NCO Non-Commissioned Officer 
OM Office Memorandum  
PAIS Punjab Artificial Intelligence System 
PFMS Public Finance Monitoring System  
POs Probationary Officers  
PTS Police Training School 
PPMM Punjab Police Mahila Mittar  
ITBP Indo-Tibetan Border Police 
 
(v)

 
RRU Rashtriya Raksha University   
RTPCR Reverse Transcription–Polymerase Chain Reaction  
SEM Scanning Electron Microscope 
SI Sub-Inspector 
STF Special Task Force 
SSB Sashastra Seema Bal 
SHO Station House Officer 
SVPNPA Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy  
SMAC Subsidiary Multi-Agency Centre  
SMART Strict and Sensitive, Modern and Mobile, Alert and Accountable, Reliable 
and Responsive, Techno-savvy and Trained  
SPS State Police Service  
SPOs State Police Organizations  
SP Superintendent of Police  
SPF Special Protection Force  
SLEC State Level Empowered Committee  
SAPs State Action Plans  
SSP Senior Superintendent of Police 
TNA Training Needs Analysis  
NSG National Security Guard 
UTs Union Territories 
UCs Utilization Certificates  
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle  
VoIP Voice over Internet Protocol 
VPO Village Police Officers  
VDP Village Development Party  
WBP West Bengal Police  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi)
 
 

1 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
In the federal structure of the country, ‘Police' and 'Public Order’ are state subjects under 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. The Police is  a vital instrument through 
which, State Governments wield their power and authority for preve ntion, detection and 
investigation of crime, maintaining law and order and providing securi ty to the people. The 
Centre also maintains Central Armed Police Forces (i.e. AR, BSF , CISF, CRPF, ITBP, SSB & 
NSG). However, they are deployed to assist the State Governm ents and UTs in maintaining 
public order on their request. The deployment of these forces, however, depends upon the overall 
security situation and their availability. 
 
2. The basic framework for policing in India was laid down by the Brit ishers in the pre-
independence era through the Police Act, 1861. The principal Act has been amended from time 
to time as per the functional requirements. Some of the States  had enacted their own Acts but 
they were largely based on the Police Act, 1861. Over the century, India has transformed into 
one of the major economic and political powers in the world, but the Pol ice are still said to be in 
a frozen state. The Police Act, 1861 in some quarters is said to be an archaic law, and a legacy of 
the colonial rule. The multi-fold growth of the population in the count ry has brought forth many 
new challenges and issues that the police is facing today. Urbani zation and economic growth, 
has spawned crimes that are highly sophisticated and trans-nati onal. The continued advancement 
in technology has led to the surfacing of newer forms of crime, a nd the expectations of the 
public from police have increased manifold. The police have also bee n facing criticism from the 
citizens regarding the abuse/misuse of their authority and viola tions of citizens' rights through 
the power and authority vested in them. In order to deal with crime a nd criminals along with 
upholding human rights and safeguarding the legitimate interests of al l citizens effectively, the 
policing system and their administration need to be reformed and m odernised so that they are 
well-equipped in terms of manpower, weaponry, technology, communication a nd coordination 
to meet the present-day requirements. 
3. Keeping in mind the Constitutional framework, police modernisatio n and reforms is the 
responsibility of State Governments, who are empowered to enact any law regarding police. The 
Centre can grant funds to the States, but cannot enforce impleme ntation. It can only issue 
advisories and make consistent efforts to persuade the States to bring in the requisite reforms. 
 
4. The debate on Police reforms has been a long-standing one, and has  spanned more than 
four decades. Over these years, several commissions have been  set up at the highest levels of 
Government and they have submitted their reports and recommendati ons for police reform to the 
Government.   Some of the important Committees in this regard hav e been, the National Police 
Commission - set up under Chairmanship of Shri Dharm Vira (1977), the Riberio Committee on 
Police Reforms - under Chairmanship of Shri J.F. Riberio (1998), the P admanabhaiah 
Committee on Police Reforms (2000), the Committee on Reforms of Crim inal Justice System 
under Dr. Justice V.S. Malimath (2000),    the Review Committee  headed by Shri R.S. 
Mooshahary (2004). Apart from these national level Commission/Commi ttees, the Bureau of 
Police Research and Development (BPR&D), whose objective is to assess and recommend/ 
suggest measures to improve the policing system in the country, has also made several 
recommendations. Even the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India had to step in on the issues of 
Police Reforms. It passed a landmark judgment on 22 nd September, 2006 in the matter of Writ 
Petition (Civil) No. 310 of 1996 – Prakash Singh and others Vs. UOI and othe rs on several 
issues concerning Police Reforms. However, the implementation of the most compelling 

2 
 
recommendations of these reports and direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court has remained a 
far cry and appears to have not been implemented in letter and spirit. 
 
5. The Committee in its meeting held on 8 th July, 2021  deliberated on the issues and 
observed that the police play an important role in maintaining and upholding the internal security 
inside the country, alongside the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF s). Accordingly, 
background study materials on the matter were sought from the Minist ry for detailed study. The 
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Comm ittee about the major 
projects and initiatives undertaken for modernisation; funding and utili zation of the fund for 
modernisation of police; provision of incentives linked for better pe rformance by the States; 
implementation status of recommendations of Mooshahary Committee; ne w initiatives required 
in the training of police officers; police training and research done  by Bureau of Police Research 
& Development (BPR&D), North-Eastern Police Academy (NEPA) and Sarda r Vallabhbhai 
Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA); and training of police  forces by State Police 
Academies; etc. 
6. From the examination of the submissions made by the Ministry,  the Committee noticed 
large disparities among the States in the implementation of the reforms, state of modernisation of 
the police systems, implementation of the laws, etc.  
7. The Committee agreed that for discharging their duties effectiv ely and efficiently, the 
State police need to have proper logistics, infrastructure and equipment s. The requirement of an 
ideal working condition for the Police to carry out their responsibilit ies professionally was also 
agreed to by the Committee.  
8. The Committee also felt that the aspect of adequate tra ining is  very vital and integral to 
modernisation of police forces and the focus on changing the menta l attitude of police personnel 
and sensitizing them towards various social issues. The train ing can play an important role in 
making the police force efficient and capable and its functioning more effective, transparent and 
accountable.  
9. To understand the factors and hindrances behind the lack of impl ementation of important 
reforms (recommended by the Central Committees/Commissions) by the St ates, the Committee 
chose the subject 'Police-Training, Modernisation and Reforms' for an i n-depth examination of 
the gamut of issues surrounding the Police System in the States and report thereon. 
10. The Committee, during the course of examination of the subject,  held 6 meetings. It 
interacted with the representatives of the Ministry of Home  Affairs, the Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA), the Bureau of Police Research & Development 
(BPR&D), the Delhi Police and the State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Gujarat, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana a nd West Bengal. The 
Committee also sought information from the remaining States on the  issues of training, 
modernisation and reforms in the policing system through a questionnaire. T he State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Mizoram, Jharkhand, Manipur, Karnataka, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Himachal Pradesh and Tripura have submitted their 
responses on the Questionnaire to the Secretariat.  Accordingly, the Report discusses these 
aspects in the following chapters:- 
(i) Chapter I- The Background and Present Status; 
(ii) Chapter II-Police Training; 
(iii) Chapter III- Police Modernisation; 
(iv) Chapter IV-Police Reforms; The Path Ahead 

3 
 
11. The Committee places its findings and recommendations in the r espective chapters, on 
the basis of the inputs received from the above-mentioned Ministry /agencies/State Governments, 
first-hand information gathered from the evidence tendered by th e witnesses before the 
Committee and the discussions that took place during the course of the m eetings of the 
Committee.   
***** 

4 
 
CHAPTER I 
THE BACKGROUND AND PRESENT STATUS 
 
1.1 The Police Act, 1861  
1.1.1 The Police Act, 1861 was enacted on 22 nd March, 1861 in the pre-independence era 
by the British Government to reorganize the police and to make it a  more efficient instrument 
for the prevention and detection of crime. This Act has 47 Secti ons. Various Sections of the 
Act, enumerate the constitution of the forces under the superintendence of the State 
Government, powers of Inspector-General, appointment, disciplinary action on offic ers, 
power of Inspector-General to make rules, additional police-officers em ployed at cost (sic) of 
individuals, the appointment of additional force in the neighbourhood of railwa y and other 
works, quartering of additional police in disturbed or dangerous districts,  awarding 
compensation to sufferers from the misconduct of inhabitants or pe rsons interested in the 
land.  
1.1.2 The Act also defines the powers of special police officers, fine on refusal to serve as 
special police officers, authority to be exercised by police offi cers, village police officers, 
police-chaukidars in the Presidency of Fort William. It also provid es for police officers to be 
always on duty and may be employed in any part of the district and  to take charge of 
unclaimed property and be subject to Magistrate's orders as to d isposal (sic). A provision that 
Magistrate may detain property and issue proclamation, confisc ation of property if no 
claimant appears, penalties for neglect of duty, etc. have a lso been mentioned. The Act also 
has a provision for the regulation of public assemblies and proces sions and licensing of the 
same, powers with regard to assemblies and processions violating  conditions of license; 
provision of punishment for certain offenses like causing a nuisance on roads or cruelty to 
animals etc.;  recovery of penalties and fines imposed by M agistrates; limitation of actions; 
and other provisions. It also mandates police officers to keep a diary  and prescribes the 
authority of the District Superintendent of Police over village pol ice. The principal Act has 
been amended from time to time as per the functional requirements. 
 
1.2 Committees/Commissions on Police Reforms   
 
1.2.1 In order to come out of the colonial era Act, for the purpose of revi ewing and 
improving the performance of the police and examining the issues p laguing the system, the 
Centre had set up several important Committees/Commissions during t he past few decades.  
Important among these Committees/Commissions have been name d in the introduction. 
Notable recommendations were those that were made by the Nation al Police Commission 
(1977-81) headed by Shri Dharm Vira. On the directions of the Hon’ble Suprem e Court of 
India, a Committee, headed by Shri J.F. Ribero, was constituted in 1998, to review the action 
taken by the Central Government/State Governments/UT Administrat ions in this regard, and 
to suggest ways and means for implementing the pending recommen dations of the National 
Police Commission.  Other Committees like the Padmanabhaiah C ommittee on the 
restructuring of Police and the Malimath Committee on reforms in Criminal Justice System 
were constituted in the year 2000.  The Ministry has informed that under the directions of 
the-then Hon’ble Prime Minister, a Committee was constituted under  the Chairmanship of 
Shri R.S. Mooshahary in December 2004 to review the status of i mplementation of 
recommendations made by the various Commissions/Committees. The  details of the 
recommendation of these Commissions/Committees have been place d at Annexure-I of the 
report. 

5 
 
1.2.2 The Mooshahary Committee Report, had identified 49 recommendati ons as being 
crucial to the process of transforming the police into a professionally c ompetent and service-
oriented organization. The thrust of these recommendations was on ra ising the professional 
standard of the police and improving their performance in police stations – both urban as well 
rural; giving importance to the role of police in the internal security of the State as well as the 
country; addressing the core issues of recruitment, training, career prog ression and service 
conditions of police personnel; tackling complaints against the poli ce with regard to non-
registration of crime, arrests, absue/misuse of power and authority etc .; and insulating the 
police machinery from extraneous influences. 
 
1.3 Model Police Act, 2006. 
1.3.1 One of the recommendations of the Mooshahary Committee was the enactment of a 
New Police Act to replace the Police Act of 1861.  The Minist ry of Home Affairs set up a 
Police Act Drafting Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Sol i Sorabjee to draft a new 
Model Police Act in September, 2005.  
1.3.2 The Committee submitted a model Police Act on 30 th October, 2006 containing 16 
chapters. The decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Prakash Sing h case is also 
reflected in this Act. The Model Act emphasized the need t o have a professional police 
service in a democratic society, which is efficient, effecti ve, responsive to the needs of the 
people and accountable to the Rule of Law. The Act provides for t he social responsibilities of 
the police and emphasizes that the police would be governed by  the principles of impartiality 
and human rights norms, with special attention to the protect ion of weaker sections including 
minorities. The other salient features of the Model Police Act include: 
 The Police Service, organized into a single entity under the S tate Government, shall 
function under a Director General of Police who shall be in the se nior-most position 
in the hierarchy with a fixed tenure of two years.   
 The Police shall function under the overall supervision of the Distr ict Magistrate who 
shall for efficiency, coordinate the functioning of the police wi th other agencies of the 
district administration. 
 The Act further provides for the hierarchy of the civil police including  the 
qualifications for recruitment at the primary ranks. 
 It has a separate chapter on armed police forces and the organizati onal structure of the 
State Armed Police Battalions, their recruitment, training and deployment. 
 It mandates the formulation of a Strategic Policing Plan for 5  years and an action plan 
for its implementation. 
 The Act provides for the constitution of a State Police Board w ith the Home Minister 
as its Chairperson and other members to frame broad policy guidelines , prepare a 
panel of officers for the rank of Director General of Police and ident ify performance 
indicators to evaluate the functioning of the police service. 
 It also provides for the constitution of a Police Establishment Co mmittee to 
recommend names of suitable officers to the State Government for posti ng to all 
positions in the rank of Assistant SP/ Deputy SP and above. 
 The Act enumerates roles, functions, duties and responsibilities of the Police.  It has 
separate chapters on policing in rural areas, the village pol ice system and policing in 
metropolitan areas.   
 The Act emphasizes effective criminal investigation including the use of science and 
technology in investigation and training research and development. 

6 
 
 The Act emphasizes police accountability and lays down a griev ance redressal 
mechanism for police personnel.  
 
 
1.4 Constitutional Limitations of Central Government  
 
1.4.1 The States are empowered to enact any law regarding police and it is primarily the 
State Governments, which have to implement the various meas ures of police reforms.  The 
Centre can grant funds to the States on a State subject, but c annot enforce implementation of 
reforms. It can only issue advisories to the States to bring in the requisite reforms.  
1.4.2 The Committee was informed by the MHA that the report o f the Mooshahary 
Committee was forwarded to all the States/UTs to initiate  action on the 49 recommendations 
made therein. MHA from time to time also issued advisorie s/reminders to the States/UTs to 
implement the recommendations and to furnish the status thereof.  
 1.4.3 As per the information provided by the Ministry, 24 Stat es/UTs have provided the 
status of implementation of these recommendations. 12 States/UT  i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Hary ana, Jharkhand, 
Lakshadweep, Odisha, Rajasthan, Puducherry, Ladakh and West Bengal ha ve not provided 
any information despite reminders. The status on implementation of the 49 Recommendations 
of Review Committee headed by Shri R.S. Mooshahary by the various St ates/UTs have been 
placed at Annexure-II of the report. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4.4 The Committee notes that 12 States/UTs have not furnished any inf ormation on 
the implementation of the 49 Recommendations of the Mooshahary Commi ttee, despite 
advisories/reminders from MHA. The Committee recommends that MH A may take up 
with these States/UTs to furnish their status within a time frame. The Committee 
desires to be apprised about the status of implementation of these recommendations in 
all States/UTs. 
 
1.4.5 The Committee was also informed by the MHA that the draft  Model Police Act was 
forwarded to States for consideration and appropriate action on 31 st October, 2006. As per 
information available, so far 17 States/UTs, viz. Assam, B ihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Meghalaya, Mizoram , Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Sikkim, Tamilnadu, Telangana, Tripura & Uttarakhand have either enacte d the Police Act or 
amended the existing Act.  
 
1.4.6 The MHA further informed that to encourage and incentivize St ates for reforming 
their policing system, the annual assessment of the best police st ations scheme was 
undertaken to identify and recognize the ten best police stations of  the country and also the 
best police station in a particular State or Union Territory.  Out of 16,671 police stations all 
over the country, short-listing was done on the basis of data uploaded on CCTNS in the 
following manner:- 
a)  3 from the States having 750+ police station 
b) 2 from all other States and NCT of Delhi 
c) 1 from each Union Territory 
 
1.4.7 The police stations were evaluated on the basis of data of c rime against women, 
SCs/STs, property offenses, missing persons and unidentified found persons  and unidentified 

7 
 
dead bodies.  An on-ground survey of the shortlisted 75 police stations was  conducted for the 
year 2020.  The criteria for choosing the best police stations in the c ountry was primarily on 
the basis of their performance in crime prevention, investigation  and disposal of cases, crime 
detection, community policing and maintenance of law and order. The infrastructure of police 
stations and citizens' feedback are also taken into account for this purpose.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4.8 The Committee appreciates the initiative of ranking of police stati ons in the 
country. The Committee believes that the annual ranking of police stati ons work as a 
constant guide for improvements. It also provides a picture of th e state of physical 
infrastructure, resources and deficiencies at the level of police stations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the MHA may incentivize the best poli ce stations in terms 
of funds and resources. It will recognize their hard work an d create an environment of 
healthy competition among all police stations in the country.  
 
***** 

8 
 
CHAPTER II 
Police Training 
2.1.1 Police officers of all ranks require training at various st ages of their careers. For a 
long time, police training was based purely on drills. However, as  the profession became 
complex, the time and effort spent on training increased. A good, well-organized training 
program determines an organization's efficiency and morale. Traini ng allows a person to 
improve their existing skills while also learning new ones tha t will benefit them in 
performing their duties in different challenging situations. It should f ocus not only on 
harnessing as well as the development of an individual's intellec tual and behavioral abilities 
with positive attitudes but also on his effective responses in d ifferent situations. In recent 
years, the importance of training police officers has been emphasi zed on inculcating attitudes 
that are appropriate to their profession.  
2.1.2 In recent times, people's political consciousness is rapidly inc reasing, as are their 
expectations. Our society's accelerating rate of change has in creased the complexity and 
variety of the tasks and responsibilities undertaken by police office rs. The technological 
explosion and faster mode of communication have transformed lifes tyle with increased life 
expectancy, resulting in socio-economic adjustment issues. In this  context, the training could 
be a vehicle for change. It has the potential to alter both t he personnel trained and those who 
come into contact with him. When people go through a training pro cess, their attitudes 
certainly change, and when they return to the field, their ac tions influence the behavior of 
others. 
2.1.3 Therefore, the aim of the training programs is to inculcate activ e cognitive attitudes in 
trainees toward their work and the people with whom they come into c ontact in the course of 
their duties. It seeks to strengthen a sense of involvement and  participation at all levels to 
address society's growing challenges more effectively. 
 
2.2 Training Mandate of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
 
2.2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs has a facilitating role and carries out certain training 
activities, which are being executed through three premier Instit utions namely the Bureau of 
Police Research & Development (BPR&D), Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel  National Police 
Academy, Hyderabad (SVPNPA), and North-Eastern Police Academy, Meghalaya (NEPA). 
As informed by the Ministry, the mandate, activities performe d and initiatives taken by these 
Institutions are as under:- 
 
(i) Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D)
 
 
2.2.2 The Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) was s et up on 28 th August, 
1970 to identify the need and problems of police in the country. Its Tra ining Division 
formulates policies on the training of police personnel of all genres  - conducting, sponsoring 
and coordinating capacity building activities, identifying training nee ds, designing 
strategies, and mentoring the subsidiary units of the Bureau, including th e 5 
Central Detective Training Institutions (CDTIs) at Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Kolkata, Jaipur & 
Ghaziabad, and the Central Academy for Police Training (CAPT), Bhopal.   
 

9 
 
2.2.3 The Training Division caters to the civil police in Sta tes and UTs, identifying with the 
common objective of a more knowledgeable and better-sensitized police force. Its efforts find 
resonance not just in flagging regional training needs, but with nationa l perspective at their 
core. It allows a happy mix of sharing and cross mingling of experiences and learnings, from 
across the country. The Training Division has facilitated capac ity building across police 
entities, both at the Centre as well as in the States and the UTs. In the last 5 years alone, it has 
helped in organising training of nearly 55,000 police officers. Furthermore,  over 3,000 police 
officers from friendly countries across the world have been trained. Th e Division has brought 
multiple capacity-building platforms, including vertical intera ction courses and management 
development programmes at various prestigious institutions, within eas y reach of police 
officers. Training themes at these events have ranged from issues  pertaining to national 
security and artificial intelligence, communication strategies  for leaders, social media 
analytics, and the art of negotiating under stress.  
2.2.4 The Training Division has trained nearly 17,000 police personnel und er the 
Developing Specialist Investigators (DSI) scheme, out of which, 158  achievers were sent 
abroad for advanced training in countries such as France, Canada and S ingapore. Apart from 
various other courses being run by the CDTIs and the CAPT, BPR& D in collaboration with 
Advanced Data Processing Research Institute (ADRIN) is conducting courses on geospatial 
which are being organized under the aegis of the ISRO. It will be a  significant 
improvement over traditional crime mapping and operations planning. 
 
(ii) Sardar Vallabhbahi Patel National Police Academy [SVPNPA] Hyderabad 
 
 
2.2.5 SVPNPA is the premier police training institution in the country. It has world-class 
police training facilities. It is mandated with the task of pre paring leaders for the Indian 
Police through training of newly recruited IPS officers and senior officers, and to be the 
Centre of research for studies on police subjects. 
 
2.2.6 The curriculum of the Academy covers the investigation and ba sic policing, latest 
trends in cyber world, financial and cross-border crimes, application of t echnology in the 
investigation, use of Crime and Criminal Tracking Network & Sys tems (CCTNS) and Inter-
operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS). The outdoor Training focuses on scientific training 
in outdoor activities –injury-free training, modular approach, benchmarks e valuation, training 
in tactical operations to combat insurgency and terrorism in various scenarios–cadre-specific 
inputs. Apart from these, trainings are imparted to IPS probationers on laws and legal studies, 
cadre language and cadre studies, attitudinal training with a foc us on holistic personality 
development of the officers to face the challenges of the fiel d and to stay on the right path, 
etc. 
 
2.2.7 Besides the basic course training to the new recruits to IPS, the academy also 
conducts mid-career training programmes for the senior IPS officers and Induction training 
course for the State Police Service (SPS)  officers who were conferred IPS. Training 
programmes for senior police officers cover the following topics namel y cyber crime and 
cyber security, seminar on national security, tactics for operat ions, speedy trial, co-ordination 
among agencies of the criminal justice system, traffic manage ment and road safety, women 
and children's safety, economic offenses and training of trainers for state  police academy 
faculty. 
2.2.8 To equip officers with skills and knowledge to handle internal s ecurity challenges viz. 
terrorism, left-wing extremism and insurgency, special tactics  wing of the academy conducts 
various courses like course on tactics, course on counter-terrorism, training of trainers course 

10 
 
on tactics, management of tactical operations, course on urban operati ons, course on 
explosives, improvised explosive devices & post-blast procedures and c ourse on simulated 
firearm system. A total of 5463 officers were trained in 171 courses during the last five years. 
This data is inclusive of training conducted by Special Tactics  Wing on Field Craft and 
Tactics.  
  
2.2.9 To meet the rapidly evolving challenges before police leaders hip and to address the 
training needs, in 2020, SVP National Police Academy has conducted  the first-ever 
nationwide Training Needs Analysis (TNA) on the training requirements of IPS officers to 
meet the current field challenges. 
 
2.2.10  The new initiatives undertaken by the Academy for improvem ent in police training to 
meet the challenges in policing include Virtual Training Wing,  the proposal for the 
establishment of National Centre for Tactics, police training n et for pooling training 
resources of all police training institutes and upgradation and dig itization of the Academy 
library. 
 
(iii) North-Eastern Police Academy [NEPA]
 
 
 2.2.11  North Eastern Police Academy, located in Meghalaya, is  a premier Police training 
institution, under the Ministry of Home Affairs. It is mandated to train the police personnel of 
North-Eastern States in particular and also personnel from across the country in general. 
NEPA has rendered excellent service in bringing cohesiveness, profess ionalism, co-operation 
and uniformity among the State police forces of the Region.  Since  its inception in 1978, the 
Academy has made noteworthy progress in the training of officers o f Police Departments, 
Army, Air Force, the Judiciary, Prisons, Home Guards & Civil De fence, CAPF, Customs & 
Excise, etc.   
 
 2.2.12  NEPA conducts basic courses, short-term in-service courses, workshops /seminars/ 
webinars.   Amongst these, the basic course is essentially knowledge -centered and the 
professional programmes are fundamentally skill-oriented. 
  
 2.2.13  The Academy also designs and conducts short-term speciali zed courses, workshops, 
seminars and webinars on contemporary and relevant issues for in-serv ice police officers of 
all the States, CAPF and other organizations to enhance their skills and knowledge. The 
academy has also started training officers from the neighbouring c ountries - Bangladesh and 
Myanmar since 2015.   To build up the capacity of police officers  in dealing with cyber 
crime, various courses on cyber-crime and cyber forensic are conducted w hich include, 
mobile forensics, cyber crime investigation for police officers und er Cyber Crime Prevention 
against Women and Children (CCPWC) Scheme among others.   
 
 2.2.14  In an effort to modernize policing, the training schedule of NEPA  is designed to 
emphasize more on the practical side. Regular inputs vis-à-vis evolving trends are included in 
the curriculum and imparted through permanent faculty and other seni or and experienced 
faculty from all over the country. From time to time, the syll abi are also reviewed to meet the 
changing requirements. 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.2.15  From the information provided by the Ministry, the Committee under stands 
that among the above-mentioned three Institutes, BPR&D occupies a ke y position, as it 
plays a vital role in the field of research. The Committee rec ommends that the BPR&D 
must make regular assessments of the need for more training institutes in the country so 
that the MHA can advise States to increase their training capacity ad equately, to train 
all their police personnel for making them more professionally efficient.  
2.2.16  The Committee takes note of the various initiatives undertaken by the Training 
Division of BPR&D. While the Institute undertakes research for the requirements of the 
police, the need to analyze the source, pattern, social base and reasons for the crimes is 
also highly essential. Hence, the Committee recommends that the MHA  may entrust 
upon the BPR&D, the responsibility of making such assessments as well so that it will 
help the BPR&D in taking suitable steps while formulating the training programmes 
for the personnel. This will help in dealing with the evolving trends of crime. 
2.2.17 The Committee observed that the BPR&D’s ‘Data on Police Organizations’ is  
released with a lag of one/more than a year. As of now, data pertaining to the year 2019 
are available vide its publication date marked as  1st January, 2020. The Committee feels 
that in the  digital age and faster mode of communication, compilation  of data should 
not be a time-consuming process. The Committee recommends that the MHA may take 
up with BPR&D to fast track the compilation of Data on Police Organ ization and 
endeavour to reduce the time lag to 6 months in place of 1 y ear so that the reports 
released by the BPR&D could be of relevant use. 
2.2.18  The Committee appreciates the Training Needs Analysis (TNA) of the  SVPNPA 
to take feedback from DGPs, ex-DGP, etc., to improve the training curriculum. 
However, the Committee also notes with concern the corruption comp laints against 
some IPS Officers. The Committee, therefore, recommends tha t the faculty members of 
the SVPNPA should chalk out a programme during the lean period  of their training 
calendar, to visit the Districts  to assess the performance of the probationary officers 
(POs) at the ground level. In view of the Committee, this would p rovide a practical 
assessment of the shortcomings and lacunae which could be elim inated through further 
improvement in the training modules. 
2.2.19  With regard to the training syllabi of the Academies, the Committe e is of the 
firm opinion that the training syllabus should be dynamic and in sync with the changing 
need and times. A static syllabus will only make the entire t raining process redundant 
and a mere formality. The Committee notes that SVPNPA and NEPA do review the 
content of the training curriculum from time to time. However, the Co mmittee 
recommends that a mechanism may be developed to review and update  the training 
curriculum biennially/ triennially based on the professional r equirement and ground-
level assessment of the POs.  
2.2.20 The Committee is of the view that the pysche of criminal minds  has undergone a 
sea change, with the evolution of modern technology. Cases of newer ways  of using 
technology for committing crimes particularly, financial frauds are  rising day by day. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the training institutions lik e SVPNPA and 
NEPA may take up with States training academies to conduct training/ sensitization 
programmes on artificial intelligence, robotics, drone technology, for ensic and ballistic 

12 
 
sciences, so that police personnel become adept in the detec tion, investigation and 
prevention of such crimes in a professional way. 
2.3 Training at State Level 
2.3.1 The police training institutes at Central level imparts t raining to the senior police 
officers of the Centre and States. However, the State-level tra ining institutes have an 
objective of providing training to the lower and mid-level officers like Deputy Superintendent 
of Police, SHO, SI, ASI, constables, etc. 
2.3.2 The Committee was informed by the State Governments that  their training system is 
aimed to develop professional competencies to inculcate knowled ge, desired skills, 
appropriate attitude and values to achieve highest standards of s ervice orientation, 
professionalism, performance and accountability. In addition to improving the ir professional 
competence, training of police personnel is also aimed at developing  their overall personality 
and also nurturing human values which helps in meeting the changing  expectations of the 
public. This is achieved by integrating courses like human rights a nd policing, gender 
sensitization, etc into the curricula. The trainees are made  aware of current issues of 
State/National/International importance which help them to unde rstand the socio-cultural and 
political equations of the society thus ensuring effective service delivery to people.  
2.3.3 The basic training of the State police forces broadly covers:- 
 
1. Basic (Induction) training of direct recruits immediately after recruitment. 
2. Post-promotional training for newly promoted officers. 
3. Training linked to promotion/ pre-promotional training of ORs (Havildar). 
4. Basic police training for direct recruits of technical cadres. 
5. Refreshers and in-service training courses. 
6. Subject-specific courses. 
7. Training on weaponry. 
8. Anti-extremist training courses. 
9. Training of trainers courses. 
10. Capacity building of constabulary through continuous training at the district level. 
 
2.3.4 Apart from above, seminars/workshops and training programmes on specif ic subjects 
are conducted for the police personnel, in collaboration with Central  Government agencies, 
like SVPNPA, Hyderabad, Bureau of Police Research & Developmen t (BPR&D), CAPT, 
Bhopal, Lok Nayak Jayaprakash National Institute of Criminology & F orensic Science 
(LNJN NICFS), New Delhi, etc. 
2.3.5 According to BPR&D’s ‘Data on Police Organizations’, 2020’, the re are 203 police 
training institutes in the country as on 1 st January, 2020. The list of State/UT-wise training 
institutes  is placed at Annexure III.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3.6 From the information provided by the States, the Committee understands  that 
the States have their own training institutes that are imparting traini ng to the State 
police personnel. The Committee also notes that as on 1 st January, 2020, there are 203 
police training institutes in the country. The Committee recom mends that the MHA 
may take up with States/UTs to scale up the training capacity of all  training institutions 

13 
 
in the country to enhance their infrastructure with virtual clas srooms, cyber labs and 
also to develop a few training centres as 'Centre of Excellence' for certain specific 
subjects relating to the police system. This will also facili tate training opportunities to 
the maximum number of police personnel in the States. The MHA m ay also allocate 
adequate funds and resources for the same. The Committee also  recommends that the 
MHA may advise States/UTs to create training facilities at the di strict level for 
annual/periodic refresher training of police personnel. 
 
2.4 Linkage with Universities 
2.4.1 The Committee, during the course of deliberations on the subjec t, sought to know 
about the steps taken to connect a cluster of police stations with  the local university, college 
and scholars so that the process of policing is reformed in tune wit h the changing 
social/political/economic requirements of the society/State. Th e Committee felt that this 
aspect leaves a great deal to be desired. The Committee i s of the opinion that it is important 
for police to understand the social, cultural, legal, political, e conomic and technological 
changes happening in the society. This can be done with the reg ular interaction of the law 
enforcement agencies with the intelligentsia.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.2 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States to link a cl uster of 
police stations to a particular university or a college.  This w ill lead to a collaboration 
with the scholars, particularly in the departments of sociology, philosophy, political 
science to develop soft skills and bring a behavioral change i n the police personnel. 
Further, the academicians and scholars who are specialists on ge nder and criminal 
issues should be invited to be a part of the training syllabus. 
2.5 Police University 
 
2.5.1 The Committee has been given to understand by the BPR&D's ' Data on Police 
Organizations', 2020, that there is only one police university in  India which is the Sardar 
Patel University of Police Security and Criminal Justice set up  at Jodhpur by the State 
Government of Rajasthan. However, as per information available on the  internet, it is 
gathered that some more States have also established/are in the  process of establishing Police 
Universities. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5.2 The Committee notes that the Sardar Patel University of Po lice Security and 
Criminal Justice at Jodhpur, Rajasthan is the only University of its kind with a focus on 
teaching and research in the field of Police, Criminal Justic e, Social Sciences, Public 
Safety and Security and other related fields. The Committee laud s the endeavor of the 
Rajasthan Government in this regard. The Committee, recommend s that the MHA 
may take up with the State Governments to open more pol ice universities in their 
respective States, or more than one State could team up to open su ch a University in a 
region. These universities can then take up research on regional  issues related to crime, 
criminal justice, public safety and security which would be nefit the police in addressing 
the issues in a more comprehensive manner.  
2.6 The Behavior of Police Personnel 

14 
 
2.6.1 The Committee raised its concern about the need for training to  the police personnel 
to change their attitude and behavior towards the common man. The Committee also took 
note that even people’s representatives are not treated properly inspi te of their being very 
high in the order of the Warrant of Precedence. Some Members of Parliam ent also 
complained and shared their personal experience about the incourteous  behavior of police 
officers even at the senior level. The MHA replied that the Sard ar Vallabhbhai Patel National 
Police Academy (SVPNPA) aims to impart to the IPS Probationers th ese very critical 
attitudes. Amongst the three main components of training – knowledge, skill and attitudes, it 
is the attitudes that are the foundation or bedrock upon which the  superstructure of 
knowledge and skills are to be built. The objective is to mol d the trainees into professionally 
competent officers in every manner and to shape them into comple te personalities possessing 
the attitudes for contributing service to society in a noteworthy manner.  
2.6.2 Besides, detailed and extensive Training Needs Analys is (TNA) has been carried out 
by the academy, after considering over 12,000 responses from different s takeholders 
including the common public, non-governmental departments and other non-poli ce 
functionaries on the training content and quality. 
2.6.3 These inputs received have been incorporated into the curricul um and the entire 
teaching content and methodology have been overhauled keeping in mind the requirements of 
the field policing. Experts from different fields, eminent persons w ith excellence in their 
areas are also called frequently to interact with the probat ioners and share their experience. 
This includes specialist speakers on gender issues, criminal investigation and trial as well. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6.4 The Committee is pleased to note that the experts on gender issu es, criminal 
investigation and trial, etc., are roped in to interact frequen tly with the police 
probationers and share their experiences. However, the Committee a lso notes with 
anguish that the public image of police throughout the country is mor e on a negative 
side. Police are often seen as insensitive towards the common  man and vulnerable 
sections. While there is no denying the fact that various reason s could be attributed to 
such behavior on the part of the Police, emphasis on right trai ning in this regard is one 
of the ways to develop such attributes in the Police Personnel. T he Committee is of the 
considered view that the shift from an entitlement-based appro ach to a rights-based 
approach is needed for positive change in attitudes of police personnel as well. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that training institutes should en sure that 
inculcating soft skills in Police Personnel must always be t he priority and focal point of 
their training modules. 
2.6.5 The Committee would like to emphasize that in a democratic coun try, people’s 
representatives have been accorded higher position vis-a-vis Government Officers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise all States/U Ts to sensitize 
Government officials of senior ranks to strictly adhere to the proto cols associated with 
the Warrant of Precedence while interacting with the MPs/MLAs. 
2.7 Training on Arrest and Interrogation Techniques 
2.7.1 Often, the police faces allegations regarding misuse a nd abuse of authority during the 
course of the investigation of crimes/incidents where the public are involved. The Committee  

15 
 
had desired to be enlightened about the procedure followed during the  arrest and 
interrogation techniques. The Committee also highlighted that wro ng application of the 
procedures/ techniques leads to improper filing of charge sheets and low conviction rate.  
2.7.2 The MHA informed the Committee, during deliberations,  that the  SVPNPA strives to 
build in awareness and respect for human rights, rights of the v ictims and the rights of the 
arrested persons through various curriculum, inputs of the Criminal Procedure Code , 
important Supreme Court judgments on the matter. Syllabus of subject s like investigation 
attitudes, ethics and human rights, also deals in detail with the powers and duties of police 
officers while and after effecting arrests, rights of arrestees, c onstitutional safeguards against 
arbitrary arrest, health and safety of arrested persons.  
2.7.3 Further, the Intelligence Bureau conducts the module on interrogation  in a 
comprehensive way, providing inputs on the latest techniques and t rends in interrogation 
across the world. They have also given an insight into the  kinesics interview method 
involving analyzing persons' behavior to assess deception. Under t he subject of forensic 
science, they also get exposure to various tools like narco-analysi s tests, brain mapping, 
polygraph or lie detector tests, etc. along with the use of the above techniques well within the 
purview of the law. Senior police officers of proven competence are also invited to share the 
case studies and experiences in scientific interrogation techniques.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.7.4 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to imp art 
adequate training to the police personnel on the procedure dur ing arrests. The training 
should also emphasize that the rights of the detainee are not violated  by resorting to 
manhandling during arrests. The police personnel should also  be trained to understand  
that their role is not just to arrest people but also to protect people and deter crime.  
2.7.5 The Committee is of the view that understanding and awareness of the laws is 
important for police because the laws keep on getting amended.  A s laws have an 
important role in the investigation and prosecution, therefore, it is p aramount that 
correct provisions of laws are applied while registering a case . This will help in 
improving the conviction rate. Therefore, the Committee recommends that SVPNPA, 
NEPA and State police academies should devise some training cu rriculum so as to 
periodically update police personnel on the changes in laws and amendments thereto. 
The academies may also collaborate with law universities/colleg es to disseminate legal 
knowledge and processes among police personnel, so as to avoid procedural lapses.  
2.7.6 The Committee also recommends that the MHA may advise States to se nsitize 
the investigating officers to use relevant provisions under the p enal laws while 
registering a case and precautions be taken during trial to secure conviction.  
2.8 Training for Handling of Crimes in Tribal Areas  
2.8.1 The Committee voiced its concerns about the interaction and ha ndling of crimes in 
tribal areas by the State police forces. The Committee opines  that a tribal accused should be 
treated in a tactical way honoring their customs and traditions . Therefore, remodeling, 
restructuring and reorienting of the syllabus of training should be based on loc al customs and 
traditions of the residents of the area as the handling of the tri bals by the police sometimes 
creates a reaction and also encourages radical groups in the society.  

16 
 
2.8.2 On queries made by the Committee about  the steps taken by the State police of 
various States to deal with tribal people, the State Governme nt of Rajasthan informed that to 
handle violent activities in the tribal area and to train police  personnel posted in the tribal 
belt, the State has established Jungle and Field Craft Traini ng Institute at PTS Kherwara, in 
the district of Udaipur. Recently, the first course of 6 weeks duration was organized and 36 
police personnel were trained. A special budget has been provided to hire the experts from 
time to time to educate police personnel to deal with the m ob psychology that includes 
dealing with tribals and other unruly masses. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.8.3 The Committee believes that a separate training module is need ed for the police 
personnel to tackle crimes in tribal areas. The Committee r ecommends that the 
SVPNPA and NEPA may collaborate with State training institutes to in clude the study 
of the cultural gap among the tribes, and include their aspirations  and tradition as a 
part of the training curriculum of the police personnel.  The  training manual of the 
States may also be suitably amended so that the police officers are made aware of local 
traditions and customs particularly of the tribals and other vulnerable groups.  
2.8.4 The Committee also recommends that police personnel posted in th e tribal belt 
should have regular interaction with the tribal leaders, NGO act ivists, non-State 
representatives like the lawyers, university professors along w ith scholars having 
specialization on tribal issues for better handling of the crimes in tribal areas. 
2.9 Training to deal with Cyber Crime 
 
2.9.1 With the advancement of technology, cyber crimes have emerge d as a major issue all 
across the globe. The cyber crimes transcend geographical boundaries whi ch makes it tough 
to track criminals. The Committee expressed its deep conce rns over the rising trend of cyber 
crimes in the country. It felt that on this issue, both the  Central and State Governments need 
to get together on the same boat, to tackle the growing men ace of cyber crime. The 
Committee observed that traditional training of the police pers onnel is not sufficient to deal 
with cyber crimes as these criminals are tech-savvy and are fol lowing new modus-operandi 
on a regular basis. Therefore, the Committee desired to know regarding the efforts made by 
the Central and State Governments to train the police personnel for handling cyber crimes.  
 
2.9.2 The Committee was informed by the MHA that to strengthen tra ining on the cyber 
crime investigation, a specialized centre of SVPNPA, namely  National Digital Crime 
Resource & Training Centre (NDCRTC), set up in 2015, provides trainin g in cyber crime 
investigation and cyber security to all law enforcement officers across the country. Some of 
the courses conducted by NDCRTC encompass the areas of disk forens ics, mobile forensics 
& call detail record analysis, windows forensics, internet-based crimes, network forensics, 
dark web, open-source intelligence, blockchain, social media analysi s and investigation of 
digital payment frauds.  NDCRTC has conducted over 290 physical courses and trained more 
than 8800 officers in the last five years from more than 24 organizations. 
 
2.9.3 During their presentation before the Committee, the State Go vernment of Punjab 
apprised the Committee that various training programmes on this aspect  have been organized 
in collaboration with NDCRTC on cyber security awareness, cyber-cri me investigation, 

17 
 
malware and network forensics, open-source intelligence and social media analysis, advanced 
digital forensics, etc.  
2.9.4 The State Government of West Bengal informed the Committee  that sessions (online 
and offline) on cyber laws were held by in-house, guest faculties an d experts. Further, 
training was given to update the knowledge base of cyber crime laws and investigation. 
2.9.5 However, the representatives of the State Government of Odisha  informed the 
Committee that cyber crime is an emerging area.  Most Stat e police have a very modest 
presence and also modest training capacity. The Government of Ind ia has taken some 
initiative but, it needs to be scaled up substantially.  The N ational Police Academy has the 
capacity to train around 200 officers at most in a year.  CD TI and the BPR&D have another 
modest initiative, mainly for ranks of sub-inspectors and inspectors.  Recently NCRB has 
started another modest initiative of online training but it nee ds to be substantially  scaled up.  
The Government of India has to offer more training on the cyber crime front .  Besides, as of 
today, there are 4 cyber crime police stations in Odisha and wi ll be expanded soon.  The 
capacity of most of the States is also modest.  The State s need help from the Government of 
India not necessarily in terms of funds but also in the form of training , equipment and 
standardization.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.9.6 The Committee expresses its concern on the increasing rate of cybe r crimes in 
the country. As per the NCRB data, cyber crime cases have increase d from 27248 in 
2018 to 50035 in 2020. The Committee observes that these crimes are mainly related to 
financial transactions. The criminals not only target the inn ocent and vulnerable, 
especially elderly people, and dupe them of their savings but also well-known persons 
and celebrities. The Committee is of the view that specialized tr aining is required to 
deal with the increasing cyber crimes in the country. The Committee recommends that 
the SVPNPA, NEPA should coordinate with State training academies to train police 
personnel with requisite knowledge of cyber laws, cyber crime  investigation, digital 
forensics and upgrade them from time to time on new technological tool s to deal with 
cyber crimes. The training academies may be advised to recrui t cyber experts as 
trainers on cyber technologies. 
2.9.7 The Committee understands that the States are facing constraints of manp ower 
and resources in managing cyber crime investigations. It recommen ds that the MHA 
should consider creating volunteer help groups of IT Experts from civil society who can 
contribute in devising methods to track cyber thieves and bringing them to justice. The 
State/UT police should create a cyber crime help desk for i mmediate reporting of the 
cyber crimes leading to an early investigation by them. Timely inte rvention could lead 
to the prevention of such crimes as well as relief to the victims. 
2.9.8 The Committee, hence, recommends that the MHA may allocate adequate funds 
and extend necessary resources for the establishment of cyber  training labs and 
strengthening/upgrading of existing cyber training infrastructure in all the States/UTs. 
 
2.10 Online Training 
2.10.1  Online medium of training has emerged as an alternative to traditional offline/ 
physical mode of learning with the development of information and c ommunication 
technology. The need for physical distancing in the aftermath of the COVID-19 outbreak has 

18 
 
made online learning the need of the hour. Although online training of the police officials 
may not be a substitute for their field training, it can ensur e continuity of learning of police 
personnel all across the country without going to the training academie s. It can also facilitate 
an easy and smooth flow of knowledge and exchange of ideas. Many of the States have 
opined that the online system of training could be of use to them for imparting training to the 
police personnel. In this regard, the Committee sought to know about the  initiatives of the 
Central and State police training academies to impart online training to the police personnel. 
2.10.2  On a query from the Committee during the course of the meeting, t he representatives 
of SVPNPA informed that the Institute has ventured into E-Learning  by creation of 63 hours 
of online training content in four regional languages and law. The Ac ademy is a partner 
institution with DoPT in the prestigious program "iGOT-Karmayogi " of the Government of 
India. It has submitted a proposal for the creation of a "virtual trai ning wing". This wing will 
be responsible for the creation of e-learning content on professional pol icing topics so that 
training can be done by IPS officers from anywhere in the country as per their convenience. 
2.10.3  The representatives of the State Government of Odisha informed  that the online 
training in police organizations is very modest in the country. It is necessary that some capital 
investment is done in this area and the Government of India should take the leadership to 
create proper infrastructure and standards for online training which would be cost-effective in 
the long run. Therefore,  the Government of India should start a substan tial scheme to fund 
online training initiatives within police organizations. The MHA, in its reply to a query raised 
by the Members of the Committee, informed the Committee that under the scheme of 
‘Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police’, the State pol ice forces may procure the 
equipment required for online training initiatives. As such, a sepa rate scheme for this purpose 
may not be required.    
Recommendation/Observation 
2.10.4  The Committee gathers that online training infrastructure in police 
organizations/training institutes is not well developed across the country. The 
Committee notes that often, the personnel are not spared by the conc erned offices due 
to shortage of manpower. Increasing the online training programmes w ould reduce the 
requirement of relieving officials from active duty for trainin g purposes. This will 
ensure that the officials identified for training do not miss  out on their trainings. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may allocate a designa ted amount 
under their grants to the States and also extend necessary re sources to them for 
developing a robust online training infrastructure, which wil l considerably lower the 
cost of delivery of training to the police personnel in the lon g run. The Centre could 
encourage the States by providing certain incentives for their online training initiatives. 
2.10.5  The Committee also recommends that the national and State police academ ies 
should collaborate and share best practices with each other throu gh online interactions. 
Such an initiative would give scope for the different State police  to understand and 
acquire experience and skillsets through experience sharing.  
2.11 Creation of Dedicated Reserve Training Pool 
2.11.1  Police personnel in every State are on active duty. Withdra wing an official for the 
purpose of training from a point of active duty would lead to a shortfal l in the number of 
active staff required for duty particularly in view of the fact tha t there is a large number of 
vacancies in the police force. Therefore, most often, the officia ls who are chosen for training 

19 
 
are not relieved by the duty official on account of shortages of staff. Keeping this in view, the 
Committee had desired to know from the States as to whether they keep any reserve pool for 
replacing the personnel who are chosen for the purpose of training so as t o mitigate the 
shortfall in personnel on active duty. 
 
2.11.2  The Committee was informed by the State Government of Rajas than that as of now 
there is no proposal for creating such a pool. The Committee was furt her informed that the 
Director-General of Police has directed from time to time to s end the trainees to the training 
course as per nominations, exceptions are made in the most urgent s ituations only. Apart 
from this District Training Centres (DTC) have been started in  all districts where the trained 
persons would impart training to all the police personnel of the di strict. They would act as a 
force multiplier. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.11.3  The Committee observes that most of the time, police stations are unde rstaffed, 
and when the officials are summoned for training, they don’t get rel ieved on time. As a 
result, if the training slot is for 100 constables, only 50 to 60 pe rcent of the constables 
are allowed to take training. Therefore, the Committee recommends that MHA may 
advise States/UTs for creation of a reserved training pool at the D istrict level so that if 
training is proposed to be given to 100 constables, then those chose n for training could 
be replaced with reserve constables from the training pool c reated for the purpose and 
there is no hesitancy on the part of the higher police offic ers in sending the personnel 
for training. 
2.12  Training on Weaponry 
2.12.1 During the deliberations on the subject, the Committee ob served that due to lack of 
appropriate training, the police personnel are not able to use the weapons properly. Therefore, 
there is a need for adequate training and firing practices to the  police personnel on the latest 
weaponry which is being used by them. The Committee also observe d that the training of 
police personnel on ballistics and prohibited and non-prohibited weapons should be imparted. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.12.2 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise the State training  
academies to impart proper training to the police personnel on the  use of the weapons 
given to them. The training should cover the use of ballistics, p rohibited and non-
prohibited weapons. 
2.13 Common Training Module 
 
2.13.1  The Committee opines that the training courses of the polic e personnel should be 
more reflective of real-world cases and incidents. There is also a  need of standardizing the 
curriculum all across the country, keeping in mind the different roles and skillsets required 
for the police personnel at different ranks. Therefore, the Committee  discussed about the 
steps taken by the MHA to create a common training module for all States.  
 
2.13.2  The MHA, in its reply, informed the Committee that a proposa l has been mooted to 
the BPR&D for establishment of a police training net wherein th e resources available with 

20 
 
State Police Academies and central police training institutions will be pooled in and shared to 
bring in synergy and collaboration.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.13.3  The Committee notes that a proposal has been mooted to the BPR&D f or 
establishment of a police training net to share the resources o f Central and State police 
academies. The Committee recommends that a common training module may be 
prepared by BPR&D and shared among the States/UTs. This will cr eate a common 
minimum standard of police training in the country.  Common online library resources 
of Central and State police training academies may also be created to ma ke them 
available all over the country. 
2.13.4  The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with the States/UTs 
for the creation of an institutional framework for sharing of resour ces and best 
practices for police training amongst the States. The mapping of training facilities 
available in different States should be done so that a State in need can use training 
facilities wherever surplus is noticed. 
 
2.14 Training To Meet Specific Challenges 
 
2.14.1  India is a vast country. Apart from the common crimes, each State  has certain specific 
threats and challenges. While some States are facing threats re lated to naxalism, some others 
are facing challenges from infiltration, terrorism, organized crimes, dru g and human 
trafficking. In this context, the Committee deliberated upon the steps taken by the Centre and 
States training institutes to cater to the need of specialized  trainings to deal with the State-
specific challenges. 
 
2.14.2  The Committee was informed by the MHA that SVPNPA, Hyde rabad has taken 
several steps for need-based State-specific training and Modernisat ion to face specific 
challenges at the State level. In order to equip officers with  skills and knowledge to handle 
the internal security challenges in the country, the Academy has got  a special centre called 
Special Tactics Wing. The Special Tactics Wing conducts co urses on terrorism, left-wing 
extremism, insurgency, management of tactical operations, urban opera tions, and post-blast 
investigation procedures, etc. The Special Tactics Wing has trained 4043 officers of State and 
Central Police Organisations (CPOs) since its inception in 2009 in the academy.  
2.14.3  The Committee was informed by the State Government of Odi sha that 
mandatory 
anti-extremist tactics training courses are organized for the rank o f constable to IPS Officers 
at direct entry-level. To handle the challenges of naxalism,  induction & refreshers training 
programme are organized for the special operations group commando and district police force 
dedicated to anti-naxal operations. Besides, induction/ refreshers'  course programme are 
conducted for special tactical unit commandos dedicated to  combating urban terrorism. To 
meet the challenges of Naxalism, a Special Operation Group Tra ining Centre, Bhubaneswar 
is imparting training to the police personnel of Maharashtra, Kerala and West Bengal State 
police.  
2.14.4   The Committee was apprised by the State Government of P unjab that a number of 
training programmes are organized to impart knowledge and skills to pol ice officers to 
investigate NDPS Act cases including detailed instructio ns for ensuring forfeiture of illegally 

21 
 
acquired property by drug smugglers, etc. Further, the training programmes  on the 
investigation of terror-related cases are organized at Punjab Police Academy and the same are 
being done in coordination with National Investigation Agency (NIA). Officers of NIA 
including their public prosecutors imparted training on the Unlawful  Activities (Prevention) 
Act, and shared their expertise on the subject with Punjab police officers.  
2.14.5   The State Government of West Bengal informed the Commit tee that to train the 
police personnel on naxalism/terrorism, trainees were sent to the  Counter Insurgency Force 
(CIF) attachment. Apart from the above, the State police academ y organizes online/offline 
training on the investigation of NDPS Act cases, safety of women , juvenile justice, organized 
crime, SC & ST Act, etc. 
 
2.14.6   The State Government of Arunachal Pradesh informed the Com mittee that police 
training centre, being a basic recruit training institute for consta bularies caters to the basic 
HR needs of APP (civil police) beside incorporation of  jungle tr aining, field crafts and 
tactics in the training syllabus. However, the police training ce ntre does not offer much in the 
given field area. It was further informed that as and when se ats are allotted from various 
institutes in an around the country for Counter Insurgency  Operations and relate d training, 
the personnel are trained. Regarding drug peddling, etc., various caps ule courses related to 
NDPS Acts are conducted on a regular basis. Being in the proxi mity of international border, 
APP has raised an STF Batallion for whom routine training on speciali zed courses under 
army and various CAPFs to cater to the pressing demands are conducted.  
2.14.7   During the course of deliberation on police training, different Stat es have submitted 
that apart from regular trainings, they have undertaken initiat ives to improve and strengthen 
the training of their police personnel. 
 
2.14.8  The Committee was informed by the State Government of G ujarat that besides 
serving police officers, faculty from National Forensic Sciences Un iversity (NFSU) and 
Rashtriya Raksha University (RRU) are also called as visiting faculty for specialized subjec ts 
and services of retired police officers and members of the judiciary a re also utilized for 
indoor lectures. 
 
2.14.9  The State Government of Haryana  apprised the Committee t hat it is making 
continuous efforts to address the changing needs and aspirations of its citizens . It is following 
the concept of Training Needs Analysis (TNA) where training is p rovided based on feedback 
from those who have already undertaken training or are undergoing training. It is making 
efforts to bring in competency-based capacity building.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.14.10 The Committee takes note of the different types of challenges that ar e 
faced by different States. It is of the opinion that none of the is sues viz naxalism, 
infiltration, terrorism, organized crimes, drug and human tra fficking, etc., have now 
remained State-specific. In fact, they have become regional, affecti ng two or more 
neighbouring States. To contain them, the CAPFs are also roped in by the Centre to aid 
the State police forces. The Committee observes that the Centr e should embark upon 
joint training programmes of both the CAPFs and State Police in order  to tackle these 
issues. The Committee, therefore, recommends that specific train ing centre should be 
opened in these areas where personnel of both the forces could undertake trainings. The 

22 
 
MHA may explore this arrangement at the earliest with funds dedi cated to establish 
such training institutions. 
 
2.14.11 While deliberating upon the internal-security challenges fac ed by the States 
sharing international borders, the Committee sought to know about the  degree of interaction 
and exchange of information between CAPFs and State police in  border areas. In response to 
this, few of the border States like Rajasthan and Punjab inform ed that there is no 
communication gap between the CAPFs and the State police for ces working in bordering 
areas. Regular meetings are held at the district level and senior level. Subsidiary Multi-
Agency Centre ( SMAC) meetings for better coordination and sharing of information/ inputs 
are also held on a regular basis between State police, CAP F, BSF and various other 
subsidiary agencies under the auspices of State Intelligence Bureau. 
Recommendation/Observation 
  
2.14.12 The Committee notes the reply of the State Governments of Rajasthan 
and Punjab that there is no communication gap between the CAPF and  the State police 
forces working in bordering areas and regular meetings are he ld at the district and 
senior level. The Committee opines that the people living in border areas are well versed 
with the terrain and other geographical conditions. Therefore, th ey can be of immense 
help in providing intelligence inputs and assist police and border guarding forces 
during emergencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MH A may advise 
State police forces and border-guarding CAPFs to train and liaison with people living in 
the border areas for gathering intelligence inputs so as to chec k drug trafficking, 
infiltration and illicit use of drones, etc. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER III 
POLICE MODERNISATION 
3.1.1 The evolution of society while being a continuous process has happen ed at an 
unprecedented rate in the twenty-first century, facilitated by fast-ev olving technology in all 
spheres of life. This has necessitated  for a modernized police force along the lines defined by 
various Commissions/Committees in its conception of the Modernis ation of State Police 
Forces Scheme by MHA. The foremost condition for Modernisation,  is the strong 
infrastructure: physical as well as technical. It also includes equi pping the police with the 
required mobility, modern weaponry, communication equipment, training gadgets  as well as 
forensic setup. Strengthening all these aspects of police functi oning will equip the State to 
tackle emerging issues of crime as well as law and order wit h the ultimate aim of being able  
to provide security as well as efficient service delivery to the citizens of the country. 
3.2 Scheme for Modernisation of State Police Forces 
3.2.1 The MHA informed the Committee that ‘Public order’ and ‘Police ’ fall under the 
State List.  However, the States have not been able to modern ize and equip their police forces 
up to the desired level due to financial constraints.  It i s in this context that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA) has been supplementing the efforts and resources of the States, from 
time to time, by implementing the Scheme for Modernisation of Sta te Police Forces (MPF 
Scheme) since 1969-70. It has been renamed as “Assistance to St ates for Modernisation of 
Police”, since 2017. 
 
3.2.2 The Ministry has informed that the objective of the scheme is to gradually reduce the 
dependence of the State Governments on the Army and the Central Arm ed Police Forces to 
control internal security and law and order situations by equippin g the State police forces 
adequately through the development of relevant infrastructure.  The focus of the scheme is to 
strengthen police infrastructure at cutting edge level by the construct ion of secure police 
stations, training centers, police housing (residential), equipping the police stations with the 
required mobility, modern technology, weaponry, communication equipment, forensic set-up, 
etc. 
 
3.3 Inter-State Distribution of Funds 
 
3.3.1 As per the guidelines on rationalization of Centrally Sponsored Sch emes conveyed by 
the NITI Aayog, the inter-State distribution of funds is made on t he basis of criteria that was 
evolved by a Committee chaired by the Home Secretary. The Comm ittee retained the criteria 
finalized by the Union Cabinet in the year 2005.These criteria include weightage of (i) 
population (35% weightage), (ii) sanctioned strength of police force (25%  weightage), (iii) 
number of police stations (15% weightage) and (iv) incidence of crime  per lakh population 
(25% weightage).   
 
3.4 Funding Pattern 
3.4.1 The States are grouped into two categories Group A and Group B, and financial 
assistance is provided by the Centre accordingly. The details of the areas are shown below:- 
 
 

24 
 
Table 3.1 
 
Category ‘A’ 8 North Eastern States including Sikkim, 
two Himalayan states, namely, Uttarakhand 
and Himachal Pradesh (from FY 2016-17)  
Jammu and Kashmir (till 2019-20) 
Eligible to receive financial assistance on 
90:10 Centre: State sharing basis 
Category ‘B’ remaining States  Eligible for financial assistance on 60:40 
Centre: State sharing basis. 
 
3.5 Components  
 
3.5.1 All the items of expenditure relating to Police are covered and a llowed based on the 
scrutiny of the High Powered Committee (HPC).   The list only  indicates the broad areas and 
the State Governments prepare projects keeping in mind their actual  requirements. The items 
to be funded by the Scheme are listed below:- 
 
A. Items Other than Construction
 
 
(i)     Mobility: Procurement of operationally required vehicles.  
(ii)    Weapons and ammunition only for practice/training. 
(iii)   Training aids/equipment required for imparting training to police    
                  personnel. 
  (iv)  All equipment required for police organizations including training equipment, 
forensic equipment for forensic science lab, communication equipme nt, 
surveillance equipment, traffic control equipment, software, equipme nt related 
to SMART policing.  
 
3.5.2 For the purposes of this scheme, vehicles such as tractors, vaj ra, prison vans, water 
tankers, shall be treated as equipment and HPC will allow such equipm ent as proposed by the 
States. 
3.5.3 The police stations that are to be constructed under the sc heme should have basic 
facilities such as a reception room, interrogation room, computer room, p lace to keep arms, 
wireless room, a restroom for personnel, toilet facilities, women c rèche.  The ultimate 
objective for the construction of police stations, police lines and out posts should be to 
improve police functioning and delivery of police services. 
3.5.4 The Ministry further informed that the State Governments are not authorized to use 
funds under MPF scheme for procurement of general equipment. 
 
B. Construction Works
 
 
(i) Construction of police infrastructure, i.e. police station buildi ngs, police outposts, 
police lines,  police housing- housing for lower subordinates (constables a nd 
head constables) and upper subordinates (ASI, SI and Inspectors). 
(ii) Construction of hi-tech forensic science laboratories. 
(iii) Construction of police training institutions. 
 
 
 

25 
 
3.6 Scheme for a Period of 3 years from 2017-18 to 2020-21 
3.6.1 The Ministry has stated that the erstwhile MPF Scheme, which was approved till 31 st 
March, 2017, has been continued for further 3 years from 2017-18 to 2019-20 a nd thereafter 
extended for the year 2020-21 as well. The MHA further informed that the  scheme has been 
further extended for the year 2021-22. 
3.7 Modification Made 
3.7.1 The scheme has been modified so as to facilitate targeted interventions. The items of 
‘mobility and ‘construction of police infrastructure including housing ’ are now allowed only 
to specific theatres viz. Jammu and Kashmir, insurgency affected North-Eastern States and 
LWE affected districts. Further, the items under 'mobility' head  would be used only for 
strengthening field-level police offices and not State-level police offices. 
 
 
3.8 Megacity Policing  
3.8.1 Approved plans of megacity policing for Hyderabad, Chennai, Mumbai, B engaluru, 
Kolkata and Ahmadabad, with the allocation of Rs.432.90 crore h ave been continued and 
funds for the remaining cities are being released. The Megacit y Policing (MCP) Plans of all 
the six cities (a sub-component of the MPF Scheme) have been approved and the entire funds 
for 5 cities except Mumbai have been released. 
 
3.9 Contingency Reserve 
3.9.1 While approving the continuation of the Scheme of Modernisation of State Police 
Forces (MPF Scheme) for five years from 2012-13 to 2016-17, the Governme nt also 
approved that "In order to meet emergent requirements and contingent needs  of States, there 
will be a reserve fund of 5% of the annual allocation of the Scheme . Allocations out of these 
funds shall be made over and above the annual allocations of the ne edy States after obtaining 
approval of the Home Secretary/Home Minister. Accordingly, 5% of the t otal allocation is 
released to the States as contingency reserve for various components of the Scheme. 
 
3.10 Preparation of State Action Plan 
 
3.10.1  State Action Plans (SAPs) are formulated by the State Govern ments as per their 
strategic priorities and requirements and as per the State Stra tegic Plan. State Governments 
submit SAPs under the MPF Scheme to MHA with the appraisal/ approval of the State Level 
Empowered Committee (SLEC). The High Powered Committee (HPC) finally approves the 
SAPs of the States. 
 
3.11 Conditions to be Fulfilled at the Time of the Release of Funds 
 
3.11.1   Utilization Certificates (UCs) in respect of funds released  during the previous year to 
the last financial year are required to be submitted by the State Governments.  
 
 
 

26 
 
3.12 Better Performance Incentives  
 
3.12.1   The allocations under the scheme lapse at the end of the year, if not released to the 
States.   Allocations are not carried forward. The States util izing the entire released funds till 
the assigned year are given 'better performance incentives' ou t of the pooled amount of the 
funds unreleased due to non-furnishing of UCs by other States.  
3.12.2   The Committee was informed by the MHA that under the umbr ella scheme of 
Modernisation of Police Forces, approved in September 2017, a component of “Incentives for 
Police Reforms” was included in the implementation structure of the scheme of “Assistance 
to States for Modernisation of Police".  It was decided to keep a  certain amount each year for 
awarding incentives to State Government for the implementation of police reforms.  To 
incentivize the implementation of police reforms as recommende d by various committees, 
originally a provision of keeping up to 10% of the total annual alloc ation of the scheme was 
made.  This incentive fund has been increased to up to 20% from the year 2019-20. 
3.12.3   The performance of States in implementing these reforms w as evaluated based on 
objective criteria.  For the year 2018-19, ten States, namely, (1) A ndhra Pradesh, (2) Gujarat, 
(3) Madhya Pradesh, (4) Odisha, (5) Punjab, (6) Rajasthan, (7) Tamil N adu, (8) Telangana, 
(9) Uttar Pradesh and (10) Uttarakhand were assessed to be  eligible for award of incentives 
and grants of Rs. 7.69 crore each to these States were releas ed. For the year, i.e. 2019-20, an 
amount of Rs. 158.26 crore has been earmarked for the award of incentives  for 
implementation of police reforms to the State Governments. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.12.4  The Committee appreciates the component of “incentives for p olice reforms” 
under the scheme of “Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police”.  The Committee 
notes that the incentive fund has been increased to up to 20% from the year 2019-20. 
The Committee however opines that the progress in police refor ms has been slow and 
hopes that the incentives given to better performing States for taki ng various measures 
on police reforms will encourage other States to fast-track the eff orts towards 
modernisation of their police. The Committee recommends that the MHA may put the 
information in public domain about the States that are leading and lagging in the 
modernisation process.  This will create a sense of competiti on and put pressure on the 
States lagging behind to perform better. The Committee also observe s that the issues 
behind the under-utilization of funds by the States also need to b e identified. Therefore, 
the Committee also recommends that the MHA should consider consti tuting a 
Committee which can visit the underperforming States and assist/ad vise/persuade them 
to utilize the funds in a planned manner; otherwise the situation in these states may take 
a long time to show improvements.   
3.13 Evaluation of Scheme of “Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police”  
3.13.1  Implementation of this sub-scheme for 3 years period from 2017-18 to 201 9-20 has 
been evaluated by NITI Aayog and the report was submitted in F ebruary, 2021. In the 
conclusion, the report stated that the scheme is highly relevant  as it has been aiding the 
capacity building and modernisation of police. Planning and impleme ntation were found 
robust and newly introduced measures like incentives based on perfo rmance and police 
reform measures and alignment to national priorities further strengt hened its relevance. The 
report, while recommending greater focus to be laid on overall scheme monitoring, also noted 
that positive impact was recorded in terms of reduction in respons e time, improved traffic 

27 
 
management, reduction in LWE incidents and preparedness for unforesee n incidents 
demanding immediate action. 
3.13.2  The Committee discussed the possibility of direct allocati on of modernisation 
funds to the police department. The MHA replied that in the ca se of Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSSs), the suggestion of direct release of funds to impl ementing agencies to avoid 
delays due to the involvement of the State Government has been  under discussion from time 
to time. However, the Government of India has approached the problem of delay in making 
the funds available to implementing agency (i.e., O/o. DGP in ca se of Assistance to States for 
Modernisation of Police (ASMP) scheme) along with issues relating to the monitoring of the 
schemes by introducing Public Financial Management System (PFMS).  
3.13.3   It is stated that a study of various reports of Parliamentary  Committees reveals that 
such release had been allowed in the schemes where Central G overnment provided 100% 
financial assistance. However, CSSs are formulated on subje cts under the State List to 
encourage States to prioritize in areas that require more atte ntion. Under CSS, presently 
States have to contribute 10% in the case of the North-Eastern and the  Himalayan States, and 
40% in the case of the remaining States. Therefore, the Central s hare is routed through State 
Government.  
 
3.14 Fresh Initiative  
3.14.1  From 1 st July, 2021, the following mechanism for the release of funds is being 
implemented:- 
“In the beginning of a financial year, the Ministries/Departments wi ll 
release not more than 25% of the amount earmarked for a State for the  CSS 
for the financial year. Additional Central share (not more than 25% at a time) 
will be released upon transfer of the stipulated State share to the Single 
Nodal Account of DGP offices in case of this scheme and utilizati on of at 
least 75% of the funds released earlier (both Central and State s hare) and 
compliance of the conditions of the previous sanction." Since the re leases 
under the scheme and monitoring would be done through Public Finance 
Monitoring System (PFMS), utilization of funds is expected to be m ore 
efficient”.  
3.14.2   The Committee desired to know whether there is a diversion of funds given to the 
State Government under 'Assistance to States for Modernisation of  Police'. The MHA 
informed that the scheme has a provision of flexibility in case of change of item proposed by 
State Government as per their strategic needs and requirement. For instance, in case of 
genuine requirement to change item(s) approved by HPC on account of obsolesc ence, 
availability of advanced equipment, etc., the process of modification of item(s) is as below:- 
➢ State Police Headquarter has to write to the Home Department , which, in turn, sends a 
proposal with approval of SLEC to MHA. 
➢ For modifications of up to 25% of the total size of the State A ction Plan (SAP), the 
concerned divisional Head in MHA can approve the proposal. 
➢ In case modification sought is above 25% of the total size of SAP , the concerned 
Division takes decision with the concurrence of the Internal Finance Division of MHA. 

28 
 
➢ The decision is conveyed to the concerned State Government by MHA. 
 
3.14.3  However, the instances of diversion of funds, if any, under 'Assi stance to States 
for Modernisation of Police' are scrutinized by the office of the Com ptroller and Auditor 
General of India and action is taken accordingly. 
3.14.4   The Committee sought to know about the reasons for delay i n the release of funds 
from Central Government to States. The MHA replied that the release of funds is  delayed 
due to pending utilization certificates from the States.  
3.14.5   Regarding the reasons for delay in spending of allocated funds b y the States, the 
MHA informed the Committee that funds released under the sch eme to the State Government 
and further to the State Police Directorate, remain unspent due to various reasons - i.e. lack of 
advance planning, delay in the release of funds, the contribution of m atching State share, 
tendering issues, contractual issues, etc. The State Government s are empowered to proceed 
against the officers concerned under relevant rules. The Government of India penalizes States 
with low utilization of funds by not releasing the funds to them w ithout utilizing the unspent 
balance or canceling the project for which the funds were released. 
3.14.6  The Committee interacted with the representatives of the  States as well on this issue. 
The representatives from the State Government of Madhya Pradesh re quested that once the 
State action plan is approved, the allocation for the year s hould be released. In response 
thereto, the MHA replied that Rule 232(v) of the General Financia l Rules, 2017 mandates, 
inter alia, that before releasing funds to the State Governments, it mu st be ensured that they 
have the capacity to actually spend the balance from the previo us year and releases are made 
during the current year. It is due to a substantial unspent balance wi th the State Governments, 
only an amount of Rs. 103.27 crores out of Rs. 770.76 crores was released during 2020-21. 
3.14.7   When asked about the timely release of modernisation grant s i.e. in the first and 
second quarter of the financial year, the MHA replied that unde r the scheme of ‘Assistance to 
States for Modernisation of Police’, modernisation grants were rele ased in all the quarters 
based on Utilisation Certificates (UCs) furnished by the Sta te Governments. For instance, 
during 2018-19 and 2019-20, substantial funds were also released during the first  and second 
quarters. 
3.14.8   The representative of the State Government of Punjab mentioned   that Central shares 
are not allocated for infrastructure and mobility.  But, Punjab, be ing a border State needs 
particular types of vehicles, etc., along with accommodations, which may again be considered 
by the Central Government. 
 
3.15 Assessment of Future Requirements of Modernisation 
 
3.15.1 The Committee opines that Modernisation is a continuous process and therefore, a lot 
needs to be done. There is also a need for the MPF scheme to fill /reduce gaps that exist 
today. In this context, the Committee enquired from the State Gov ernments about their 
assessment of the future requirements for Modernisation. The responses of some of the State 
Governments are enumerated below:- 
 
1. Law enforcement solution using big-data analytics. 
2. GIS-based command and control center for incident management, crime m apping and 
analysis using the GIS system. 

29 
 
3. Equipment like handheld metal detectors, door frame metal detectors,  night vision 
devices, searchlights, non-linear junction detectors, explosive d etector, under- vehicle 
search mirror, etc. 
4. Upgradation of Police communications to digital mode. 
5. Introduction of smart prosecution system in traffic. 
6. CCTV-based vehicle tracking and identification system for crime control. 
7. Installation and up-gradation of CCTV camera infrastructure. 
8. Extension of red light violation detection, automatic number plat e recognition and 
speed detection system. 
9. Extension of Safe City Project to all cities or towns exceeding  a population of 50,000 
for the installation of CCTV cameras. Safe cities should also have road engineering 
scientifically examined so as to reduce/ eliminate blind spots, dark corners (with 
lighting) and decrease the probability of accidents. 
10. Skill up-gradation and to establish social media lab, crime scene lab and cyber darknet 
analysis lab.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.15.2     The Committee notes that the modernisation grants given to States are 
lapsable and therefore, recommends that MHA may release the funds  to States in the 
first or second quarter so that the States have adequate time to sp end the funds. The 
MHA may also work out ways to remove administrative delays and bottlene cks that 
cause delays in the release of funds. 
3.15.3   The Committee further recommends that the MHA may take up wi th the 
Ministry of Finance to add some more States  having strategic internati onal borders in 
category-A so that additional funds under the MPF scheme are made available to them. 
The Ministry may also consider to re-include
 the items of ‘mobility and ‘construction of 
police infrastructure including housing’ under the ‘Assista nce to States for 
Modernisation of Police’ for all States/UTs. This will help in  increasing the number of 
vehicles for operational needs and also improving the housing s atisfaction level of police 
personnel.  
3.16 Standardization of Equipments, Weaponry, Vehicles, etc. 
3.16.1 Modernisation includes the upgradation of weapons, communications syst ems 
including wireless devices, latest technologies and development  of requisite infrastructures. 
The police should be equipped with state-of-the-art weapons, vehicles, communication 
devices, etc., for an effective investigation, management of law and order and other 
peripheral functions. Therefore, the Committee discussed the matt er during the course of 
deliberations on the subject.   
3.16.2   The MHA informed the Committee that as police is a Sta te subject as per the 
Constitution of India, it is primarily the duty of State Governments to modernize their police. 
The Government of India supplements the efforts of States by assis ting States.  The funds are 
provided under Assistance to States for the Modernisation of the Police Scheme. The States 
prepare an annual state action plan and are free to propose wea pons as per their strategic 
requirements. 
3.16.3   Moreover, the surplus weapons (including the rifles) held by CAPF s, are offered for 
transfer to the needy State Police Organizations (SPOs) on nominal prices fixed by MHA. 

30 
 
While identifying the weapons, the complete set of spares/maga zine/complete equipment 
schedule (CES) items/packing materials as provided by the origi nal equipment manufacturer 
as part of the consignment, if available, is released to the S POs. The complete details of such 
weapons and ammunition are forwarded to MHA by respective Force HQs for approval and 
to issue transfer instructions to needy SPOs. 
3.16.4   The Committee in its meeting held on 25th November, 2021, di scussed increasing 
the use of non-lethal weapons as compared to lethal weapons by the Sta te police forces. The 
Committee was informed by the representative of the State Gov ernment of West Bengal that 
a sufficient supply of non-lethal weapons is a problem due to the limited capacity of 
manufacturing within the country. Therefore, there is a need to increase the capacity of its 
manufacturing. 
3.16.5  Regarding availability of proper communication equipments and l ogistics support 
available with the police stations in the country, the Comm ittee notes that as per BPR&D’s 
report on ‘Data on Police Organizations’, as on 1 st January, 2020, the State-wise number of 
police stations that do not have vehicles, telephone, wireless/mobiles is as under:- 
Tables 3.2  
NUMBER OF POLICE STATIONS HAVING/NOT HAVING VEHICLES. TELEPHONES 
&WIRELESS/MMOBILES IN STATES/UTs 
AS ON 01.01.2020 
SI.NO. STATE/UTs TOTAL 
NUMBER 
OF 
ACTUAL 
POLICE 
STATION 
 
NUMBER OF POLICE STATIONS 
 
HAVING 
VEHICLES 
NOT 
HAVIN
G 
VEHIC
LES 
HAVIN
G 
TELEP
HONE 
NOT 
HAVING 
TELEPH
ONE 
HAVING 
WIRELES
S/ 
MOBILES 
NOT 
HAVIN
G 
WIREL
ESS/ 
MOBIL
ES 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 1,021 886 135 NP NP NP NP 
2 Arunchal Pradesh 91 87 4 37 54 87 4 
3 Assam 344 340 4 203 141 343 1 
4 Bihar 1029 1029 0 1029 0 1029 0 
5 Chhatisgarh 453 453 0 426 27 453 0 
6 Goa 43 43 0 43 0 43 0 
7 Gujarat 711 711 0 711 0 711 0 
8 Haryana 382 382 0 382 0 382 0 
9 Himachal Pradesh 148 140 8 148 0 148 0 
10 Jharkhand 548 548 0 548 0 548 0 
11 Karnataka 1051 1051 0 1051 0 1051 0 
12 Kerala 547 547 0 547 0 547 0 
13 Madhya Pradesh 1117 1117 0 1117 0 1117 0 
14 Maharashtra 1163 1163 0 1163 0 1163 0 
15 Manipur 84 75 9 20 64 73 11 
16 Meghalaya 74 65 9 12 62 65 9 
17 Mizoram 42 42 0 42 0 42 0 
18 Nagaland 86 86 0 50 36 68 18 
19 Odisha 621 617 4 618 3 583 38 
20 Punjab 430 423 7 361 69 394 36 
21 Rajasthan 893 893 0 884 9 893 0 

31 
 
22 Sikkim 29 29 0 29 0 29 0 
23 Tamil Nadu 1990 1990 0 1990 0 1990 0 
24 Telangana 838 838 0 838 0 838 0 
25 Tripura 82 82 0 68 14 82 0 
26 Uttar Pradesh 1656 1581 75 1581 75 1656 0 
27 Uttarakhand 159 157 2 159 0 159 0 
28 West Bengal 633 633 0 633 0 631 2 
29 A & N Islands 24 24 0 24 0 24 0 
30 Chandigarh 17 17 0 17 0 17 0 
31 D & N Haveli and 6 6 0 6 0 6 0 
 Daman & Diu        
32 Delhi 209 209 0 209 0 209 0 
33 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
235 235 0 156 79 218 17 
34 Ladakh 7 7 0 7 0 7 0 
35 Lakshadweep 16 16 0 11 5 9 7 
36 Puducherry 54 54 0 54 0 54 0 
 Total 16833 16576 257 15174 638 15669 143 
 Data of Daman & Diu is included  in D & N Haveli as Combined data pr ovided by both the UTs 
3.16.6   As per the data above,  it may be seen that out of 16,833 police  stations in the 
country, 257 police stations are not having vehicles, 638 police statio ns are not having 
telephones and 143 police stations are not having wireless/mobiles in the country. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.16.7   The Committee is of the view that modern policing requires strong  
communication support, state-of-the-art  modern weapons, and a high de gree of 
mobility for quick response.The Committee notes with anguish  that 257 police stations 
do not have vehicles, 638 police stations do not have telephones and 143 police stations 
are not having wireless/mobiles in the country. In the 21 st century India, there are police 
stations without telephones or proper wireless connectivity espec ially in many sensitive 
states like Arunachal Pradesh, Odisha and Punjab, particularly in view of the fact that 
some of these States had been rewarded with better performanc e incentives in the year 
2018-19. Further, a very sensitive border Union Territory like Jammu & Kashmir also 
has a sizeable number of police stations which does not has tel ephones and wireless sets. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise suc h States to 
immediately equip their police stations with adequate vehicles  and communication 
devices else it may lead to disincentivization of modernisation grant s from the Centre. 
For the UTs, MHA may ensure that the needful is done at the earliest. 
3.16.8   The Committee has been given to understand by the States that l imited 
manufacturing of non-lethal weaponry in the country is a cause fo r their non-
availability with the States desirous to obtain them.  Hence, it re commends that the 
MHA may initiate setting up of adequate manufacturing units of non-le thal weaponry 
in the country so as to address the issue of shortages in this regard. It recommends 
that the MHA may coordinate with States to increase investment in the purchase of 
non-lethal weaponry, latest anti-riot equipments and standardize the uniform of 
police personnel with lightweight, easy to wear body protection gea rs to minimize 
injury/casualty during performing law and order duties. 
 
 

32 
 
3.17 Use of Technology by State Police 
3.17.1   The growing need of technology for the police forces is also  evident from the fact 
that the criminals have become tech-savvy and are leveraging diff erent technologies to 
commit crimes. Therefore, it is important for the police forces to as sess the need of 
technology to improve policing in the country. Technologies like biome tric identification, 
facial recognition, Automatic License Plate Recognition (ALPR),  CCTV cameras, GPS, 
forensic science, etc. are also proving instrumental in collecting and storing data, identifying 
and apprehending criminals. Moreover, with the development of  Internet of Things (IoT), 
now more data is being generated, collected and anal yzed than ever before by the law 
enforcement agencies across the globe.  
3.17.2   In this context, the Committee deliberated upon the use of diff erent technologies to 
improve policing in the country. The MHA informed the Committee that  during the 49 th 
DGs/IGs annual conference held on 30 th November, 2014, the Hon'ble Prime Minister 
introduced a concept of S.M.A.R.T Policing. It implies: S-Se nsitive and Strict; M-Modern 
and Mobility; A-Alert and Accountable; R-Reliable and Responsive and T- Trained and 
Techno-savvy. To encourage innovations and the use of modern technologies , SMART 
Policing has been included and allowed as one of the categori es of items under the scheme of 
'Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police'.  Under this scheme, the States have been 
provided flexibility to include items/projects as per their strategic priorities and requirements. 
States such as Andhra Pradesh have included leveraging technologie s such as artificial 
intelligence (AI), data analytics in surveillance, forensics, crime analytics, etc. as some  of the 
priorities. As informed by the State Governments, major technology-rel ated initiatives taken 
by the different State police are given below:- 
Table 3.3
 
 
S.No State Technology-related initiatives 
1 Rajasthan 1.CCTNS based Analytics Dashboard is integrated with a data lake environment (HIVE 
Cluster), which is the first of its kind integration in the  Police Department (CCTNS Project) 
throughout India. This will help in scaling the analytics capa bilities in real-time with multiple 
data sources (inter-department and intra-department). 
2. The unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) is a multi-tasker t hat is useful in reconnaissance, live 
monitoring of situations as well as capturing photo/video clips for record purposes.  
3. The RajCop Official app has been upgraded with a face recogni tion module which can 
match the face of a suspect person against a database of know n persons in real-time. Rajasthan 
police is in the process of widening the ambit of this  module by making the uploading of the 
photograph of all arrested persons in CCTNS module mandatory , which will help develop a 
rich database of known offenders.  
4. Helmet with the camera has been specially designed and procure d for use by officers in law 
and order situations, to effectively capture police action as well as activities of the miscreants, 
which can later serve as evidence during the investigation of such cases. 
2 Gujarat 1. Mobile forensic van equipped with scientific tool s for collection of evidence along with 
forensic experts.  
2. E-Gujcop, computerized the Police functioning extensively  with crime and criminal 
information database for effective crime management. 
3. Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS) for digital fingerprints to be integrated 
with National Automated Fingerprint Identification System (NAFIS).  
4. 5.3D scanner for crime scene investigation. 

33 
 
3 Odisha 1. Arakhi App is an extension of CCTNS, which serves as a database for all FIRs registered in 
police stations also Auto-generation of CDs. The app ca n be used by an investigating officer 
outside the police station and without access to the poli ce desktop and eliminate duplication of 
work. 
2. Malkhana Module envisages maintaining proper chain of custo dy, safe and secure storage of 
seized/ gathered evidence and timely disposal in accordance with the law. This module helps in 
the online seamless disposal of MAL Items. 
3. Medico-legal opinion system module enables investigating office rs to directly send the 
requisition to medical officers who can upload examination reports against requisition. 
4. All Police stations have been provided with live scanners b y which the Finger Prints are 
being collected online and through central AFIS Software com pared with the database. 
Through obtaining good quality FP and quick online verification/mat ching from database 
detection, it has helped in solving several crimes. 
4 Uttar Pradesh 1. Latest technology and equipment are being used for the collection of samples, their 
preservation and in the examination of exhibits.  
2. Upgrade and Modernisation of FSLs including setting up of FSLs  in 18 ranges 
3. Three DNA labs have been opened last year which is equi pped with the latest DNA analysis 
equipment namely genetic analyzer, RTPCR machine and Automat ic DNA extraction device. 
4. Purchase orders for the latest equipment worth about 20 cr ores have been issued in FY 
2020-21. 
5. Sexual Assault examination kits have been distributed to all districts.  
5 Madhya 
Pradesh 
1. The State leads in the use of scientific investigation tools like DNA fingerprinting, call detail 
records analysis, use of sophisticated mobile fingerprinti ng tools. Investigating agencies use a 
mobile unit that consists of various kits for collecting   evidence and preserving it in such a way 
that it doesn't get contaminated.  
2. District cyber cell units and State cyber cell uses the latest software for analyzing social 
media, open-source intelligence and call detail records.  Technology plays a vital role in 
keeping law and order in place.  
3. Live surveillance system/CCTV surveillance- an int egrated system of surveillance cameras 
in cities, towns and also on highways placed at strategic lo cations to capture suspects and 
criminals. It is also useful in identifying traffic rule violators.  
4. Body-worn cameras and interceptor vehicles are used by traffi c police to ensure the 
implementation of traffic rules. 
6 Punjab 1.PAIS (Punjab Artificial Intelligence System), App uses machine learning, deep learning, 
visual search, and face recognition for the identification of cri minals to assist police 
personnel. This app helps in storing and carrying informat ion about criminals. It also helps in 
identifying not only a criminal but also the gang members. F urther, it provides for 
information retrieval during investigations. 
2. Automatic License Plate Recognition (ALPR) devices is be ing used by police for a variety 
of law enforcement purposes, from identifying stolen cars  to catching up with people who 
have active warrants or monitoring alerts.  
7 West Bengal 1. Kolkata Police is implementing IFVP (Iris, Finger, Voice and Photo) software for the 
integration of all the biometric data of accused persons  in a single database with a quick access 
facility for investigation purposes.  
2. The following modern technologies are used for the detection P rocess:- 
a. DNA Analyzer.  
b. Chemical tests as classical examination. GMS (Gas Chr omatography-Mass Spectra), FTIR 
(Fourier Transform Infra-Red), UV-Visible absorption, etc. instr umental technology.  
c. Comparison Microscope, SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) u sed as a part of 
instrumental analysis. 

34 
 
8 Telangana 1. State-of-Art Computing and Command Center- Technology fusion centre for convergence 
of disparate technologies and business applications. 
2. Hawkeye App-empowering public to be citizen police. 
3. TSCOP-Empowering the frontline police workers. 
4. More than 8 Lakhs CCTV Cameras have been installed in t he State in partnership with the 
community. 
5. Integrated Traffic Management System (ITMS). 
6. JRMS- Jail Release Monitoring System for improved surveillance of repeated offenders. 
7. Online fingerprint verification and facial recognition. 
8. Evidence-based investigation and prosecution tools being ad opted. 
9. Video footage from CCTV system and video enhancement tool s. 
10. Bio-metric recognition through an automatic fingerprint ide ntification system from a 
fingerprint database. 
9 Delhi 1. CCTV cameras have been installed by Delhi police, the public and by the Delhi 
administration.  Under the safe city project, the feed f rom all these three categories will be 
collected in the centralized control room. 
2. Delhi Government has collaborated with ISRO (Indian Spa ce Research Organization) to 
start with a new technology called Crime Mapping Analytics  and Predictive System (CMAPS). 
This initiative will use space technology for controlling c rime and maintaining law and order. 
The police officers will be provided with a personal digital  assistant and this personal digital 
assistant is connected to a storage processor that stores the data of criminals. Every distress call 
will be converted into a digital message. This technology w ill also be used to collect real-time 
data at the crime scene. For example, the system will help  to identify in which area theft is at a 
high rate and this information can be used to deploy police  in the area to stop further cases of 
thefts. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.17.3   The Committee appreciates the various technological measures tak en by the 
States/UTs including installation of CCTVs, ERSS-112, fingerprint ve rification, voice 
and facial recognition, DNA fingerprinting, CDR analysis, body-worn  camera, mobile 
forensic vans,  citizen portals, etc. These technologies will  certainly create a transparent 
mechanism to identify and monitor crime trends and patterns. Gi ven a scientific 
approach to the collection of evidence and investigation, they can h elp in taking 
proactive measures to prevent crime. By providing digital access  to the police, citizens 
can avail services from the comfort of their homes. The citizens  can register and track 
their complaints, and provide feedback without visiting the police station. 
3.17.4    The Committee observes that technology like artificial intell igence, big data, 
etc. can effectively help in mapping the crime hotspots and getting a digital footprint of 
the criminals. This can be used to deploy force more effectivel y thereby 
reducing/preventing crime. Artificial intelligence can be u sed to draw correlations 
between the types of crime, time, location, match fingerprints, fac ial images, analyze 
CCTV footage and recognize vehicle number plates, etc. Big data can be used to 
integrate and store data from multiple sources. This will help in d eveloping a scientific 
approach to policing. The Committee recommends that the MHA may en courage and 
incentivize States to leverage technologies like artificial intell igence, big data, etc. for 
policing. The Committee further recommends that BPR&D may be task ed to make a 
compendium of the latest technologies used by the various State police  forces and share 
among them. This will help the States to fight crimes in a coordinated manner. 

35 
 
3.17.5   The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs shou ld take 
up with States/UTs to deploy drones/ unmanned aerial vehicl es for VVIP security, 
surveillance of crime hotspots, crowd control/ riot management, disas ter management, 
etc. 
3.18 Installation of CCTV Cameras in Police Stations 
3.18.1   Apart from the above-mentioned initiatives of the State Gove rnments on the use of 
technology to assist law enforcement agencies, the Hon'ble Supreme  Court of India, vide its 
order dated 2nd December, 2020, has directed the installation of C CTV cameras in all police 
stations. 
3.18.2   The Committee desired to know from the MHA about the status o f the installation of 
CCTV cameras in all police stations. The MHA replied that an advisory dated 8 th July, 2021 
has been issued to State / UT Governments for the instal lation of CCTV cameras in all police 
stations within a time frame.  
3.18.3   Further, under the scheme of 'Assistance to States for M odernisation of Police', 
States have been given the flexibility to formulate State  Action Plans (SAPs) as per their 
strategic priorities and requirements. The proposals of States rega rding CCTV systems were 
approved within SAPs during the last 4 years. 
3.18.4  The Committee was informed by the representatives of Tam il Nadu police that they 
have installed Internet Protocol CCTV cameras.  They informed that a senior police official 
sitting in his office can have the views of the police stat ion and see the persons entering, 
exiting and their interactions, within the station premises.  This is a way to ensure hassle-free 
registration of cases, and also monitor the activities of the polic e stations. The status of 
installation of CCTV cameras as informed by some of the State Governments is as follows:- 
Table 3.4
 
 
S.No State No. of CCTV Cameras Installed in Police Stations  
1 Gujarat  7354 cameras installed at 622 police stations 
2 Punjab Under process to install cameras at 423 police stations along with 153 
police posts. 
3 Haryana Proposed to install 7000 cameras across all police stations with an average 
of 15 cameras per police station and 5 cameras per police post. 
4 West Bengal 2680 Cameras installed in 624 police statio ns under the Assistance to the 
States for Modernisation of Police, 2018-19 scheme. 
5 Jharkhand Detailed project report under progress. 
6 Mizoram 147 cameras installed. A total of 578 cameras  to be installed till 
December, 2021 
7 Andhra Pradesh 966 cameras already installed in various police stations. Under-process to 
install 15,700 cameras with 12 cameras per police station. 
8 Assam Under-process to install 4522 cameras in 323 police stati ons and 6 other 
police offices. 

36 
 
9 Odisha Under-process. 
10 Uttar Pradesh 3066 cameras installed at 1533 police stations. At  each police station, 2 IP 
cameras have been installed. DPR is being prepared for further installation 
of cameras in police stations. 
11 Madhya Pradesh 4 cameras each have been installed in 859 pol ice stations. Installation of 
additional CCTV cameras under process. 
12 Tamil Nadu  IP CCTV Cameras have been installed in 1564 p olice stations.  
13 Delhi 1941 cameras already installed. 2175 additional came ras are being 
installed. 
14 Manipur Under-process. 
15 Sikkim Administrative approval and financial sanction of Rs  4,71,70,185 for 
installation of CCTV cameras in all police stations in S ikkim has been 
approved and sanctioned by  the State Government. Proce ss of installation 
has started. 
16 Arunachal Pradesh CCTV installed in 94 police stations, an d will be installed in remaining 5 
police stations by December, 2021. 
17 Meghalaya CCTV cameras installed in 5 police stations. 
Installation in the remaining 70 police station is under process. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.18.5   The Committee notes that some of the States/UTs have started installing  CCTV 
cameras in police stations to comply with the directions of the Hon 'ble Supreme Court. 
It appreciates that Tamil Nadu Police has installed IP CCTV c ameras which enables a 
senior police official to keep an eye on the activities inside t he police station. It observes 
that such a measure is a good step towards protecting the rights and l egal remedies of 
the citizens while they are in the police station to file their complaints, FIRs, etc., and 
ensuring that there is no harassment on the part of police staff. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take up with the States/UTs for installing at least 
one or two IP cameras at a strategic location in all police stations. T he Committee also 
recommends that States/UTs may conduct a periodic audit of all the  CCTVs installed in 
police stations and replace/upgrade them, wherever required.  The Committee further 
recommends that the MHA take up with the Ministry of Law & Justice  to advise 
States/UTs to initiate talks with their respective courts for ins tallation of CCTVs at 
court premises, for round-the-clock monitoring of court buildings.  
3.19 Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System (CCTNS) 
3.19.1  CCTNS is a mission mode project under the national e-gov ernance plan 
conceptualized by the Ministry of Home affairs. It aims at creat ing a comprehensive and 
integrated system for enhancing the efficiencies and effective  policing at all levels and 
especially at the Police Station level through the adoption of the princ iple of e-governance 

37 
 
and creation of a nationwide network of infrastructure for the evolution of IT-enabled state of 
the art tracking system. 
3.19.2   The MHA informed that CCTNS has been made operational in all States/Union 
Territories. In CCTNS, FIRs are being registered 100% electronically  in 16074  police 
stations. Apart from this, all States/ Union Territories have launched their State citizen portals 
providing citizen-centric police services including online fili ng of complaints. Further, 
citizens can also file online complaints related to cyber-c rimes on National Cyber-crime 
Portal. 
3.19.3  Regarding the steps taken to ensure round-the-clock internet conne ctivity at police 
stations to use the Crime and Criminal Tracking Network Sys tem (CCTNS), the MHA 
replied that the following initiatives have been taken for i mproving the network connectivity 
in police stations:- 
 
(i) MHA has accorded approval to all the States/Union Territories to  increase the 
existing bandwidth from 512 kbps to 2 Mbps over VPN over broadband 
through available telecom service providers, including non-BSNL service 
providers.   
  
(ii) MHA in coordination with the Department of Telecommunication is providing 
network connectivity under Bharat Net. In the first phase, 413 police s tations 
have been approved. Under the scheme of ‘Assistance to States for 
Modernisation of Police’, various equipments related to CCTNS are  allowed 
as per the requirements.  
3.19.4  The Committee was also informed by the State Governments of the steps taken by 
them to link services and other modules with the CCTNS. The C ommittee was informed by 
the State Government of Haryana that all the districts are sha ring data with Inter-operable 
Criminal Justice System (ICJS). All concerned Police units have  been directed to seek legal 
opinion in all cases through this module only. Charge sheets are al so getting vetted online 
through the e-prosecution module. Besides efficient service delivery t hrough the online 
portal, one of the key objectives of the CCTNS Haryana project is to make police functioning 
citizen-friendly and more transparent and improve the delivery of citizen-centric services 
through effective usage of ICT. Haryana citizen portal – Har Samay is fully operational with 
as many as 33 citizen-centric services and the following servi ces are being extended to the 
citizens on the portal:  
 Character Certificate  
 Complaint 
 Employee Verification  
 Right to Information  
 Tenant Verification  
  Police Clearance Certificate  
 Event Performance  
 Domestic Verification 
 
3.19.5  The Committee was informed by the State Government of Tela ngana that real-time 
integration of ICJS and CCTNS has been done to electronically share data/ information of 
FIR, charge sheets and acknowledgments. In the next phase, prosecution,  e-prisons, juvenile 
justice, summons and warrants, trial details will be integrated. 

38 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.19.6  The Committee notes that the Crime and Criminal Tracking N etwork and 
Systems (CCTNS) has been made operational in all States/Union Ter ritories and FIRs 
are being registered 100% electronically in 16,074 Police Station s. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to integrate CCTNS data wi th that 
of courts, prisons, prosecution, forensics and fingerprints as part  of the Inter-operable 
Criminal Justice System (ICJS). This real-time integration will help in reducing 
duplication of work and errors, speed up the trial of cases si gnificantly and increase the 
efficiency of the police. 
3.19.7   The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States to digitize the  
issuance of services like passport verification reports, arms li cense verification reports 
and character certificates so that multiple visits of the citiz ens to the police stations and 
diversion of police personnel for such routine administrative w ork is avoided. These 
police personnel can be utilized in handling investigations and  maintenance of law and 
order which are the core functions of the police. 
 
3.20 E-FIR 
3.20.1  The Committee notes that FIRs are being registered 100% ele ctronically in 16,074 
Police Stations now in CCTNS. The Committee opined that elec tronic filing of FIRs should 
be the next step forward. In this regard, the Committee decide d to know about the progress 
made by the Central and State Governments for the establishment  of online registration of 
cases (e-FIR) all across the country. In its response, the MHA info rmed the Committee that 
as per available information,  limited e-FIR facility is curre ntly available in Delhi, Odisha, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for registering cases only for pro perty and vehicle thefts where 
details of the accused are not known. In order to facilitate States / Union Territories, the 
National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) has made available an e-FIR  module to the States/ 
Union Territories and has also sent an advisory on 14 th September 2018 to States/UTs to 
customize and use the e-FIR module as per their requirements. 
3.20.2    To avoid delays over the determination of the jurisdiction , which impacts the victim 
and also may lead to an offender getting away, the Ministry o f Home Affairs (MHA) issued 
an advisory to States/ Union Territories to ensure that Police r egister an FIR upon receipt of 
information of commission of a cognizable offense, even if it is found that the subject matter 
relates to the jurisdiction of some other police station. The State s/Union Territories were 
advised to instruct the Police to register a 'Zero FIR' and t hen transfer the same to the 
concerned police station under section 170 of the Criminal Procedure Code.  The MHA has 
been regularly issuing advisories to all States/UTs in this matter for ensuring compliance.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.20.3   The Committee notes that the e-FIR facility is currently available in Delhi, 
Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for registering cases only for  property and 
vehicle thefts where details of the accused are not known. It observes that sufficient time 
has elapsed since the advisory was issued in 2018, for the State s/UTs to act upon the 
same and operationalize the e-FIR module. The Committee is of th e considered view 
that online registration would save people from the hassle of running to police stations 
to lodge their complaints.  

39 
 
3.20.4   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should coor dinate with 
State Police to initiate the facility of e-FIR in the remaining State s/UTs. The Committee 
also recommends that the MHA may work on modalities and advise S tates/UTs for 
extending the facility of e-FIR for other non-heinous crimes as well. 
 
3.21 Investigation of Cyber Crimes 
 
3.21.1  The 21 st century has ushered in an era of new-age crimes and complex modus  
operandi, which has been continuously evolving further at a rapid rate . The use of the dark 
web, voice over internet protocol (VoIP) calls, etc., are some of t he tools actively used by 
criminals but police strategies for these are still evolvi ng. No police force can live up to the 
contemporary challenges without upgrading itself with advanced skills and supplement with 
adequate resources. Police should endeavor to match its strategy in training and procurement 
with the modern-day policing challenges.  
3.21.2   The Committee sought to know about the number of cases of cyber crim es registered 
in the country. The MHA  informed that as per the report "Crime in India, 2019, of the 
National Crime Record Bureau (NCRB), the data of cyber crimes in  the States/UTs is as 
under:- 
Table 3.5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*The data for 2020 has been obtained from the report "Crime in India,  2020 of the National Crime Record 
Bureau (NCRB). 
3.21.3   According to the "Crime in India 2019" report, in the year 2019 charg e-sheeting rate 
is 39.1%. This includes cases charge-sheeted out of cases from the previous year and also 
cases charge-sheeted out of cases during the year 2019. 
3.21.4  A total of 50,035 cases in 2020 were registered under cyber crime s, showing an 
increase of 11.8% in registration over 2019 (44,735 cases). The crime rate under this category 
increased from 3.3 in 2019 to 3.7 in 2020. During 2020, 60.2% of cyber-cri me cases 
registered were for the motive of fraud (30,142 out of 50,035 cases) foll owed by sexual 
exploitation with 6.6% (3,293 cases) and extortion with 4.9% (2,440 cases). 
3.21.5 According to the ‘Data on Police Organizations’ published by BPR& D, as on 1 st 
January, 2020, the State-wise number of cyber cells in the country are as follows:-] 
 
 
 
 
Year No of Cyber crimes 
registered 
2017 21796 
2018 27248 
2019 44735 
2020 50035 

40 
 
Table 3.6 
 
NUMBER OF CYBER CELLS IN STATE/UT 
AS ON 01.01.2020 
Sl. 
No. 
STATES/UTs NUMBER OF 
CYBER CELL(s) 
WOMEN CELL(s) NUMBER OF 
SOCIAL MEDIA 
MONITORING 
CELL(s) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 1 1 2 
2 Arunchal Pradesh 1 1 1 
3 Assam 0 0 1 
4 Bihar 75 40 76 
5 Chhatisgarh 29 1 0 
6 Goa 0 0 1 
7 Gujarat 10 2 0 
8 Haryana 30 24 24 
9 Himachal Pradesh 1 0 0 
10 Jharkhand 15 5 6 
11 Karnataka 1 0 31 
12 Kerala 19 20 1 
13 Madhya Pradesh 10 51 1 
14 Maharashtra 47 47 40 
15 Manipur 10 0 3 
16 Meghalaya 10 0 4 
17 Mizoram 0 1 1 
18 Nagaland 1 0 1 
19 Odisha 34 537 0 
20 Punjab 0 0 24 
21 Rajasthan 0 41 1 
22 Sikkim 1 0 0 
23 Tamil Nadu 7 27 19 
24 Telangana 5 3 4 
25 Tripura 1 0 1 
26 Uttar Pradesh 2 1 1 
27 Uttarakhand 13 13 13 
28 West Bengal 33 453 2 
29 A & N Islands 1 1 1 
30 Chandigarh 1 1 1 
31 D & N Haveli 1 1 1 
 Daman & Diu 0 2 0 
32 Delhi 16 15 NA 
33 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
0 13 1 
34 Ladakh 0 1 0 
35 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 
36 Puducherry 1 0 0 
 Total 376 1,302 262 
 
3.21.6   The Committee was informed by the MHA and the State G overnments during the 
deliberation on the subject that they have accorded priority tow ards equipping the police 
forces with requisite training and infrastructures to effectively  tackle the increasing cyber 
crimes in the country. The National and State training academie s are running specialized 
training programmes for police personnel of different ranks to deal with cyber crimes. 

41 
 
Moreover, cyber cells, cyber forensic labs have also been/ are being established for more 
professional approach to detect, investigate and deter cyber crimes in their jurisdictions. 
  
3.21.7  With the induction of new technologies, new modus-operandi are use d by the 
criminals to commit cyber crimes, the police faces a new type of challenge. The Committee 
agrees with the submission of the MHA and State Governments t hat traditional policing 
system is not adequate to deal with the technology based crimes . Apart from imparting 
specialized training to the police personnel, there is a growin g need with the Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) to take assistance of cyber experts /IT professionals for 
handling cyber crimes. Therefore, the Committee sought to know whether Central and State 
Governments have made any effort to induct cyber experts/ IT professi onals in the police 
force. The MHA, in its reply, informed that one of the recommendati ons of the Mooshahary 
Committee is about the teeth-to-tail ratio in the police force . It recommended that the ratio 
between SI and Constable should be 1:4 (present ratio ranges from 1:7 to 1:15). Therefore, 
the State Governments /Police Directorates need to reduce recrui tment of constables and 
create positions for experts. 
3.21.8  The Committee was informed by the State Governments of Jh arkhand, Mizoram, 
Assam, Goa, Andhra Pradesh, Manipur, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Punjab t hat they are taking 
assistance of cyber experts/ forensic consultants to deal with  cyber crimes. They are assisting 
investigating officers in handling technology related crimes. Some S tates have  already 
recruited and some others are in the process to recruit these experts. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.21.9  The Committee expresses its deep concerns
 over the rising rate of cyber crimes 
in the country. As per the information provided to the Committee, it is seen that some of 
the States like Punjab, Rajasthan, Goa, Assam do not have a single cybe r crime cell, 
while in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, only one/two  cyber crime cells 
have been set up. It observes that each day, cyber-criminals are using newer methods 
and new modus-operandi to commit cyber crimes. Therefore, it is  important for the 
police to stay updated on new modus-operandi and technology trends adopted by 
criminals. 
 
3.21.10  The Committee recommends that MHA may advise States to set up cyber c ells 
in all the districts. The States should map the cyber  crim e hotspots which will help in 
quick detection of crimes and taking proactive measures to prevent cyber crimes. 
 
3.21.11 The Committee also recommends to upgrade the existing cyber cells  by 
setting up dark web monitoring cells and social media monitoring cells to tackle 
different types of cyber crimes. 
 
3.21.12   To strengthen the investigation of inter-State crimes, the Committee 
recommends that MHA may advise States/UTs that when investigating offic ers visit 
outside their jurisdictional State for investigation of a cyber cr ime, they should be 
provided with optimum support from the law enforcement agencies of other States and 
UTs, as required.  
3.21.13   The Committee notes that some States are using cyber experts f or the detection 
and investigation of cyber crimes. Therefore, along with traditional pol ice recruitments, 

42 
 
there is a need to induct technical experts into the police for ce. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may encourage States/UTs to recruit quali fied cyber 
experts/IT professionals to assist police in detecting, monitori ng, preventing and 
investigating cyber crimes. 
3.22 Efforts to Tackle Drone Attacks 
 
3.22.1 Apart from cyber crimes, misuse of drones technology also poses a s ignificant threat 
to Governments all across the globe. The use of drones or unmanned aeria l vehicles by the 
terrorists has thrown up a new challenge before the security force s to deal with a paradigm 
shift in the nature of the threat and countermeasures. Rogue drones ha ve become a critical 
threat to any country's security, privacy and cyber-security. Drones are be ing used for 
surveillance of vital installations and for the delivery of drugs, arms and ammunitions and 
other terrorist activities, which is an alarming issue. To add up , there is also the threat of 
hacking of drones, drone data, mobiles and other devices connected with the drones. 
Therefore, building capabilities to deter, detect and neutralize such aerial threats with the help 
of anti-drone technology is an urgent requirement. 
 
3.22.2   Considering the growing threats and incidents of a drone attack in the country, the 
Committee enquired about the steps taken to address the issue. T he replies of the States 
Government have been summarized below:- 
Table 3.7 
 
S.No. State Steps taken to deal with Drone Attacks 
1 Rajasthan Regular instructions/ advisories are issued to various departments of bordering 
areas about not sharing the strategic information with anyone on phone calls 
unless authenticated. Cases registered regarding VoIP calls are  monitored at the 
senior level and are pursued in courts also. The various vital in stallations, Army/ 
Air Force bases, Oil Refinery areas and other similar s trategic places, have been 
classified as Red Zone (no flying zones for drones), Yellow Zone  (where drones 
could operate with permission and Green Zone (where permissi on is not 
required. 
2 Mizoram No formal guidelines have been laid down/issued by the State Government 
regarding the use of drones and in case of certain situatio ns such as National 
Day, visit of VVIP, border dispute, etc. the State poli ce administration has given 
recommendations/suggestions to issue prohibition order for use of drones in 
certain areas to the concerned authorities, and accordingly,  issued prohibition 
order for specified time. It may be mentioned that being a peaceful State, the 
State police administration has not laid  any specific gu idelines for the use of 
drones. However, the State police administration is constan tly monitoring any 
possible threat posed by the use of drones. 
3 Andhra Pradesh ADGP, Operations, has been nominated as nodal officer to address the 
challenges of drone attacks. Strict watch and vigilance a re being maintained on 
all vital installations by the concerned SSP. Apart from the above, guidelines 
issued by MHA regarding flying permission in Red, Green and Yell ow Zones 
are being followed. 
4 Assam The Superintendent of Police have been advised to identify abandoned airstrips, 
open grounds and spaces in their respective jurisdiction that ma y facilitate 
launching of flying objects and to suitably secure such place s by the deployment 
of security forces, patrolling, etc. Besides, Security  forces deployed for guarding 
of vital installations have been sensitized regarding the  threat from drone attacks 
and security of vital installations of national importan ce has been augmented 
especially the vulnerable oil installations, rail and road bridges which are already 
having a threat from extremist elements. 

43 
 
5 Manipur The process for the making of Red Zones on the Digital Sky platform has been 
initiated by the State Government. 
6 West Bengal The Intelligence Branch, West Bengal has prep ared geo-coordinates of vital 
Installations in the form of Red Zones and Yellow Zones with categorization and 
points for uploading on Digital Sky Platform as per DGCA a nd MHA 
guidelines. 
7 Sikkim The use of drone is recommended as per The Drone Rules, 2021 notified by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation notification, dated, the 25 th August, 2021 i.e. also for 
specific purpose on application within the permitted zone  with necessary 
restriction. 
 
8 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
The Drone Policy, 2021 is in initial stage and yet to be framed under the 
aegis/guidance of guidelines provided by the Ministry of Civi l Aviation. 
Mapping and nomination is in the process. Red zone (no fly zon e) mapping is 
being done. 
9 Punjab Punjab has not drafted or articulated a separate police drone policy. However, 
specific area-based detection and neutralization of threat s of drones are available 
and being improved upon. However, larger areas like borders rema in a 
challenge. This is being done by physical patrolling and nakabandi by police 
which is backed by effective intelligence inputs. 
 
3.22.3  The State Government of Punjab further informed the Commit tee that in recent past, 
the movement of drones from across the international border has incre ased significantly. 
Drones have been sighted over 133 times near international border i n the last two years. The 
first recorded delivery of arms/ammunition by drone was in August, 2019. Similar drone 
sightings have also been observed in Jammu and Kashmir. Besides, t here is no effective anti-
drone technology available in the country. Number of public and private sector companies are 
involved in countering drone technologies. In this regard, Punjab is follow ing the policy 
notified by Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India.  
3.22.4   The major challenge before the law enforcement agencies f or countering the drone 
threat is its detection, identification and safe neutralizati on. Technology based counter drone 
measures are the need of the hour which should be developed by concerned department of 
Government of India. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.22.5   The Committee expresses its grave concern on the use of different types of 
drones for committing crimes, transporting drugs, arms and ammunition, etc., which is 
a threat to the internal security of the country. The Committee notes th at the MHA has 
issued guidelines for flying permission in red, green and yellow zones. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA along with the Ministry of Civil Aviation m ay advise States 
to sensitize ground-level police personnel on the drone regulations. This may include the 
civilian use of drones which will help in detecting rogue drones. 
3.22.6   The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with concerned 
Ministries/ Agencies to create a central pool of anti-drone tech nology at the earliest and 
give its access to all States/UTs to deal with the menace of illi cit use of drones. For this 
purpose, the participation of the private sector may be explored. Th e MHA may 
coordinate with concerned Ministries/Agencies and States/UTs to create an SOP for the 
steps to be taken by the State police in case of a drone attack. 
 
 

44 
 
3.23 Vacancies in the State Police Forces 
3.23.1   The Committee emphasized the adequacy of State police pe rsonnel to perform the 
multifarious role and responsibilities entrusted to them. In this context,  the Committee sought 
to know from the MHA about the number of existing vacancies in the State police forces. The 
MHA replied that the number of policemen in the State Polic e Forces is about 20 lakhs.  As 
far as the volume of crime is concerned, about 50 lakhs crimes a re registered in the country 
every year.   As per data on Police Organisations compiled by BPR&D, the ratio as on 1 st 
January, 2020, of police personnel per lakh persons is 195.39 as per sanc tioned strength and 
155.78 as per actual strength.  As per data on Police Organizations compiled by the Bureau of 
Police Research and Development (BPR&D), as on 01 st January, 2020, the relevant figures 
are as under:  
Table 3.8
 
 
 Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
Vacancies/ 
Surplus 
Total No. of policemen in the 
State Police Forces 
26,23,225 20,91,488 5,31,737 
DGP/Spl.DGP 117 135 18   (+) 
Addl. DGP 310 364 54   (+) 
Sub-Inspector 1,53,288 99,283 54,005 
Constable 9,77,540 8,10,554 1,66,986 
 
3.23.2   According to BPR&D’s report on ‘Data on Police Organizations’, as  on 1 st January, 
2020, the State-wise police-population ratio in the country is as under:- 
 
Table 3.9 
SANCTIONED AND ACTUAL POLICE-POPULATION AND AREA RATI O IN STATES/UTs 
AS ON 01.01.2020 
 STATES/UTs CIVIL POLICE 
PER LAKH OF 
POPULATION 
DISTRICT 
ARMED 
RESERVE 
POLICE PER 
LAKH OF 
POPULATIO
N 
SPL. ARMED 
POLICE PER 
LAKH OF 
POPULATION 
RB ARMED 
POLICE PER 
LAKH OF 
POPULATION 
TOTAL POLICE 
PER LAKH OF 
POPULATION 
S A S A S A S A S A 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 84.98 71.73 31.62 24.86 20.25 14.13 4.21 2.96 141.06 113.68 
2.  Arunchal Pradesh 556.25 418.73 - - 123.63 112.71 331.57 298.87 1 011.45 830.31 

45 
 
3.  Assam 68.73 55.73 35.05 24.52 124.81 105.89 23.38 21.34 251.97 207.49 
4.  Bihar 54.90 27.56 42.44 36.78 15.31 9.62 2.61 2.23 115.26 76.20 
5.  Chhatisgarh 165.71 131.52 - - 49.18 43.86 46.49 45.15 261.38 220.53 
6.  Goa 432.49 379.55 - - 36.76 13.46 189.90 118.77 659.16 511.78 
7.  Gujarat 86.96 66.60 33.62 28.49 40.83 27.69 1.31 - 162.72 122.78 
8.  Haryana 209.11 151.73 - - 19.72 18.76 12.79 9.69 241.63 180.19 
9.  Himachal Pradesh 157.95 147.50 10.52 10.52 10.55 9.27 78.23 73.24 257 .25 240.52 
10. Jharkhand 44.59 33.53 115.86 90.06 32.06 28.48 25.63 20.11 218.15 172. 18 
11. Karnataka 98.34 82.82 36.28 26.20 20.61 14.51 3.01 2.42 158.23 125.95 
12. Kerala 143.58 129.26 - - 30.21 21.00 3.81 2.23 177.60 152.49 
13. Madhya Pradesh 117.73 85.41 - - 37.63 32.81 2.65 1.80 158.01 120.02 
14. Maharashtra 165.99 145.89 14.59 13.49 15.27 13.50 2.26 1.99 198.12 174.87 
15. Manipur 571.05 492.72 - - 217.06 203.91 335.46 246.30 1123.57 942.93 
16. Meghalaya 189.29 167.07 77.65 72.87 123.40 106.11 118.89 109.51 509.23 455.56 
17. Mizoram 380.30 285.56 - - 210.68 165.69 351.09 223.29 942.07 674.54 
18. Nagaland 259.83 269.88 121.84 155.1
1 
585.28 604.67 270.34 271.26 1237.30 1300.93 
19. Odisha 67.28 58.00 23.15 21.87 39.25 34.10 16.67 15.35 146.36 129.31 
20. Punjab 236.34 216.07 - - 63.21 53.40 21.45 17.03 321.00 286.50 
21. Rajasthan 119.23 102.27 - - 16.40 14.95 6.51 5.14 142.14 122.36 
22. Sikkim 371.06 368.97 - - 153.67 135.53 447.98 346.78 972.71 851.27 
23. Tamil Nadu 117.61 104.73 26.54 24.96 20.32 18.70 0.15 0.15 164.62 148. 54 
24. Telangana 113.67 78.34 59.75 31.47 16.47 9.11 19.95 11.95 209.85 130.88 
25. Tripura 206.70 161.79 115.28 79.56 97.06 89.58 321.64 237.14 740 .68 568.07 
26. Uttar Pradesh 123.71 91.14 - - 59.12 42.42 0.36 0.30 183.19 133.85 
27. Uttarakhand 94.85 96.15 53.38 47.11 32.66 30.39 15.98 14.51 196.87 188.16 
28. West Bengal 97.23 61.45 23.77 16.31 33.35 21.91 3.03 0.86 157.38 100.53 
29. A & N Islands 816.58 751.51 183.67 92.96 - - 253.02 263.43 1253. 27 1080.90 
30. Chandigarh 587.95 505.98 - - 78.10 71.19 83.91 72.45 749.96 649.62 
31. D & N Haveli 62.77 56.03 - - - - 101.77 85.99 164.54 142.02 
32. Daman & Due 128.60 98.60 - - - - - - 128.60 98.60 
33. Delhi 410.26 367.88 - - 48.74 42.38 - - 459.01 410.26 

46 
 
34. Jammu and 
Kashmir 
398.57 362.31 - - 114.39 84.74 174.76 163.21 687.73 610.25 
35. Ladakh 486.39 368.03 - - - - 327.55 201.02 813.95 569.05 
36. Lakshadweep 472.06 392.65 - - - - - - 472.06 392.65 
37. Puducherry 172.95 128.89 - - 53.91 36.97 66.12 59.42 292.97 225.28 
All India 124.38 99.35 20.99 16.76 37.86 29.70 12.16 9.97 195.39 155. 78 
 
S:Sanctioned 
A: Actual 
@ ‘In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (a) of s ection 2 of the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman 
and Diu (Merger of Union territories) Act,2019 (44 of 2019), the ce ntral government hereby appoints the 26 th 
day of January, 2020, as the appointed day for the purposes of the sa id Act’ according to a Home Ministry. 
However, in some tables the Union Territories , i.e.  UT  Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu have been 
provided separate data and for the some tables they have been provided combi ned data. 
3.23.3   From the above table, it may be seen that only Nagaland  has more than actual police 
per lakh of the population as compared to the sanctioned average in the country. The 
Committee sought to know about the number of police personnel per lakh of population vis-
à-vis international benchmarks. The MHA replied that while India has the largest police force 
in the world, there are no international benchmarks to assess the optimal level of the police 
force in a country. The organizational structure of the police forces va ries from country to 
country as do the functions and tasks assigned to them.  Many c ountries do not have Central 
Armed Police Forces (CAPFs).  In addition, the number of policeme n required is dependent 
on several variables like the volume of crime, societal structure s, use of technology and local 
problems.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.23.5   The Committee notes the vacancy of 5,31,737 as against the sanctioned stren gth 
of 26,23,225 in State police forces, is almost  21 % shortfall. It is  not a desirable figure 
given the crime and security scenario in the country. The Commit tee is of the 
considered view that shortage of staff has a direct bearing on the  efficiency of the police. 
The workload of the existing staff increases forcing them to d o work overtime, most of 
the time in stressful and trying circumstances. This not only leads to the increased stress 
level of police venting out at times on common people but also co mpromises the overall 
performance of police in the discharge of their duties. The  Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to conduct Police recr uitment drives 
in a mission mode and remove the administrative bottlenecks for t he recruitment of 
police personnel at different ranks in a time-bound manner.  
3.24 Women Representation on Police 
3.24.1   The Committee opines that the police without adequate repres entation of women can 
not be treated as truely modernized or reformed. The Committee obs erves that the role of 
women in the police has been steadily increasing. The induc tion of women and their 
representation in the police force has not only helped women at la rge feel empowered but 
also helped to address crime against them effectively. Furt her, the police are required to deal 
with varied situations of public order involving women, which  also necessitates their 
representation in police forces. The Committee, while di scussing the vacancies in State 
police forces, also discussed the representation of women in S tate police forces.  

47 
 
3.24.2   According to BPR&D’s report on ‘Data on Police Organizations’,  as on 1 st January, 
2020, the State-wise strength and percentage of women in police is as given below:- 
Table 3.10 
 
STRENGTH OF WOMAN POLICE, RESERVATION OF WOMAN POLICE , WOMAN 
POPULATION PER WOMAN POLICE 
AS ON 01.01.2020 
SI.NO STATES/UTs ACTUAL STRENGTH 
OF TOTAL POLICE 
(CIVIL+DISTRICT 
ARMED RESERVE 
(DAR) +SPL. ARMED 
+IRB) 
ACTUAL STRENGTH 
OF WOMAN POLICE 
(CIVIL+DISTRICT 
ARMED RESERVE 
(DAR) +SPL. 
ARMED+IRB 
PERCENTAGE OF 
WOMAN POLICE 
(CIVIL+DISTRICT 
ARMED  RESERVE 
(DAR)+ SPL. 
ARMED +IRB) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 59,553 3,483 5.85% 
2 Arunchal 
Pradesh 
12,546 1,087 8.66% 
3 Assam 71,608 5,434 7.59% 
4 Bihar # 91,862 23,245 25.30% 
5 Chhatisgarh 63,839 4,510 7.06% 
6 Goa 7,907 8,36 10.57% 
7 Gujarat 84,078 9,847 11.71% 
8 Haryana 52,088 4,344 8.34% 
9 Himachal 
Pradesh  
17,623 3,375 19.15% 
10 Jharkhand 64,938 4,635 7.14% 
11 Karnataka 83,259 6,895 8.28% 
12 Kerala 53,723 3,884 7.23% 
13 Madhya Pradesh 99,496 6,001 6.03% 
14 Maharashtra 2,14,776 26,890 12.52% 
15 Manipur 29,410 2,676 9.10% 
16 Meghalaya 14,760 851 5.77% 
17 Mizoram 8,081 580 7.18% 
18 Nagaland 28,113 2,739 9.74% 
19 Odisha 58,455 5,854 10.01% 
20 Punjab 85,947 7,334 8.54% 
21 Rajasthan 95,262 9,339 9.80% 
22 Sikkim 5,678 458 8.07% 
23 Tamil Nadu 1,12,745 20,861 18.50% 
24 Telangana ~ 48,877 2,500 5.11% 
25 Tripura 22,791 1,169 5.13% 
26 Uttar Pradesh 3,03,450 29,112 9.59% 
27 Uttarakhand 21,106 2,578 12.21% 
28 West Bengal ^ 97,775 9,491 9.71% 
29 A & N Islands* 4,302 553 12.85% 
30 Chandigarh 7,711 1,448 18.78% 
31 D & N Haveli 801 49 6.12% 
 Daman & Diu 424 59 13.92% 
32 Delhi 82,195 10,110 12.30% 
33 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
80,938 2,677 3.31% 
34 Ladakh 1,673 309 18.47% 
35 Lakshadweep! 267 28 10.49% 
36 Puducherry 3,431 260 7.58% 
Total 20,91,488 2,15,504 10.30% 

48 
 
 
Source For Population: Registrar General & Census Commissioner of India, P rojected Mid Year Population 
# 35% for woman and 3% for backward caste woman. 
@ The Govt. of HP has not notified any reservation for woman  in Police Department. However, presently 
20% vacancies of constables are being filled up by Female candidat e through direct recruitment. 
~ 33.3% for civil, 10% for DAR & 0% State Armed Reserve. 
^ NIL, However,  the Govt. has sanctioned the following numbe r of posts for woman Police. (Lady 
Inspectors-75, LSI-798, LASI-931 and IC-9700. Total-11504) 
* 33% Horizontal reservation for woman 
! ‘ZERO’. During the year, 2015, 33% of posts from the rank of constable to SI under direct recruitment 
& 10% promotion post to the rank of Head Constable were reserv ed for woman but Hon'ble CAT 
Ernakulam bench has set aside the RR of 2012. Therefore depar tment went for the amendment of RR 
2012 including reservation of woman. 
3.24.3  It may be seen that against the actual strength of 20, 91,488 of total police (Civil+ 
District Armed Reserve (DAR)+ Spl. Armed+IRB), the actual stre ngth of women police 
(Civil+ District Armed Reserve (DAR)+ Spl. Armed+IRB) is 2,15, 504 which is  just 
10.30%.The Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir has abysmally low perc entage of just 
3.31%.  The Committee however appreciates that the State of Bihar h as significantly better 
performance than other States with 25.30%. 
3.24.4   The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee tha t it has issued advisories 
dated 22nd April, 2013, 21 st May, 2014, 12 th May, 2015,   21 st June, 2019 and 22 nd June, 
2021 to all the State Governments to increase the representation  of women police to 33% of 
the total strength. All the State Governments have been requested to create additional posts of 
women constables/sub-inspectors by converting the vacant posts of m ale constables. The aim 
is that each police station should have at least 3 women sub-i nspectors and 10 women police 
constables so that a women's help desk is manned round the clock.   
3.24.5   The Committee was informed by the State Governmen t of Punjab that one of the 
most important innovations is the digital interface and 100% recording of complaints on 
the Punjab Police Mahila Mittar (PPMM) digital portal , whereby the details of the 
complainant and category of the complaint is recorded  on the portal in every case by the 
Punjab police Mahila Mittars by logging in with her use r 'ID' and password. The disposal 
of the complaint is also recorded specifying the nature  of action initiated and results 
achieved. The monitoring of work done by the various wome n helpdesks and the PPMMs 
can be monitored by senior officers at the district and st ate level through the portal and the 
individual complaints can be accessed to check the q uality of disposal. The 1015 women 
police personnel posted as Punjab police Mahila Mitt ar (PPMM) are recognized as the 
female face of the Punjab police who are perceived a s a friend, counselor and guide to the 
women, children and senior citizens.  
3.24.6   The representative of Delhi Police informed the Committe e that crime against 
women cells have been established in all the police stati ons along with counselors who are 
available round the clock. 
 
 

49 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.24.7   The Committee is anguished to note that women are abysmally und er-
represented in the police force as they constitute only 10.30% o f the police force. The 
Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to create a road map for 
making the representation of women police to 33% of the total stren gth a reality. 
Further, the appointment of women in police may be done by creating additional posts 
rather than converting the vacant posts of male constables. It will also  help in 
improving the police-population ratio in the country. Besides increas ing the percentage 
of women in police,  taking a cue from the defense forces wh ere women are being 
assigned combative roles, the MHA may also advise the States/UTs to g ive them 
important challenging duties central to the police, and not just duties of inconsequence.  
3.24.8   The Committee notes that MHA has advised the States/UTs that each p olice 
station should have at least 3 women sub-inspectors and 10 women p olice constables so 
that a women's help desk is manned round the clock.  The Com mittee recommends that 
BPR&D may be tasked to assess the performance of the women's h elp desks. The MHA 
may also advise States/UTs to establish at least one all-women police station in each 
district.  
3.25 Stress Management of Police Personnel 
3.25.1  Due to huge vacancies particularly at mid and low level , the police personnel have to 
perform multiple shifts, work overtime, and without getting any wee kly off day, which 
affects their physical and mental health. Other than poor work-li fe balance, the police 
personnel also have to work with limited resources at their disposal. Some police stations 
lack basic facilities such as drinking water, clean toilets, t ransport, staff and funds for routine 
purchases which put extra pressure on them. The Committee expressed its concern on the 
overburdened and stressed police forces and sought to know from the State Governments 
about the steps taken for stress management of police personnel. The  steps taken by some of 
the State Governments to reduce burden and manage stress of the pol ice personnel are as 
follows:- 
1. Yoga Classes, games and sports, cultural programmes, raising days of district 
police/units, etc. are held regularly/ periodically. 
2. Seminars on mental health are also conducted by calling psychiatric  doctors and 
counselors to patients (police personnel and their dependent family me mbers) who 
have stress-related problems. 
3. Regular medical camps and family/health counseling through professi onals are being 
organized.  
4. Internal transfer and posting orders are issued regularly to man far flung 
posts/difficult jobs on a rotational basis 
5. Sainik Sammelan, musical nights, sports meet, and stress mana gement programmes 
are held regularly. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.25.2   The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the State Governments for 
stress management of the police personnel. The Committee recommends that MHA may 
take up with BPR&D and national and State training academies to cre ate stress 
management modules both offline and online to help the polic e personnel from time to 
time to de-stress through yoga, exercises,  counseling and treatment, etc. The States may 

50 
 
also establish counseling/ wellness centers for the police p ersonnel to maintain their 
psychological well-being and perform their duties more efficiently.  
 
3.26 Inter-State Coordination Mechanism 
3.26.1   The Committee is of the view that coordination and cooperat ion between the Central 
and State Governments is necessary to maintain internal security  and investigation of crimes 
to enforce law and order. The Committee while deliberating on the subject, emphasized the 
strengthening of Centre-State and inter-State coordination mechanism to deal particularly 
with crimes like terrorism, human and drug trafficking, organized crime a nd investigation of 
inter-State crimes.  
 
3.26.2   To deal with the drug menace in the region, the representat ive of the State 
Government of Haryana informed the Committee that after the North-Zonal  Council Meeting 
held by the Hon’ble Home Minister of India, a coordination cell at Panchkula  has been set up 
which has police officials from Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Rajast han and Haryana.  They are 
stationed, specifically, there round the clock and deal with inter-State smuggling of drugs.   
 
3.26.3   The representative of the Delhi Police informed the Commit tee that there is very 
good coordination and sharing of intelligence with other State police forces and the Central 
agencies at the ground level. The Special Cell of Delhi polic e is in regular touch with the 
State police forces and the intelligence agencies on a real- time basis, to deal with terrorist 
problems. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.26.4  The Committee opines that a nationally coordinated response by the p olice and 
the national law enforcement agencies, including the intellig ence agencies, is required to 
deal with inter-State crimes. Proper coordination and an effective s upport mechanism 
for sharing information amongst different agencies and Governm ent departments are 
necessary for conducting operations. Therefore, the Committee  recommends that the 
MHA may take up with concerned Ministries and States/UTs f or strengthening of 
internal communication between different agencies by establishing standard 
mechanisms for securing the seamless flow of information par ticularly to tackle the 
menace of terrorism, drug and human trafficking, organized crim e, etc. An inter-State 
forum may be established for sharing intelligence inputs and  to deliberate upon plans 
for coordinated action among States in areas of policing. 
3.27  Emergency Response Support System (ERSS)  
 
3.27.1  The MHA informed the Committee that the pan India Single  number ‘112’ 
Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) is now functional in 35 S tates/ Union 
Territories. This single number enables access to police, medical  and fire services in 
emergencies. This system provides for integration with other he lplines for emergency 
services, including women and child helpline. 
3.27.2   The representatives of the State Government of Odisha inform ed the Committee that 
under 'Mo Sarkar' initiative, every day hundreds of complainants, who ha ve visited the police 
station, are randomly selected by the system and a phone call is made to them sometimes by 

51 
 
DGP, District SP but many times by call centre to get thei r feedback.  This has helped in 
improving the performance of police particularly at the police station level. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.27.3 The Committee notes that Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) is a Pan-
India single number (112) based emergency response system for ci tizens in 
emergencies.  The Committee recommends that MHA may advise State s to create a 
state-of-the-art facility, recruit adequate staff and sensitize them to  handle calls. 
Regular feedback may also be taken from the complainants on the ser vice of ERSS. 
This will help in improving the performance of police and b uilding trust with people. 
Efforts should be made to reduce the response time to extend help to the person in 
distress. 
3.27.4 The Committee takes note of the 'Mo Sarkar' initiative of O disha, under which, 
every day, feedback is being sought from selected complainants.  The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise the States to develop a feedback mechanism like 
that of Odisha to assess and improve the performance of the police.  
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
CHAPTER IV 
POLICE REFORMS: THE PATH AHEAD 
 
4.1.1 For the sake of growth and development of any organization, the r eform should be a 
continuous exercise which should be built upon the fundamentals of int rospection and 
upgradation in order to achieve excellence. The police reforms is no exception to this and 
various expert committees and panels have studied one or more asp ects of policing and have 
put forth their recommendations for their adoption and realization, over the past four decades. 
Other than study/research-based recommendations, State Governments a nd police 
organizations, out of their appreciation of facts and circumstances,  had also resolved to 
transform as a part of the growth curve. There also are instances w here innovation, a thought, 
or idea has been experimented and its sphere of implementation has widened and yielded 
desirable results. 
4.1.2 Besides simplification and streamlining of procedures, extending greater functional 
agility to various organs of the police force has been at the center of police reforms, which 
have been rolled out in the States in terms of reorganization, cr eation of new units and 
suitable changes in laws and rules. 
4.1.3 The Committee has already discussed in Chapter I the bac kground and present status 
of police reforms and also the various committees/commissions tha t were set up by the 
Central Government to examine and recommend changes in the police system in the country. 
As mentioned in Chapter I of the report, the Union Government had als o set up another 
committee under the Chairmanship of Shri R.S. Mooshahary to assess how far the States/UTs 
have implemented the recommendations/suggestions of the various Com mittees for 
reforming the police system. The Committee has given 49 recomme ndations for reforming 
the policing system in the country. The status on implementation o f the recommendations of 
the Mooshahary Committee as per the information received from  States/UTs has been placed 
at Annexure II for reference.  
4.2 Implementation Status of the Recommendations of Mooshahary Committee 
4.2.1 During the course of deliberation on the subject, the Committ ee discussed in detail 
about the implementation status of some of the key recommendations of the Mooshahary 
Committee in the States, which are as follows:- 
 
4.3 Model Police Act, 2006 
4.3.1 The Mooshahary Committee recommended for the enactment of a New Police Act to 
replace the Police Act of 1861.  In response, the Ministry of Home Affairs had set up a Police 
Act Drafting Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Soli Sorabj ee to draft a new Model 
Police Act in September, 2005. The Committee submitted a Mod el Police Act on 30 th 
October, 2006 containing 16 chapters. The decision of the Hon’ble Suprem e Court in the 
Prakash Singh case is also reflected in this Act.   One of the  salient feature of the Model Act 
was that it emphasized on  a professional police ‘service’ in a democratic society, which is 
efficient, effective, responsive to the needs of the people and a ccountable to the rule of law. 
The Act provided for social responsibilities of the police and emphasiz ed that the police 
would be governed by the principles of impartiality and human rights n orms, with special 
attention to the protection of weaker sections including minorities . A copy of the draft Model 

53 
 
Police Act as framed by the Committee was forwarded to State s for consideration and 
appropriate action on 31st October, 2006. 
4.3.2 The MHA further informed that as per available informat ion, so far 17 States, viz 
Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal P radesh, Kerala, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamilnadu, Te langana, Tripura & 
Uttarakhand have either enacted the Police Act or amended the existing Act.  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.3.3 The Committee is concerned to note that the Model Police Act was  forwarded to 
all the States in 2006 and even after 15 years, so far only 17 States have either enacted 
the Model Police Act or amended their existing Act. This show s laxity on the part of the 
remaining States. The Committee is of the view that adoption/ implem entation of the 
Act by all States will help in creating a uniform police struc ture across the country. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may take feedback  from such 
States to understand their perspective in the matter so as to ad vise them accordingly, 
for the adoption/ implementation of the Model Police Act, 2006.  
4.4 Dual system vs Police Commissionerate System 
4.4.1 The Committee deliberated upon the existing policing system in  urban and rural 
areas of the country. In this context, the Committee discussed t he prevalence of Police 
Commissionerate System in big cities of the country, in which, the Commissioner of Police 
(CP) is the head of a unified police command structure, and is responsible for the force in the 
city, and directly accountable to the State Government whereas unde r the dual system, 
the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police (SP) share  powers and 
responsibilities of police in a district. The Mooshahary Committee  has recommended that all 
cities with population above 10 lakhs should adopt the Commissionerate system. 
 
4.4.2 According to BPR&D’s ‘Data on Police Organisations’, as on 1st January, 2020, the 
State-wise Commissionerates in the country are as under- 
Table 4.1 
 
POLICE COMMISSIONERATE SYSTEM IN INDIA 
AS ON 01.01.2020 
SI. 
NO. 
STATE/UTs NUMBER OF 
CITIES  HAVING 
POLICE 
COMMISSIONERAT
E SYSTEM 
NAME OF CITIES 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 2 Vishakhapatnam Vijaywada   
2 Arunchal Pradesh 0     
3 Assam 1 Guwahati    
4 Bihar 0     
5 Chhatisgarh 0     
6 Goa 0     
7 Gujarat 4 Ahemadabad Vadodara Rajkot Surat 
8 Haryana 3 Gurugram Faridabad Panchkula  
9 Himachal Pradesh 0     

54 
 
10 Jharkhand 0     
11 Karnataka 6 Bengaluru Belagavi Hubali -
Dharwad 
Mangalor
e 
Kalaburagi Mysore   
    
12 Kerala 5 Thiruvanthapura
m 
Kolam Thrissur Ernakula
m 
Kozhikode    
13 Madhya Pradesh 0     
14 Maharashtra 11 Amravati Aurangabad Mumbai  Nagpur 
Nashik Navi Mumbai Pune  Railway 
Mumbai 
Solapur Thane Nashik  
15 Manipur 0     
16 Meghalaya 0     
17 Mizoram 0     
18 Nagaland 1 Dimapur    
19 Odisha 1 Twin City Bbsr-
Ctc 
   
20 Punjab 3 Amritsar Jalandhar Ludhiana  
21 Rajasthan 2 Jaipur Jodhpur   
22 Sikkim 0     
23 
 
Tamil Nadu 7 Chennai Coimbatore Madurai Salem 
Tirunelveli Trichy Tiruppur  
    
24 Telangana 9 Cyberabad Hyderabad Karimnagar Nizamaba
d 
Khammam Rachakonda Ramagunda
m 
Siddipet 
Warangal    
25 Tripura 0     
26 Uttar Pradesh 0     
27 Uttarakhand 0     
28 West Bengal 
 
7 Asansol 
Durgapur 
Barrackpur Bidhannagar Chandann
agar 
Howrah Kolkatta Siliguri  
29 A & N Islands 0     
30 Chandigarh 0     
31 D & N Haveli and 0     
 Daman & Diu 0     
32 Delhi 1 Delhi    
33 Jammu and Kashmir 0     
34 Ladakh 0     
35 Lakshadweep 0     
36 Puducherry 0     
Total 63     
 
4.4.3 There are a total of 63 police commissionerates in the country w ith Maharashtra 
having a maximum of 11 commissionerates, followed by Telangana (9) and West Bengal (7). 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.4.4 The Committee notes that some States in the country have created multipl e 
police commisionerates in their States, while some States having siz eable populations 
do not have any police commisionerate. The Committee is of the view th at the police 
commissionerate system leads to faster decision-making to solve u rban-centric issues. 

55 
 
With the growing number of cities with a million-plus population, the 
Commissionerate system would be a better option to manage for manageme nt of law 
and order problems and complex issues. The Committee recommen ds that the MHA 
may advise States to consider establishing police commissionerate s ystem in cities 
having more than 10 lakh population as recommended by Mooshahary Committee. 
4.4.5 The Committee also recommends that BPR&D may conduct a comparative 
study on the effectiveness of police commisionerate vis-à-vis dual system (District 
Magistrate & Superintendent of Police). It will encourage more S tates to establish 
police commissionerate system in their cities. 
4.5 Village Policing 
4.5.1 The policing system in rural areas is different from that of urba n areas. The policing 
in rural areas is done at the village level. To strengthen polic ing at the village level, the 
Mooshahary Committee recommended that the traditional system of v illage policing system 
should be reviewed and revamped. The MHA informed the Committee  that as per available 
information from some States/UTs, the status of the establishme nt of the village policing 
system is as under:- 
Table 4.2 
 
Fully Implemented Partially 
implemented 
Accepted but no 
action initiated 
Under 
Consideration 
Chhattisgarh Tamil 
Nadu, Mizoram, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Punjab, Tripura, 
Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands. 
Meghalaya, Gujarat, 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Nagaland, 
Uttarakhand, 
Chandigarh, 
Bihar, Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli 
 
4.5.2 The Committee desired to know from the MHA and State Govern ments about the 
village policing system in the country. The MHA informed that C hapter VII of Model 
Police Act 2006 circulated by the Government of India to States provi des for model law 
about “Policing in Rural Areas and Village Police System”. Th e provisions/ clauses include 
Enlistment of Village Guard and selection criteria, duties & re sponsibilities of Village 
Guard, Village Defence Parties and Community Liaison Groups. Further, t he clauses 
empower the District Superintendent of Police for the functioning of the village police 
system and not the SDO.  
4.5.3 The State Government of Odisha informed the Committ ee that the village police 
system is well in place in Odisha to assist police organi zations at the village level with a 
sanctioned strength of 18,441 Grama Rakshis. 
4.5.4 The State Government of Uttar Pradesh informed the Committee that a scheme of 
Village Chowkidar/ Gram Prahari exists in the States with 68, 337 Gram Praharis available in 
98,486 revenue villages. Further, a comprehensive Draft Act viz. “Uttar Pradesh Gram 
Prahari Act 2021” has been formulated. The State Government of Wes t Bengal informed the 
Committee that the post of Village Police Volunteers has be en introduced in the State.The 
State Government of Punjab informed the Committee that Vi llage Police Officers (VPO) 
are already active in ensuring such coordination. Further, the rural bea t system is also 
operational in the State. 

56 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.5.5 The Committee opines that the village policing system needs to b e strengthened 
in the country. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may coordinate 
with States/UTs to make arrangements for providing training to the mem bers of the 
village policing system about their role and responsibilities to hel p the police in the 
maintenance of law and order in the rural area. The Committee al so recommends that 
the BPR&D may undertake a study by collecting State-wise data on the village policing 
system in the country in order to make a proper assessment of the  prevalence and 
performance of the village policing in the country. The Committee r ecommends that the 
MHA may encourage the State/UTs and incentivize them for setting  up village policing 
system as it would reduce the burden of the local police station s at semi-urban, Notified 
Area Councils (NACs) and towns in policing, vigilance and crime prevention. 
4.6 Separation of Investigation from law and order  
4.6.1 While deliberating upon reforming the existing role and responsib ilities of the State 
police forces, the Committee discussed that one of the import ant recommendations of the 
Mooshahary Committee was the separation of core functions i.e. inves tigation of crimes and 
maintenance of law and order from the non-core functions of the police. The MHA informed 
the Committee that as per available information, the status of separation of investigation from 
law and order in the States is as follows:- 
 
Table 4.3 
 
Fully implemented Partially implemented Accepted but no action 
initiated 
Under 
Consideration 
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh,   
Maharashtra, Punjab. 
Goa, Bihar, Manipur, 
Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Delhi. 
Chhattisgarh, Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Uttarakhand, 
Tripura, Sikkim, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli. 
Meghalaya, 
Chandigarh. 
 
4.6.2 The Committee sought to know from the State Governments about the steps taken by 
them towards separation of investigation from law & order. The  State Government of Uttar 
Pradesh informed that with lesser manpower, the separation of inve stigation from law & 
order becomes impractical.  But, now, with induction of the manpower, es pecially at the sub-
inspector and constable level, it is getting better.  Separation of investigation from law & 
order is always better in the sense that the chances of securing  conviction improves with 
more professional investigation. The representatives of the State Gov ernment of Uttar 
Pradesh further informed the Committee that 20 % of the total staff at the police station is to 
be deployed under the SHO for investigation wing, and will be provi ded with necessary 
logistics support.  
4.6.3 The State Government of Odisha informed that it has already s eparated investigation 
from law and order in the police commissionerate and in other parts  of the State, it is under 
process. 

57 
 
4.6.4 The State Government of West Bengal informed that in the exi sting set up of Kolkata 
Police, there are two wings – investigating cadre and non-investig ating cadre. Only officers 
of investigating cadre investigate and others are deployed for law  and order duties. For West 
Bengal Police (WBP), Criminal Investigation Department (CID) has  a unit in each district 
exclusively for investigating important cases undertaken by them.  However, in WBP SI/ASI 
are engaged in law and order duties along with investigation on day to day basis.  
4.6.5 The Committee further discussed about the impact of non-seperat ion of investigation 
and law and order related work on conviction rate. The Committee notes from the National 
Crime Records Bureau’s (NCRB) Report ‘Crime in India’, 2020, the conviction  rate for IPC 
cases in the country is given below:- 
Table 4.4 
Disposal of IPC Cases by Police & Court 
Sl. 
No. 
Crime Head 
under IPC 
Total Cases 
for 
Investigation 
Cases 
Charge-
Sheeted 
Charge-
sheeting 
Rate 
Total Cases 
for Trial 
Total 
Cases 
Convicted  
Conviction 
Rate 
1. Murder 50,258 24,015 85.3 2,32,859 4,536 44.1 
2. Rape 43,196 23,693 82.2 1,69,558 3,814 39.3 
3. Kidnapping & 
Abduction 
1,56,358 32,081 37.3 2,64,117 3,381 35.6 
4. Rioting 81,846 43,063 89.2 5,19,589 4,613 29.5 
5. Hurt (including 
acid attack) 
7,67,762 4,73,822 88.7 29,04,719 50,694 41.9 
 
4.6.6 The conviction rate under major crime heads of murder, rape, kidnapping  & 
abduction, rioting and hurt (including acid attack) are not more than 45%. T he lowest 
conviction rate among these is of rioting (29.5%) and kidnapping & abduction (35.6%). 
4.6.7 The Committee sought to know from the State Governments about th e possible 
reasons for the low conviction rate. Some of the State Governments i nformed the Committee 
that the important reasons for the low conviction rate are lapses i n the investigation, not 
writing case diaries regularly in time, lack of time for I/O  to investigate a case as they are 
engaged in law and order and other miscellaneous duties.  
4.6.8 Other reasons for low conviction rate includes  the non-collection of evidence in 
heinous crimes as per established procedures, biological/physical/c hemical/digital evidence 
not being  preserved/ protected at the crime scene and lack of s cientific kits to collect 
evidence from the crime scene. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.6.9 The Committee notes that only a few States have separated the investigation 
from the law and order duties of their police. The Committee is  of the view that 
separation of investigation from law and order is important to maintain the 
accountability of the police and increase their autonomy in investigatin g crimes. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may advise the rem aining States 
to create separate investigations and law and order wings in the polic e. It will lead to 

58 
 
specialization and professionalism in the police department, sp eed up the investigation 
and secure the conviction of offenders. 
4.6.10   To address the shortage of staff in creating separate wings for inves tigation and 
law & order, the Committee recommends that the personnel of the  rank of ASIs & head 
constables can be utilized for investigation of minor offences of simple nature after 
adequate training. 
 
4.6.11   The Committee notes that one of the reasons of low conviction rate is  the lapses 
in the investigation. Therefore, it is important that regular monitoring a nd supervision 
of the investigation of cases should be done by senior officers. T he Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise States for the field visit of the senior police 
officers of the rank of SP/IG/DIG for on-the-spot assessment of investigati on of cases. 
The SP/DSP should submit monthly PRs (Progress Reports) on imp ortant cases and the 
performance of I/Os. Accordingly, suitable rewards/punishment sh ould also be given to 
I/Os. The Committee also recommends to upgrade the skills of the  I/Os through 
periodic training and engaging experts as and when necessary. 
4.6.12  The Committee strongly believes that forensic laboratories play a significant role 
in the scientific collection of evidence. Therefore, the Commi ttee recommends that the 
MHA may take up with States to further strengthen the for ensic laboratories in the 
country. Efforts should be made to establish at least on e forensic lab at 
regional/divisional level so that the evidence is ex amined quickly and investigation is 
not delayed. 
4.7 Outsourcing of Police Functions 
 4.7.1 Apart from investigation and law and order duties, police pers onnel have been 
entrusted with various divergent responsibilities such as traffi c management, disaster rescue, 
removal of encroachments, etc.  The Mooshahary Committee recom mended that the non-
core/peripheral and non-policing activities (e.g., serving of su mmons) should be out-sourced 
to free more policemen for investigation.  
4.7.2 The MHA informed the Committee that as per the availa ble information from some 
States/UTs, the status of the outsourcing of police functions is as under:- 
 
Table 4.5 
 
Fully Implemented Partially 
implemented 
Accepted but no 
action initiated 
Under 
Consideration 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh 
(Community Policing 
system 
implemented), 
Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands. 
Tamil Nadu, Delhi, 
Chandigarh, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
Nagaland, 
Uttarakhand,  
Sikkim, Manipur, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Punjab 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Gujarat, Maharashtra 
 
4.7.3 The Committee sought to know from the States about the steps tak en to outsource 
some of the police functions to reduce the burden on police.The Sta te Government of 

59 
 
Mizoram informed that the Village Defence Party (VDP) and NGOs  at their respective local 
areas have been assisting police in various divergent responsibilities.  
 
4.7.4 The State Government of Andhra Pradesh informed that to reduce  the burden on the 
regular police, technology initiatives and automation of systems-m aintenance of equipment 
are being done by reputed private agencies. Further, the guard duties at v ital installations, 
treasuries, security at bank chests are being taken up  by Special Protection Force (SPF). 
4.7.5 The State Government of Gujarat informed that their police de partment has identified 
certain areas for outsourcing like drivers, followers, housekeeping,  canteen operation, 
maintenance of the garden, maintenance and upkeep of the resi dential and non-residential 
building.  
 
4.7.6 The State Government of Sikkim informed that a separate unit  for disaster rescue i.e. 
State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) has been created. There  is a separate unit For traffic 
management whereas for Fire Service, a separate Directorate has  been set up. A separate 
ERSS-112 has recently been set up for emergency and disaster rescue. 
4.7.7 The State Government of Meghalaya informed that to reduce the burden on the State 
police, the officials of the department are being assisted by the volunteers of home guards and 
civil defense in the management and regulation of traffic in  the State. The officials of State 
Disaster Response Force assist during natural and man-made calami ties.Village Development 
Party (VDP) and Community Liaison Group (CLG) have been constituted to a ssist police 
officials at times of emergencies. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.7.8 The Committee notes that the police in some of the States are outsou rcing 
personnel and leveraging technology to reduce the burden on police . The Committee is 
of the view that for efficient policing, there is a need for the pol ice force to restrict 
themselves to core functions of investigation of cases and maintenanc e of law & order.  
The Committee recommends that the MHA may task BPR&D to conduct a study to 
determine such functions of the police that can be outsourced wi th requisite training. 
The MHA can then advise States based on the outcome of the study. T hese measures 
will help reduce the workload of the police and improve their  efficiency. This will save 
manpower and promote police-community partnerships by involving n on-police 
communities.  
 
4.8 Escorting the Under-Trial Prisoners 
4.8.1 Shortage of manpower is one of the reasons for lack of separation  of investigation 
from law & order duties of the police. The Committee is of the opinion that a large number of 
police personnel are engaged in escorting the under-trial prisoners from prison to the court 
every day. This leads to shortage of manpower at the police station s. It also hampers their 
performance. Therefore, the Committee discussed the matter during the course of deliberation 
on the subject.  
4.8.2 The MHA informed the Committee that "reduction in the nu mber of arrests" is one of 
the recommendations of the Mooshahary Committee on police reforms. Th e recommendation 
is that arrest is not mandatory while investigating cognizable o ffenses. It should be resorted 
to only in cases of heinous/specified category of cases. The S tates have been requested to 

60 
 
consider the reform and the reform was included for incentive fund in 2019-20. The reduction 
in the number of arrests will impact the issue of manpower escorting under-trial prisoners. 
4.8.3 The MHA further informed the Committee that the use of technology wi ll also resolve 
the issue up to a large extent.  Another way is to implement  recommendations of the 
Mooshahary Committee on an orderly system. The existing system i s to be replaced by a 
system of attachment of one constable /helper for assisting in atte nding to petitioners and 
telephones. The States have to use the manpower effectively on-court  duties of police, 
prevention of crime, investigation and assisting magistracy in maintaining law and order. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.8.4 The Committee notes that the State police has a multifarious role to p erform but 
has a shortage of staff. Further, as pointed out by Mooshahary Committe e, arrests 
should be resorted to only in cases of heinous/ specified category of crimes and a 
reduction in the number of arrests will impact the issue of m anpower escorting under-
trial prisoners. Therefore, the States should use the manpower ju diciously. The 
Committee recommends that the MHA may advise the States to take up with  their 
respective courts and prisons to consider holding virtual trials of the prisoners, -
particularly those who are in high-risk groups - through video con ferencing. It will help 
in dedicating less police force for escorting under-trial pr isoners to courts and also save 
resources.  
4.9 Directorate of Prosecution 
 
4.9.1 The Committee believes that it is important that the investigating officers should 
work in close coordination with the prosecution/legal expe rts during the course of the 
investigation, filing of charge sheets and trials. In this re gard, the Mooshahary Committee 
has recommended for establishment of the Directorate of Prosecution  in the States/UTs so 
that the control over prosecution should rest with senior police offic ers. This is vital for the 
maintenance of proper standards of prosecution during the trials. 
4.9.2 The MHA informed the Committee that as per available  information from some 
States/UTs. The status of the establishment of the Directorate of Prosecution is as under:- 
Table 4.6 
 
Fully Implemented Partially 
implemented 
Accepted but no 
action initiated 
Under 
Consideration 
Not agreed 
Chhattisgarh, Tamil 
Nadu, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Mizoram, Manipur Meghalaya, 
Uttarakhand, 
Gujarat, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli. 
Nagaland, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Punjab 
Bihar, 
Maharashtra 
 
4.9.3 The Committee enquired from MHA as to whether the public prose cutors should be 
posted in Police Stations as well as in the office of the S P/DSP/IG.  The MHA replied that 
according to Malimath Committee “another important factor for the  success of the 
prosecution is proper coordination between the prosecutor and the Inve stigating Officer 

61 
 
without in any manner undermining the independence of the prosecutor by ma king 
subordinate to the police hierarchy.”  The Malimath Committee, therefore, does not make a 
recommendation for the Assistant Public Prosecutor to be attached  to the police stations or 
the SP.  The MHA further informed that the police should seek the  advice and guidance of 
the prosecution machinery for framing more robust charge sheets and als o on procedural 
aspects so as to avoid lapses in this regard.  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.9.4 The Committee is of the view that the key factor in the success of prosecution is 
proper coordination between the prosecutor and the inves tigator. Therefore, the 
prosecution set up in the States needs to be strengthened. Th e Committee notes that 
many States/UTs have not established the Directorate of Prose cution. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise these States for establishing the  Directorate of 
Prosecution within a time frame. 
4.9.5 The Committee notes that the Malimath Committee has not made a 
recommendation for the Assistant Public Prosecutor to be attached to the police stations 
or the SP. But, the Committee is of the view that there is a lac k of legal advice available 
to the investigating officers. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may 
take up with the Ministry of Law & Justice and the States for re structuring of 
prosecution directorates to closely align the prosecutors/ legal ex perts with the 
investigators. It will help them in legal guidance during the in vestigation, collection of 
evidence, filing of charge sheets and securing conviction. 
4.10 Police Establishment Board (PEB)  
4.10.1  To decide all transfers, postings, promotions and other service  related matters for 
police officers, the Mooshahary Committee  recommended that separat e State level PEB 
should be set up in each State for Gazetted and non-Gazetted ranks. The MHA informed the 
Committee that as per information available from some of th e States, the status of 
establishment of State Police Establishment Boards is as follows:- 
Table 4.7 
 
Fully implemented Partially implemented Accepted but no action 
initiated 
Under 
Consideration 
Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal Pradesh, 
Sikkim, Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, Punjab, 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 
Nagaland, Gujarat Manipur Bihar 
 
4.10.2  The Committee during the course of deliberations on the subject, sought to know from 
the State Governments about the establishment of Police Establishment Boards in their State.  

62 
 
4.10.3  The representative of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh  informed that the 
transfers of non-gazetted police personnel are done by the Police Estab lishment Board at the 
headquarters level constituted by the Government of Uttar Pradesh. Further, State-level   
Police Establishment Board is constituted in the State, which recommends the transfer and 
posting of IPS officers. 
4.10.4  The State Government of Odisha informed the Committee tha t Police Establishment 
Board has been formed for the transfer and posting of police officers at the  State level, Range 
level and District level.  
4.10.5  The State Government of West Bengal informed that the Wes t Bengal Board is 
created for the posting of all police personnel in the rank of Dy. SP and above. 
4.10.6  The State Government of Gujarat informed that the Gujarat Pol ice Establishment 
Board has been set up for transfers as well as promotions. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.10.7  The Committee notes that as per available information, few States have 
established Police Establishment Boards, and recommends that MHA  may advise the 
remaining States to create Police Establishment Boards for the trans fer or posting of 
the IPS officers as well as officials posted at Zone/Range/Di strict level in a judicious and 
impartial manner.  
4.11 Promotional Avenues of Constables 
4.11.1  While discussing the strength of State police forces in the country, the Committee was 
informed by the MHA that the constables constitutes the highest st rength of the State police 
forces. As per BPR&D’s ‘Data on Police Organizations’, as on 1st January, 2020, the actual 
strength of the constables in State police force is 8,10,554, out of t otal actual strength of 
20,91,448, which is 38.75%.  
4.11.2  The Mooshahary Committee has recommended that at least 3 promotions should be 
given to the constables in entire carrer .Therefore, the Committe e desired to be apprised from 
the MHA about the carrer progression avenues of constables in the country . The MHA 
informed the Committee that the State Governments are responsibl e to ensure the career 
progression of their police personnel. The constables are promoted as h ead constables, 
assistant sub-inspectors, sub-inspectors and inspectors depending upon t heir eligibility 
criteria and suitability decided by the States. As per availa ble information from some of the 
States/UTs, the status of the establishment of the Promotional Ave nues of Constables, as 
recommended by Mooshahary Committee is as under:- 
Table 4.8 
Fully Implemented Partially 
implemented 
Accepted but no 
action initiated 
Under 
Consideration 
Tamil Nadu, Bihar, 
Meghalaya, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, Tripura, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Sikkim, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Dadra & 
Chhattisgarh, 
Karnataka, Gujarat, 
Delhi 
Manipur Nagaland 

63 
 
 
 
 
4.11.3  The MHA further informed that Section 54 of the Model Police A ct 2006 circulated 
by the Government of India to States /UTs has the provision of proce dure for promotion of 
police officers. The clause says as follows:- 
54. Procedure for promotion of police officers- 
                ‘Promotion to each rank in the Police Service shall be based on merit, which 
would include seniority, to be evaluated through the result of a qu alifying 
examination and performance evaluation in respect of each officer. The Director-
General of Police shall, with the approval of the State Governme nt, frame the 
evaluation criteria for each rank and category of police personnel’ 
 Provided that for the officers of the Indian Police Service, such evaluation criteria 
shall be as framed by the Government of India. 
4.11.4    The Committee sought to know from the State Governments a bout the promotional 
avenues along with incentive linked promotion scheme for the consta bles in their State. The 
information furnished from some of the State Governments have been tabulated as under:- 
 
Table 4.9
 
 
S.No. State Promotional avenues of constables 
1 Odisha Constables are promoted to the next rank of HC/Havi ldar. Besides, there is a 
direct promotion to the rank of ASI of Police through departmental examination. 
2 Uttar Pradesh Provision has been made by the Government that the constable is promoted to the 
post of Head Constable in 07 years and to the post of sub-inspec tor in 10 years 
after his 03 years of service. After that, after the serv ice of 07 years, provision has 
been made for promotion to the post of Inspector on a total ser vice of 17 years. 
4 Goa The promotion is done as per seniority basis. Howeve r , there is no incentive-
linked promotion scheme in the State,  
5 Andhra Pradesh Apart from regular promotions, accelerated  promotions to the police personnel 
who turned out  an outstanding performance in anti-extremist operations, are 
being continued. Such promotions will be ordered by the Gover nment based on 
recommendations of the committee constituted for the purpose.  
6 Assam Under this Modified Assured Career Progression Schem e (MACPS), the 
employees avail Assured Career Progression (ACP) in the for m of financial 
benefit in 10, 20, 30 years if not promoted during the tenure. 
The constables (Armed and Unarmed branch) after completion of  5 years of 
service in the rank are eligible to attend the Jr. NCO's  Cadre Course (8 weeks) (in 
order of seniority), cadre course for promotion to the next h igher rank of Naik 
(Unarmed Branch). After completion of 2 years of service in the rank  to Naik 
(Unarmed Branch), they are eligible to attend the SR. NCO's Cadre Course (12 
Weeks) for promotion to the rank of Head Constable (UB). After completion of 5 
years, Armed Branch Sub Inspector are eligible for promot ion to the rank of 
Armed Branch Inspector on the basis of seniority. 
7 Mizoram There is no incentive -linked promotion scheme. However, there is a provision for 
out-of-turn promotion in respect of meritorious sportspersons among  State 
Government employees. Promotion of constable to head constabl e (80% by 
seniority promotion, 20% by limited departmental examination),  constable/ head 
constable to ASI (15% by seniority promotion, 60% by limited depart mental 
examination, 25% by direct recruitment), ASI to SI (50% by se niority promotion 
and 50% by direct recruitment), SI to Inspector (100% by senior ity promotion). 
Nagar Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 

64 
 
8 Jharkhand Non-matric constables are promoted to Havaldar then to PSI (Polic e Sub 
Inspector) (training) then PI (training) and matric pass constables  are promoted to 
ASI then to SI and then to inspector subject to vacancy/ senior ity in the 
department. An opportunity for direct recruitment of constable rank police 
personnel to the level of police sub-inspector through limited e xamination within 
the department. 
9 Sikkim The constables get time bound promotion according to r ecruitment and promotion 
rules of Sikkim police manual. 
10 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
The constables in the State police are promoted to the r ank of ASI and SI as per 
vacancies. 
11 Meghalaya To ensure that constables are being promoted to the next rank, direct recruitment  
in the rank of sub-inspectors in the District Armed Branch and in  the Armed 
Police Battalions have been limited to 20%. However, there i s no scheme for 
incentive link promotion. But, promotions are given to offici als for their 
outstanding contribution in the field of sports, extracurric ular activities and for 
their gallant act. 
12 Tripura On completion of 2 years as a constable on 1 st day of January of every year in 
which DPC is convened on the basis of departmental examination as  prescribed by 
the State Government, constables may appear in departmental exam ination for 
promotion from constable to Naik, Constable (driver), Head C onstable (unarmed 
branch), Asst. Sub-Inspector of police, as per recruitment rules. 
13 Himachal Pradesh A Constable has career progression avenues for promotion up to the  rank of Dy. 
Superintendent of Police. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.11.5  The Committee notes that according to MHA, the State Governments ar e 
responsible to ensure the career progression of their police personnel. However, the 
promotional aspect is a very important aspect of police reform on w hich the Union 
Government is in contact with the State Government. The Committee further notes that 
the system of promotion of constables is different in the States and observes that most of 
the States do not follow incentive linked promotion schemes or an y kind of 
extraordinary performance-linked promotion schemes. The Committee  recommends 
that MHA may encourage States to improve the promotional avenues of the c onstables 
through regular departmental exams and incentive-linked promotion schemes to keep 
them motivated. 
 
4.12 The Housing of Police Personnel 
4.12.1  The Mooshahary Committee recommended that 100% family accom modation should 
be provided for all non-Gazetted ranks of police personnel along with the additional 
provision of barracks accommodation at district headquarters. But, the housing of State police 
personnel is not satisfactory in the country. 
4.12.2   The Committee sought to know from MHA about the details of t he police 
modernisation grant given to the States for catering to the housi ng needs of the state police 
personnel. The MHA replied that the centrally sponsored scheme of Assistan ce to States for 
Modernisation of Police has been formulated under the State List to encourage States to 
prioritize in areas that require more attention. As the Stat e police forces operate under the 
State Governments, providing housing to the police personnel is the prim ary responsibility of 
the State Governments. Further, the Government of India has impl emented the 
recommendation of the XIV Finance Commission to increase the sh are of States in central 
taxes from 32 % to 42 % since the year 2015-16. Consequent to this,  it was expected that the 
States would allocate more funds for the construction of police buildings  and police housing. 

65 
 
However, in specific theatres of insurgency affected North-Easte rn States and LWE affected 
districts, construction including police housing was revived after appro val to the umbrella 
scheme of Modernisation of Police Forces in September, 2017.   
4.12.3  From the responses to queries by the Committee, the informat ion  received from the 
State Governments about the housing satisfaction level of police pe rsonnel in their States has 
been tabulated below for reference:- 
 
Table 4.10 
 
S.No. State Housing satisfaction level 
1 Assam 16.50% (L/S Qtr.) 
22.70% (U/S Qtr.) 
2 Andhra Pradesh 37.88% 
3 Goa 16% (approx)-Upper subordinates (PI/PSI/ASI) 
11% (approx)-Lower subordinates (HC/PC) 
4 Mizoram 16.43% 
5 Uttar Pradesh  43.64% 
6 Punjab 19% 
7 Odisha 17.43%- Constabulary 
36.17%-Subordinate officers 
8 Delhi 19.53% 
9 Manipur 5.12% (as on 1st January, 2021) 
10 West Bengal 34% 
11 Sikkim Approximately, 10 % of the police personnel are provided 
Government quarters. 
12 Arunachal Pradesh 24%  
13 Meghalaya 23% 
14 Tripura Constable to Havildar-8.92% 
ASI to Inspector-55.19% 
Higher Officials-52.35% 
 
4.12.4  The State Government of Manipur informed the Committee tha t the Central 
assistance for housing/ accommodation facilities for the State Police personnel is not 
adequate. Therefore, the Fund allocation for Police housing/acco mmodation under Police 
Modernisation may be increased so that the housing satisfaction l evel of Manipur police may 
be increased to 25% of the national level. 
 

66 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.12.5  The Committee is disappointed to note the poor housing satisfaction levels of the 
State police personnel in the country. The Committee further notes that in specific 
theatres of insurgency affected, the North-Eastern States and LWE af fected districts, 
construction including police housing was revived after approval to the umbrella 
scheme of Modernisation of Police Forces in September, 2017.   The Committee 
recommends that MHA may actively consider the allocation of funds to all States/UTs 
for housing under the 'Assistance to States for Modernisation of P olice’. The States may 
also be advised to take steps for improving the housing satisfa ction level of police 
personnel in a phased manner. For this, the Committee recomme nds that the Centre 
may establish a mechanism for providing adequate assistance to St ates for this specific 
purpose and persuade them to implement the housing projects fo r the police personnel 
emphatically and monitor it through quarterly reviews. 
4.13 Independent Police Complaint Authority 
4.13.1  The Committee examined the need for a grievance redressal  mechanism, both for the 
citizens as well as within the police organization, so that the functioning improves and the 
confidence of the society is strengthened. In this context, the Committee sought to know from 
the MHA about the grievance redressal mechanism in State police  departments of the 
country. 
4.13.2   The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that it has circulated the 
Model Police Act, 2006 to all State Governments which has the  provision of constituting 
Police Accountability Commission & District Accountability Authority for ensuring 
accountability of the police. This Act also describes the soc ial responsibility of the police. 
The responsibility includes the display of good behavior with members of the public with due 
courtesy and decorum, guiding and assisting members of the public, pa rticularly senior 
citizens, women, children, the poor and indigent and physically or m entally challenged 
individuals found on streets or other public places or otherwise. Further,  one of the directions 
of the Supreme Court of India in the Prakash Singh case on police re forms was to constitute 
Police Complaints Authorities at the State and District le vels for looking into complaints 
against police officers. These directions were forwarded to the States/UTs for its 
implementation. 
4.13.3  The Committee sought to know about the number of States/UTs that have set up an 
independent complaints authority to inquire into complaints of police m isconduct. The MHA 
replied that as per information available following States/UTs  have constituted Police 
Complaints Authorities at the State and District levels for looking into complaints against 
police officers: - 
(i) Arunachal Pradesh (ii) Assam (iii) Chhattisgarh (iv) Goa (v) Guja rat (vi) Haryana (vii) 
Himachal Pradesh(viii) Jharkhand (ix) Karnataka (x) Kerala (xi) Madhya P radesh (xii) 
Maharashtra (xiii) Manipur (xiv) Meghalaya (xv) Mizoram (xvi) Nagaland (xv ii) Odisha 
(xviii) Punjab(xix) Rajasthan (xx) Sikkim (xxi) Tamil Nadu (xxii) Tripura (xxiii) Uttar 
Pradesh (xxiv) Uttarakhand (xxv)West Bengal (xxvi) Andaman & Nicobar Islands (xxvii) 
Chandigarh(xxviii) Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu (xxix) De lhi (xxx) 
Lakshadweep (xxxi) Puducherry. 
* Bihar has constituted only the “District Accountability Authority” for each district. 
 

67 
 
4.13.4   During the course of deliberation on the subject, the representa tive of the State 
Government of Odisha informed the Committee that in pursuance to the  directions of the 
Hon’ble Apex Court, “Police Complaints Authority” was constituted by  conferring on the 
Lokpal, the functions of the “Police Complaint Authority” at the State level and district level 
to look into the complaints against the police officers. 5 reg ular posts and 9 contractual posts 
have been created for the functioning of the Police Complaint  Authority. The Police 
Complaint Authority has started functioning.  
 
4.13.5   The representative of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh  informed the 
Committee that all the complaints related to police are deal t with by suitable senior police 
officers by conducting inquiries. 
 
4.13.6   The representative of the State Government of Punjab informe d the 
Committee that a Central Police Complaints Authority exists t hat is headed by a retired 
officer of the rank of Chief Secretary. Further, there also exists an Int ernal Vigilance Cell 
(IVC) in the Punjab police that is headed by an ADGP rank officer. 
4.13.7 The representative of the State Government of Gujarat informed th e Committee that 
State and District level Police Complaints Authority have been incorporated in Sec-32(G)(H) 
of Gujarat Police Act, 1951.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.13.8  The Committee notes that 31 States/UTs have constituted Police Comp laints 
Authorities at the State and District levels for looking into complai nts against police 
officers. The Committee is of the view that the Police Complaint Auth ority should be 
established outside the police force. Therefore, The Committee  recommends that the 
MHA along with the Ministry of Law & Justice may take up with State s to ensure that 
the Police Complaint Authority should comprise of retired High Cou rt Judges, retired 
senior civil servant/ police officers, eminent jurists along with  the representation of 
women. The Committee also recommends that BPR&D may conduct a s tudy to assess 
the effectiveness of the Independent Police Complaint Authori ty in States to check 
whether the complaints against police personnel have gone up or  reduced. The study 
may also include the types of complaints against police personnel an d action taken 
thereon.  
 
4.13.9   The Committee also recommends that the MHA may advise States that the 
internal grievance redressal cell of police should work in a time-bound manner so that 
the grievances of aggrieved police personnel are addressed in time.  
 
4.14 Revisiting the laws  
4.14.1   During the course of the examination of the subject, the Comm ittee deliberated that 
the existing acts/ rules concerning State police should be review ed and restructured 
periodically through suitable amendments as per the needs. The Indian Penal Code, 1860 and 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 are archaic laws that were framed durin g the colonial era. In this 
connection, the Mooshahary Committee has recommended to review t he confession made 
under Section 25 and 26 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.  
4.15 Section 25, Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
4.15.1  The Section of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 reads as under:- 

68 
 
'Confession to police officer not to be proved.—No confession 
made to a police officer, shall be proved as against a person 
accused of any offense.—No confession made to a police officer, 
shall be proved as against a person accused of any offense.' 
 
4.16 Section 353, Indian Penal Code, 1860 
4.16.1   The Committee raised concern on the misuse of section 353  of the Indian Penal 
Code (IPC) which reads as under:- 
‘Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharg e 
of his duty.—Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any 
person being a public servant in the execution of his duty as such 
public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person fr om 
discharging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of 
anything done or attempted to be done by such person in the lawful 
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which ma y 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.’ 
 
4.16.2  The Committee discussed that Section 353 is a non-bailable Section and it has been 
seen that, at times, it is imposed on people during non-violent agit ation. Consequently, the 
agitators have to face trial which leads to their unnecessary harassment.  
Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances  (NDPS) Act, 1985 
4.16.3 During the deliberations on the subject, the Committee discuss ed the misuse of NDPS 
Act, 1985, by the concerned authorities in the cases of recovery of very small quantity of 
drugs. The Committee was given to understand that the harsh punishment  and burden of 
proof on the accused under the NDPS Act, 1985 is the main cause o f concern through which, 
sometimes, cases are framed or are not properly booked under the ND PS Act, 1985, to keep 
the accused for longer period in judicial custody. The Committee fel t that sufficient 
safeguards may be incorporated in the Act to prevent its misuse, and denial of freedom and 
liberties to affected persons. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.16.4     The Committee gathers that the MHA has constituted a Committee to review  
the Indian Penal Code, 1860, Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and Ind ian Evidence Act, 
1872. The Committee recommends that the MHA may discuss the matter wi th all the 
stakeholders including the States, keeping in view of the best  global practices in policing 
and constitutional rights and safeguards of the citizens. The Committee  would like to be 
apprised about the recommendations made by the Committee pertaining to these laws. 
4.16.5 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs m ay consider to 
take up with the concerned Ministry/ Department to review the NDP S Act, 1985, in the 
light of the concern raised by the Committee. 
4.17 Police-Community Relations 
 
4.17.1  Strong relationships of mutual trust between police and the communities are critical in 
maintaining public safety and effective policing. Police offici als rely on the cooperation of 

69 
 
community members to provide information about crime in their neighborh oods and to work 
with the police to devise solutions to crime and disorder problems.  Similarly, community 
member’s willingness to trust the police depends on whether the poli ce actions reflect 
community values and incorporate the principles of procedural justice a nd legitimacy. In this 
context, the Committee discussed with the Ministry of Home Af fairs and State Governments 
about their community policing initiatives and steps taken to f urther strengthen the relation of 
police with the community. 
 
4.17.2  The BPR&D informed the Committee that under the National Police Mission, it has 
launched the "Student Police Cadet (SPC) Programme” in 2018, for character and capacity 
building for students of classes 8 and 9. The programme is running  in over 11,300 schools 
across the country and over 8,00,000 SPC cadets are registered in the program. 
 
4.17.3  The representatives of the State Government of Punjab inform ed the Committee 
that under the Community Policing Project (Saanjh), separate buildings were constructed in 
close vicinity of the police stations to provide police-related services like verifications, 
crime information, registration of lost articles, permissions, e tc. at a very nominal cost. It is 
an institutionalized effort to integrate community policing with the existing policing system 
and it provides vast space for police-community participation, with a n inbuilt mechanism 
of coordination with civil, judicial and non-government organizations. This  coordination 
proves extremely useful in the mobilization of public support and help. 
 
4.17.4  The State Government of Rajasthan informed the Committee that the police is 
committed to build trust and confidence in the community by ma ximizing its outreach to the 
people, for effective service delivery and grievance redressal. W ith this thought in mind, they 
have started a 'Jansahbhagita Scheme' in 2018, for the purpose of taki ng policing to the 
doorstep of a common man, for providing prompt relief and effective redre ssal in the 
remotest of villages. During these programs almost 2,253 complaints  were received and have 
been resolved so far. This scheme has proved to be very success ful in establishing direct 
communication with the community population, at regular intervals, w hich in turn has helped 
in catering to a larger section of the population. They further i nformed that directions have 
already been issued to the local police to be in touch with th e nearby school, college and 
university. Classes are also taken by police officers for better interaction.  
 
4.17.5  Some of the States also informed the Committee that the y have established 
Community Liaison Groups (C.L.G.) to develop a regular communica tion channel between 
police and community for effectively addressing the issues at the local level. Various 
Committees have also been formed at community/village/dist rict level for regular police-
people interaction and for effective redressal of the grievance of th e people. Apart from 
above, community bonding trainings have been imparted to the police officials, especially on 
matters of public importance such as etiquettes to deal with  general public, gender 
sensitization and others. 
 
4.17.6  In the meeting held on 22 nd July, 2021, the Committee discussed the need of creation 
of a civil police club where the police can interact with civ il authorities like lawyers and 
university professors. The State Government of Rajasthan replied that a platform to have a 
regular dialogue of Police with civil society representatives  like lawyers, university 
professors, scholars, councilors, NGOs is a great idea. In this backdro p, Rajasthan police 
intend to establish 'Community Police Resource Centers’ in each di strict, which can act as an 
active focal point for this purpose. 

70 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.17.7  The Committee strongly believes that policing system should b e transparent, 
independent, accountable and people-friendly. The Committee opin es that community 
policing involves a cooperative effort between police and the c ommunities where both 
can work together to solve the crime and crime-related problems.   Further, police and 
public partnerships are also key in enabling a more proactive  and agile approach to 
combating crime.  
 
4.17.8  The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the States to improve the relation of 
police with the community and recommends that the MHA may take u p with States to 
showcase the positive initiatives undertaken by the various State pol ice to build a 
friendly image among people. The Committee also recommends that MHA  may create a 
forum for the exchange of best practices of police-people interaction among the States. 
  
 4.18 Challenges in Police Reforms 
4.18.1   Despite the efforts of the Central and State Governments to reform the policing 
system in the country through the implementation of the Modal Police  Act, 2006, 
implementation of the recommendation of the Mooshahary Committee an d other initiatives, 
there are certain factors that are hampering and slowing down the p ace of police reforms in 
the country. During the course of examination of the subject, the Com mittee enquired from 
the State Governments about the factors that are affecting the  process of police reforms in 
their jurisdiction. The responses of some of the State Governments hav e been enumerated 
below:-  
1. The educational background especially at the constable level is a  major 
limitation in modernizing the force whether it is in terms of leveraging 
technology or upgrading to new processes.  
2. Behavioral changes are slow and difficult to achieve progressively with age. 
3. The volume of work is disproportionately high vis-à-vis the workforce 
available. The over-worked average policeman is highly susceptible  to 
external influences adversely affecting his output.  
4. Structural and functional changes in the police not only require admin istrative 
and financial approval at the Govt. level, but also the will and pa ssion to 
implement them in a time-bound manner so as to bring about a perce ptible 
change.  
5. Changes in law, directions by courts/ commissions, etc. are aff ected 
immediately on paper but the commensurate upgrades in resources, tr aining, 
etc. are time-consuming.  
6. Top-down or Bottom-up reforms policy has different approaches and brings 
about different results. Each strategy has its own merits and de merits and has 
to be deployed judiciously. 
7. Shift in Crime profile from traditional crimes to economic and cyber frauds. 

71 
 
8. Getting real-time information for forensic analysis from oversea s service 
providers (internet service providers) and telecommunication services is  often 
too slow to identify the offender.  
9.  Unmanned aerial vehicles & drones have emerged as t he latest threat, posing 
serious security concerns along with the border areas  for delivery of drugs, 
arms, etc.  
10. Organized Criminal Groups/ elements in the State have deve loped inter-state 
and international linkages over the years.  
11. The recovery of large consignments of illicit country-made weapons from the 
hinterland poses numerous challenges to the law and order situation in the 
States.  
12. Limited human resource capacity at Police Stations translates into sub-optimal 
service delivery.  
13. There is a shortage of resources available for utilization by th e police 
department which is consequently translating into not only a lack of 
infrastructure but also a shortfall in maintenance of pre-existing infrastructure. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.18.2  The Committee expresses its concern that a multitude of factor s are impeding 
the pace of police reforms in the country. It believes that wi th sustained efforts in 
pursuit of police reforms, MHA in collaboration with States/UT s will overcome these 
challenges. The Committee, therefore, recommends that MHA may keep  endeavoring 
towards its goal steadily and bring out much-needed reforms in the police force. 
**** 
 

72 
 
             OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS- AT A GLANCE  
 
 
State/UT Wise Status of Recommendations of  Mooshahary Committee  
 
 The Committee notes that 12 States/UTs have not furnished any infor mation on 
the implementation of the 49 Recommendations of the Mooshahary Commi ttee, despite 
advisories/reminders from MHA. The Committee recommends that MH A may take up 
with these States/UTs to furnish their status within a time frame . The Committee 
desires to be apprised about the status of implementation of these recommendations in 
all States/UTs. 
 (para 1.4.4)  
 
Ranking of Police Stations 
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative of ranking of police stations i n the 
country. The Committee believes that the annual ranking of police stati ons work as a 
constant guide for improvements. It also provides a picture of th e state of physical 
infrastructure, resources and deficiencies at the level of police stations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the MHA may incentivize the best poli ce stations in terms 
of funds and resources. It will recognize their hard work an d create an environment of 
healthy competition among all police stations in the country.  
(para 1.4.8 ) 
 
Training Mandate of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
 
  From the information provided by the Ministry, the Committee unders tands 
that among the above-mentioned three Institutes, BPR&D occupies a ke y position, as it 
plays a vital role in the field of research. The Committee rec ommends that the BPR&D 
must make regular assessments of the need for more training institutes in the country so 
that the MHA can advise States to increase their training capacity ad equately, to train 
all their police personnel for making them more professionally efficient.  
(Para 2.2.15) 
The Committee takes note of the various initiatives undertaken by the T raining 
Division of BPR&D. While the Institute undertakes research for the requirements of the 
police, the need to analyze the source, pattern, social base and reasons for the crimes is 
also highly essential. Hence, the Committee recommends that the MHA  may entrust 
upon the BPR&D, the responsibility of making such assessments as well so that it will 
help the BPR&D in taking suitable steps while formulating the training programmes 
for the personnel. This will help in dealing with the evolving trends of crime. 
(Para 2.2.16) 
The Committee observed that the BPR&D’s ‘Data on Police Organizations’ is 
released with a lag of one/more than a year. As of now, data pertaining to the year 2019 
are available vide its publication date marked as  1st January, 2020. The Committee feels 
that in the  digital age and faster mode of communication, compilation  of data should 
not be a time-consuming process. The Committee recommends that the MHA may take 

73 
 
up with BPR&D to fast track the compilation of Data on Police Organ ization and 
endeavour to reduce the time lag to 6 months in place of 1 y ear so that the reports 
released by the BPR&D could be of relevant use. 
(Para 2.2.17) 
 
The Committee appreciates the Training Needs Analysis (TNA) of th e SVPNPA 
to take feedback from DGPs, ex-DGP, etc., to improve the training curriculum. 
However, the Committee also notes with concern the corruption comp laints against 
some IPS Officers. The Committee, therefore, recommends tha t the faculty members of 
the SVPNPA should chalk out a programme during the lean period  of their training 
calendar, to visit the Districts  to assess the performance of the probationary officers 
(POs) at the ground level. In view of the Committee, this would pr ovide a practical 
assessment of the shortcomings and lacunae which could be elim inated through further 
improvement in the training modules. 
              (para 2.2.18)  
  With regard to the training syllabi of the Academies, the Committe e is of the 
firm opinion that the training syllabus should be dynamic and in sync with the changing 
need and times. A static syllabus will only make the entire t raining process redundant 
and a mere formality. The Committee notes that SVPNPA and NEPA do review the 
content of the training curriculum from time to time. However, the Co mmittee 
recommends that a mechanism may be developed to review and update  the training 
curriculum biennially/ triennially based on the professional r equirement and ground-
level assessment of the POs.  
(para 2.2.19) 
The Committee is of the view that the pysche of criminal minds has  undergone a 
sea change, with the evolution of modern technology. Cases of newer ways  of using 
technology for committing crimes particularly, financial frauds are  rising day by day. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the training institutions lik e SVPNPA and 
NEPA may take up with States training academies to conduct training/ sensitization 
programmes on artificial intelligence, robotics, drone technology, for ensic and ballistic 
sciences, so that police personnel become adept in the detec tion, investigation and 
prevention of such crimes in a professional way. 
 (para 2.2.20) 
 
Training at State Level 
From the information provided by the States, the Committee understands  that 
the States have their own training institutes that are imparting traini ng to the state 
police personnel. The Committee also notes that as on 1 st January, 2020, there are 203 
police training institutes in the country. The Committee recomm ends that the MHA 
may take up with States/UTs to scale up the training capacity of all  training institutions 
in the country to enhance their infrastructure with virtual clas srooms, cyber labs and 
also to develop a few training centres as 'Centre of Excellenc e for certain specific 
subjects relating to the police system. This will also facilitate training opportunities for 

74 
 
the maximum number of police personnel in the States. The MHA m ay also allocate 
adequate funds and resources for the same. The Committee als o recommends that the 
MHA may advise States/UTs to create training facilities at the di strict level for 
annual/periodic refresher training of police personnel. 
(para 2.3.6)  
Linkage with Universities 
 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States to link a clu ster of 
police stations to a particular university or a college.  This w ill lead to a collaboration 
with the scholars, particularly in the departments of sociology, philosophy, political 
science to develop soft skills and bring a behavioral change i n the police personnel. 
Further, the academicians and scholars who are specialists on ge nder and criminal 
issues should be invited to be a part of the training syllabus. 
(para 2.4.2) 
Police University 
 
 The Committee notes that the Sardar Patel University of Pol ice Security and 
Criminal Justice at Jodhpur, Rajasthan is the only University of its kind with a focus on 
teaching and research in the field of Police, Criminal Justic e, Social Sciences, Public 
Safety and Security and other related fields. The Committee lauds the endeavor of the 
Rajasthan Government in this regard. The Committee, recommend s that the MHA 
may take up with the State Governments to open more pol ice universities in their 
respective States, or more than one State could team up to open su ch a University in a 
region. These universities can then take up research on regional  issues related to crime, 
criminal justice, public safety and security which would be nefit the police in addressing 
the issues in a more comprehensive manner.  
(para 2.5.2) 
The Behavior of Police Personnel 
 The Committee is pleased to note that the experts on gender issu es, criminal 
investigation and trial, etc., are roped in to interact frequen tly with the police 
probationers and share their experiences. However, the Committee a lso notes with 
anguish that the public image of police throughout the country is more on a negative 
side. Police are often seen as insensitive towards the common  man and vulnerable 
sections. While there is no denying the fact that various reason s could be attributed to 
such behavior on the part of the Police, emphasis on right trai ning in this regard is one 
of the ways to develop such attributes in the Police Personnel. T he Committee is of the 
considered view that the shift from an entitlement-based appro ach to a rights-based 
approach is needed for positive change in attitudes of police personnel as well. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that training institutes should en sure that 
inculcating soft skills in Police Personnel must always be t he priority and focal point of 
their training modules. 
(para 2.6.4) 
 The Committee would like to emphasize that in a democratic country, people’s 
representatives have been accorded higher position vis-a-vis Government Officers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise all States/U Ts to sensitize 

75 
 
Government officers of senior ranks to strictly adhere to the protocols  associated with 
the Warrant of Precedence while interacting with the MPs/MLAs. 
(para 2.6.5) 
 
Training on Arrest and Interrogation Techniques 
 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to impar t 
adequate training to the police personnel on the procedure dur ing arrests. The training 
should also emphasize that the rights of the detainee are not violated  by resorting to 
manhandling during arrests. The police personnel should also be trained to understand  
that their role is not just to arrest people but also to protect people and deter crime.  
 (para 2.7.4) 
 The Committee is of the view that understanding and awareness of the  laws is 
important for police because the laws keep on getting amended.  As  laws have an 
important role in the investigation and prosecution, therefore, it is p aramount that 
correct provisions of laws are applied while registering a case . This will help in 
improving the conviction rate. Therefore, the Committee recommends that SVPNPA, 
NEPA and State police academies should devise some training cu rriculum so as to 
periodically update police personnel on the changes in laws an d amendments thereto. 
The academies may also collaborate with law universities/colleg es to disseminate legal 
knowledge and processes among police personnel, so as to avoid procedural lapses.  
 (para 2.7.5) 
 The Committee also recommends that the MHA may advise States to se nsitize 
the investigating officers to use relevant provisions under the p enal laws while 
registering a case and precautions be taken during trial to secure conviction.  
(para 2.7.6) 
Training for Handling of Crimes in Tribal Areas 
 The Committee believes that a separate training module is need ed for the police 
personnel to tackle crimes in tribal areas. The Committee r ecommends that the 
SVPNPA and NEPA may collaborate with State training institutes to inc lude the study 
of the cultural gap among the tribes, and include their aspirations  and tradition as a 
part of the training curriculum of the police personnel.  The  training manual of the 
States may also be suitably amended so that the police officers are mad e aware about 
local traditions and customs particularly of the tribals and other vulnerable groups.  
(para 2.8.3) 
The Committee also recommends that police personnel posted in th e tribal belt 
should have regular interaction with the tribal leaders, NGO act ivists, non-State 
representatives like the lawyers, university professors along w ith scholars having 
specialization on tribal issues for better handling of the crimes in tribal areas. 
    (para 2.8.4)  

76 
 
 
Training to deal with Cyber Crime 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern on the increasing rate of c yber crimes in 
the country. As per the NCRB data, cyber crime cases have increase d from 27248 in 
2018 to 50035 in 2020. The Committee observes that these crimes are mainly related to 
financial transactions. The criminals not only target the inn ocent and vulnerable, 
especially elderly people, and dupe them of their savings but also well-known persons 
and celebrities. The Committee is of the view that specialized tr aining is required to 
deal with the increasing cyber crimes in the country. The Committee recommends that 
the SVPNPA, NEPA should coordinate with State training academies to train police 
personnel with requisite knowledge of cyber laws, cyber crime  investigation, digital 
forensics and upgrade them from time to time on new technological tool s to deal with 
cyber crimes. The training academies may be advised to recrui t cyber experts as 
trainers on cyber technologies. 
 (para 2.9.6) 
The Committee understands that the States are facing constraints of manp ower 
and resources in managing cyber crime investigations. It recommen ds that the MHA 
should consider creating volunteer help groups of IT Experts from civil society who can 
contribute in devising methods to track cyber thieves and bringin g them to justice. The 
State/UT police should create a cyber crime help desk for i mmediate reporting of the 
cyber crimes leading to an early investigation by them. Timely inte rvention could lead 
to the prevention of such crimes as well as relief to the victims. 
  (para 2.9.7)  
The Committee, hence, recommends that the MHA may allocate adequate funds 
and extend necessary resources for the establishment of cyber  training labs and 
strengthening/upgrading of existing cyber training infrastructure in all the States/UTs. 
  (para 2.9.8)  
 
Online Training 
  The Committee gathers that online training infrastructure in police  
organizations/training institutes is not well developed across the country. The 
Committee notes that often, the personnel are not spared by the conc erned offices due 
to shortage of manpower. Increasing the online training programmes w ould reduce the 
requirement of relieving officials from active duty for trainin g purposes. This will 
ensure that the officials identified for training do not miss out on their training. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may allocate a designa ted amount 
under their grants to the States and also extend necessary re sources to them for 
developing a robust online training infrastructure which will con siderably lower the 
cost of delivery of training to the police personnel in the lon g run. The Centre could 
encourage the States by providing certain incentives for their online training initiatives. 
(para 2.10.4) 
 

77 
 
The Committee also recommends that the national and State police academ ies 
should collaborate and share best practices with each other throu gh online interactions. 
Such an initiative would give scope for the different State police  to understand and 
acquire experience and skillsets through experience sharing.  
(para 2.10.5 ) 
Creation of Dedicated Reserve Training Pool 
 The Committee observes that most of the time, police stations are u nderstaffed, 
and when the officials are summoned for training, they don’t get rel ieved on time. As a 
result, if the training slot is for 100 constables, only 50 to 60 pe rcent of the constables 
are allowed to take training. Therefore, the Committee recommends that MHA may 
advise States/UTs for creation of a reserved training pool at the D istrict level so that if 
training is proposed to be given to 100 constables, then those chose n for training could 
be replaced with reserve constables from the training pool c reated for the purpose and 
there is no hesitancy on the part of the higher police offic ers in sending the personnel 
for training. 
 (para 2.11.3) 
Training on Weaponry 
The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise the State trainin g 
academies to impart proper training to the police personnel on the  use of the weapons 
given to them. The training should cover the use of ballistics, prohibited and non-
prohibited weapons. 
(para 2.12.2) 
Common Training Module 
 
The Committee notes that a proposal has been mooted to the BPR&D for 
establishment of police training net to share the resources of Cen tral and State police 
academies. The Committee recommends that a common training module  may be 
prepared by BPR&D and shared among the States/UTs. This will cr eate a common 
minimum standard of police training in the country.  Common online library resources 
of Central and State police training academies may also be created to ma ke them 
available all over the country. 
              (para 2.13.3)  
The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with the States/UTs 
for the creation of an institutional framework for sharing of resour ces and best 
practices for police training amongst the States. The mapping of training facilities 
available in different States should be done so that a State in need can use training 
facilities wherever surplus is noticed. 
             (para 2.13.4)   
Training To Meet Specific Challenges 
 
 The Committee takes note of the different types of challenges that ar e faced by 
different States. It is of the opinion that none of the issues viz naxalism, infiltration, 
terrorism, organized crimes, drug and human trafficking, etc. , have now remained 

78 
 
State-specific. In fact, they have become regional, affecting two  or more neighbouring 
States. To contain them, the CAPFs are also roped in by the Centre  to aid the State 
police forces. The Committee observes that the Centre should embark upon joint 
training programmes of both the CAPFs and State Police in order to tac kle these issues. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that specific training centre  should be opened 
in these areas where personnel of both the forces could under take trainings. The MHA 
may explore this arrangement at the earliest with funds dedicated  to establish such 
training institutions. 
(para 2.14.10) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the State Governments of Rajasthan and 
Punjab that there is no communication gap between the CAPF and the S tate police 
forces working in bordering areas and regular meetings are he ld at the district and 
senior level. The Committee opines that the people living in border areas are well versed 
with the terrain and other geographical conditions. Therefore, th ey can be of immense 
help in providing intelligence inputs and assist police and border guarding forces 
during emergencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MH A may advise 
State police forces and border-guarding CAPFs to train and liaison with people living in 
the border areas for gathering intelligence inputs so as to chec k drug trafficking, 
infiltration and illicit use of drones, etc. 
(para 2.14.12) 
 
Scheme for Modernisation of State Police Forces 
 The Committee appreciates the component of “incentives for polic e reforms” 
under the scheme of “Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police”.  The Committee 
notes that the incentive fund has been increased to up to 20% from the year 2019-20. 
The Committee however opines that the progress in police refor ms has been slow and 
hopes that the incentives given to better performing States for taki ng various measures 
on police reforms will encourage other States to fast-track the eff orts towards 
modernisation of their police. The Committee recommends that the MHA may put the 
information in public domain about the States that are leading and lagging in the 
modernisation process.  This will create a sense of competiti on and put pressure on the 
States lagging behind to perform better. The Committee also observe s that the issues 
behind the under-utilization of funds by the States also need to b e identified. Therefore, 
the Committee also recommends that the MHA should consider consti tuting a 
Committee which can visit the underperforming States and assist/ad vise/persuade them 
to utilize the funds in a planned manner; otherwise the situation in these states may take 
a long time to show improvements.   
   (para 3.12.4) 
Evaluation of Scheme of “Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police” 
     The Committee notes that the Modernisation grants given to States are lapsable 
and therefore, recommends that MHA may release the funds to State s in the first or 
second quarter so that the States have adequate time to spend the f unds. The MHA may 
also work out ways to remove administrative delays and bottlenecks that cause delays in 
the release of funds. 
              (para 3.15.2)  

79 
 
The Committee further recommends that the MHA may take up with the  
Ministry of Finance to add some more States  having strategic internati onal borders in 
category-A so that additional funds under the MPF scheme are made available to them. 
The Ministry may also consider to re-include  the items of ‘mobility and ‘construction of 
police infrastructure including housing’ under the ‘Assista nce to States for 
Modernisation of Police’ for all States/UTs. This will help in  increasing the number of 
vehicles for operational needs and also improving the housing s atisfaction level of police 
personnel.  
 (para 3.15.3) 
Standardization of Equipments, Weaponry, Vehicles, etc. 
The Committee is of the view that modern policing require s strong 
communication support, state-of-the-art  modern weapons, and a high de gree of 
mobility for quick response.The Committee notes with anguish  that 257 police stations 
do not have vehicles, 638 police stations do not have telephones and 143 police stations 
are not having wireless/mobiles in the country. In the 21 st century India, there are police 
stations without telephones or proper wireless connectivity espec ially in many sensitive 
states like Arunachal Pradesh, Odisha and Punjab, particularly in view of the fact that 
some of these States had been rewarded with better performanc e incentives in the year 
2018-19. Further, a very sensitive border Union Territory like Jammu & Kashmir also 
has a sizeable number of police stations which does not has tel ephones and wireless sets. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise suc h States to 
immediately equip their police stations with adequate vehicles  and communication 
devices else it may lead to disincentivization of modernisation grant s from the Centre. 
For the UTs, MHA may ensure that the needful is done at the earliest. 
        (para 3.16.7) 
The Committee has been given to understand by the States that limited  
manufacturing of non-lethal weaponry in the country is a cause fo r their non-
availability with the States desirous to obtain them.  Hence, it re commends that the 
MHA may initiate setting up adequate manufacturing units of non-lethal w eaponry in 
the country so as to address the issue of shortages in this regar d. It recommends that 
the MHA may coordinate with States to increase investment in the pur chase of non-
lethal weaponry, latest anti-riot equipments and standardize the u niform of police 
personnel with lightweight, easy to wear body protection gears to mi nimize 
injury/casualty during performing law and order duties. 
                    (para 3.16.8 )  
 
Use of Technology by State Police 
   The Committee appreciates the various technological measures ta ken by the 
States/UTs including installation of CCTVs, ERSS-112, fingerprint ve rification, voice 
and facial recognition, DNA fingerprinting, CDR analysis, body-worn  camera, mobile 
forensic vans,  citizen portals, etc. These technologies will  certainly create a transparent 
mechanism to identify and monitor crime trends and patterns. Gi ven a scientific 
approach to the collection of evidence and investigation, they can h elp in taking 
proactive measures to prevent crime. By providing digital access  to the police, citizens 

80 
 
can avail services from the comfort of their homes. The citizens  can register and track 
their complaints and provide feedback without visiting the police station. 
(para 3.17.3) 
    The Committee observes that technology like artificial intelligence,  big data, 
etc., can effectively help in mapping the crime hotspots and gettin g a digital footprint of 
the criminals. This can be used to deploy force more effectivel y thereby 
reducing/preventing crime. Artificial intelligence can be u sed to draw correlations 
between the types of crime, time, location, match fingerprints, fac ial images, analyze 
CCTV footage and recognize vehicle number plates, etc. Big data can be used to 
integrate and store data from multiple sources. This will help in d eveloping a scientific 
approach to policing. The Committee recommends that the MHA may en courage and 
incentivize States to leverage technologies like artificial inte lligence, big data, etc., for 
policing. The Committee further recommends that BPR&D may be task ed to make a 
compendium of the latest technologies used by the various State police  forces and share 
among them. This will help the States to fight crimes in a coordinated manner. 
(para 3.17.4) 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs sh ould take 
up with States/UTs to deploy drones/ unmanned aerial vehicl es for VVIP security, 
surveillance of crime hotspots, crowd control/ riot management, disas ter management, 
etc. 
              (para 3.17.5)    
Installation of CCTV Cameras in Police Stations 
   The Committee notes that some of the States/UTs have started inst alling  CCTV 
cameras in police stations to comply with the directions of the Hon 'ble Supreme Court. 
It appreciates that Tamil Nadu Police has installed IP CCTV c ameras which enables a 
senior police official to keep an eye on the activities inside t he police station. It observes 
that such a measure is a good step towards protecting the rights and l egal remedies of 
the citizens while they are in the police station to file their complaints, FIRs, etc., and 
ensuring that there is no harassment on the part of police staff. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take up with the States/UTs for installing at least 
one or two IP cameras at a strategic location in all police stations. T he Committee also 
recommends that States/UTs may conduct a periodic audit of all the  CCTVs installed in 
police stations and replace/upgrade them wherever required.  The Committee further 
recommends that the MHA take up with the Ministry of Law & Justice  to advise 
States/UTs to initiate talks with their respective courts for ins tallation of CCTVs at 
court premises for round-the-clock monitoring of court buildings.  
                          (para 3.18.5)  
Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System (CCTNS) 
The Committee notes that the Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and 
Systems (CCTNS) has been made operational in all States/Union Ter ritories and FIRs 
are being registered 100% electronically in 16,074 Police Station s. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to integrate CCTNS data wi th that 
of courts, prisons, prosecution, forensics and fingerprints as part  of the Inter-operable 

81 
 
Criminal Justice System (ICJS). This real-time integration will help in reducing 
duplication of work and errors, speed up the trial of cases si gnificantly and increase the 
efficiency of the police. 
(para 3.19.6)   
   The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States to digiti ze the 
issuance of services like passport verification reports, arms li cense verification reports 
and character certificates so that multiple visits of the citiz ens to the police stations and 
diversion of police personnel for such routine administrative w ork is avoided. These 
police personnel can be utilized in handling investigations and  maintenance of law and 
order which are the core functions of the police. 
        (para 3.19.7) 
E-FIR 
   The Committee notes that the e-FIR facility is currently available i n Delhi, 
Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for registering cases only for  property and 
vehicle thefts where details of the accused are not known. It observes that sufficient time 
has elapsed since the advisory was issued in 2018, for the State s/UTs to act upon the 
same and operationalize the e-FIR module. The Committee is of th e considered view 
that online registration would save people from the hassle of running to police stations 
to lodge their complaints. 
(para 3.20.3) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should coordinate  with 
State Police to initiate the facility of e-FIR in the remaining State s/UTs. The Committee 
also recommends that the MHA may work on modalities and advise S tates/UTs for 
extending the facility of e-FIR for other non-heinous crimes as well. 
(para 3.20.4)   
 
Investigation of Cyber Crimes 
 
The Committee expresses its deep concerns
 over the rising rate of cyber crimes 
in the country. As per the information provided to the Committee, it is seen that some of 
the States like Punjab, Rajasthan, Goa, Assam do not have a single cybe r crime cell, 
while in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, only one/two  cyber crime cells 
have been set up. It observes that each day, cyber-criminals are using newer methods 
and new modus-operandi to commit cyber crimes. Therefore, it is  important for the 
police to stay updated on new modus-operandi and technology trends adopted by 
criminals. 
(para 3.21.9) 
   
The Committee recommends that MHA may advise States to set up cyber  cells in 
all the districts. The States should map the cyber  crime hotsp ots which will help in 
quick detection of crimes and taking proactive measures to prevent cyber crimes. 
(para 3.21.10)   
  

82 
 
The Committee also recommends to upgrade the existing cyber cells b y setting 
up dark web monitoring cell and social media monitoring cells  to tackle different types 
of cyber crimes. 
(para 3.21.11) 
 
To strengthen the investigation of inter-State crimes, the Committee 
recommends that MHA may advise States/UTs that when investigating offic ers visit 
outside their jurisdictional State for investigation of a cyber cr ime, they should be 
provided with optimum support from the law enforcement agencies of other States and 
UTs, as required.  
(para 3.21.12) 
The Committee notes that some States are using cyber experts for the detection 
and investigation of cyber crimes. Therefore, along with traditional pol ice recruitments, 
there is a need to induct technical experts in the police fo rce. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may encourage States/UTs to recruit quali fied cyber 
experts/IT professionals to assist police in detecting, monitori ng, preventing and 
investigating cyber crimes. 
(para 3.21.13 ) 
Efforts to Tackle Drone Attacks 
 
The Committee expresses its grave concern on the use of different typ es of 
drones for committing crimes, transport of drugs, arms and ammunition,  which is a 
threat to the internal security of the country. The Committee notes t hat the MHA has 
issued guidelines for flying permission in red, green and yellow zones. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA along with the Ministry of Civil Aviation m ay advise States 
to sensitize ground-level police personnel on the drone regulations. This may include the 
civilian use of drones which will help in detecting rogue drones. 
            (para 3.22.5)    
The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with conce rned 
Ministries/ Organisations to create a central pool of anti-drone technology at the earliest 
and give its access to all States/UTs to deal with the menace of ill icit use of drones. For 
this purpose, the participation of the private sector may be explored . The MHA may 
coordinate with concerned Ministries/Agencies and States/UTs to create an SOP for the 
steps to be taken by the State police in case of a drone attack. 
(para 3.22.6  )  
 
Vacancies in the State Police Forces 
  The Committee notes the vacancy of 5,31,737 as against the sanctione d strength 
of 26,23,225 in State police forces, is almost  21 % shortfall. It is  not a desirable figure 
given the crime and security scenario in the country. The Commit tee is of the 
considered view that shortage of staff has a direct bearing on the  efficiency of the police. 
The workload of the existing staff increases forcing them to d o work overtime, most of 
the time in stressful and trying circumstances. This not only leads to the increased stress 
level of police venting out at times on common people but also co mpromises the overall 

83 
 
performance of police in the discharge of their duties. The  Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to conduct Police recr uitment drives 
in a mission mode and remove the administrative bottlenecks for t he recruitment of 
police personnel at different ranks in a time-bound manner.  
         (para 3.23.5)  
Women Representation on Police 
   The Committee is anguished to note that women are abysmally unde r-
represented in the police force as they constitute only 10.30% o f the police force. The 
Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to create a road map for 
making the representation of women police to 33% of the total stren gth a reality. 
Further, the appointment of women in police may be done by creating additional posts 
rather than converting the vacant posts of male constables. It will also  help in 
improving the police-population ratio in the country. Besides increas ing the percentage 
of women in police,  taking a cue from the defense forces wh ere women are being 
assigned combative roles, the MHA may also advise the States/UTs to g ive them 
important challenging duties central to the police, and not just duties of inconsequence.  
(para 3.24.7) 
The Committee notes that MHA has advised the States/UTs that each polic e 
station should have at least 3 women sub-inspectors and 10 women p olice constables so 
that a women's help desk is manned round the clock.  The Com mittee recommends that 
BPR&D may be tasked to assess the performance of the women's h elp desks. The MHA 
may also advise States/UTs to establish at least one all-women police station in each 
district.  
                        (para 3.24.8)  
Stress Management of Police Personnel 
   The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the State Governme nts for stress 
management of the police personnel. The Committee recommends that MHA  may take 
up with BPR&D and national and State training academies to create s tress 
management modules both offline and online to help the polic e personnel from time to 
time to de-stress through yoga, exercises,  counseling and treatment, etc. The States may 
also establish counseling/ wellness centers for the police p ersonnel to maintain their 
psychological well-being and perform their duties more efficiently.  
              (para 3.25.2)  
Inter-State Coordination Mechanism 
The Committee opines that a nationally coordinated response by the pol ice and 
the national law enforcement agencies , including the intelli gence agencies, is required 
to deal with inter-State crimes. Proper coordination and an effective s upport 
mechanism for sharing information amongst different agencies and G overnment 
departments are necessary for conducting operations. Therefore,  the Committee 
recommends that the MHA may take up with concerned Ministries an d States/UTs for 
strengthening of internal communication between different agencies b y establishing 
standard mechanisms for securing the seamless flow of information particularly to 

84 
 
tackle the menace of terrorism, drug and human trafficking, organ ized crime, etc. An 
inter-State forum may be established for sharing intelligence in puts and to deliberate 
upon plans for coordinated action among States in areas of policing. 
(para 3.26.4)   
 
Emergency Response Support System (ERSS)  
 
The Committee notes that Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) is a 
Pan-India single number (112) based emergency response system for citizens in 
emergencies.  The Committee recommends that MHA may advise State s to create a 
state-of-the-art facility, recruit adequate staff and sensitize them to  handle calls. 
Regular feedback may also be taken from the complainants on the ser vice of ERSS. 
This will help in improving the performance of police and b uilding trust with people. 
Efforts should be made to reduce the response time to extend help to the person in 
distress. 
(para 3.27.3) 
The Committee takes note of the 'Mo Sarkar' initiative of Odisha, unde r which, 
every day, feedback is being sought from selected complainants.  The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise the States to develop a feedback mechanism like 
that of Odisha to assess and improve the performance of the police.  
(para 3.27.4) 
Model Police Act, 2006 
 The Committee is concerned to note that the Model Police Act was forwarded to 
all the States in 2006 and even after 15 years, so far only 17 States have either enacted 
the Model Police Act or amended their existing Act. This show s laxity on the part of the 
remaining States. The Committee is of the view that adoption/ implem entation of the 
Act by all States will help in creating a uniform police struc ture across the country. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may take feedback  from such 
States to understand their perspective in the matter so as to ad vise them accordingly, 
for the adoption/ implementation of the Model Police Act, 2006.  
 (para 4.3.3) 
Dual system vs Police Commissionerate System 
The Committee notes that some States in the country have created multipl e 
police commisionerates in their States, while some States having siz eable populations 
do not have any police commisionerate. The Committee is of the view that police 
commissionerate system leads to faster decision-making to solve u rban-centric issues. 
With the growing number of cities with a million-plus population, the 
Commissionerate system would be a better option to manage for manageme nt of law 
and order problems and complex issues. The Committee recommen ds that the MHA 
may advise States to consider establishing police commissionerate s ystem in cities 
having more than 10 lakh population as recommended by Mooshahary Committee. 
 (para 4.4.4) 

85 
 
 The Committee also recommends that BPR&D may conduct a comparative 
study on the effectiveness of police commisionerate vis-à-vis dual system (District 
Magistrate & Superintendent of Police). It will encourage more S tates to establish 
police commissionerate system in their cities. 
(para 4.4.5) 
Village Policing 
 The Committee opines that the village policing system needs to be strengthened 
in the country. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may coordinate 
with States/UTs to make arrangements for providing training to the mem bers of the 
village policing system about their role and responsibilities to hel p the police in the 
maintenance of law and order in the rural area. The Committee al so recommends that 
the BPR&D may undertake a study by collecting State-wise data on the village policing 
system in the country in order to make a proper assessment of the  prevalence and 
performance of the village policing in the country. The Committee r ecommends that the 
MHA may encourage the State/UTs and incentivize them for setting  up village policing 
system as it would reduce the burden of the local police station s at semi-urban, Notified 
Area Councils (NACs) and towns in policing, vigilance and crime prevention. 
 (para 4.5.5) 
Separation of Investigation from law and order  
The Committee notes that only a few States have separated the investigation 
from the law and order duties of their police. The Committee is  of the view that 
separation of investigation from law and order is important to maintain the 
accountability of the police and increase their autonomy in investigatin g crimes. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may advise the rem aining States 
to create separate investigations and law and order wings in the polic e. It will lead to 
specialization and professionalism in the police department, sp eed up the investigation 
and secure the conviction of offenders. 
                (para 4.6.9)  
To address the shortage of staff in creating separate wings for inves tigation and 
law & order, the Committee recommends that the personnel of the  rank of ASIs & head 
constables can be utilized for investigation of minor offenses of simple nature after 
adequate training. 
(para 4.6.10) 
 The Committee notes that one of the reasons for low conviction rate is t he lapses 
in the investigation. Therefore, it is important that regular monitoring a nd supervision 
of the investigation of cases should be done by senior officers. T he Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise States for the field visit of the senior police 
officers of the rank of SP/IG/DIG for on-the-spot assessment of investigati on of cases. 
The SP/DSP should submit monthly PRs (Progress Reports) on imp ortant cases and the 
performance of I/Os. Accordingly, suitable rewards/punishment sh ould also be given to 
I/Os. The Committee also recommends to upgrade the skills of the  I/Os through 
periodic training and engaging experts as and when necessary. 
(para 4.6.11) 

86 
 
 The Committee strongly believes that forensic laboratories play a significant role 
in the scientific collection of evidence. Therefore, the Commi ttee recommends that the 
MHA may take up with States to further strengthen the for ensic laboratories in the 
country. Efforts should be made to establish at least on e forensic lab at the 
regional/divisional level so that the evidence is ex amined quickly and investigation is 
not delayed. 
(para 4.6.12) 
Outsourcing of Police Functions 
  The Committee notes that the police in some of the States are outsou rcing 
personnel and leveraging technology to reduce the burden on police . The Committee is 
of the view that for efficient policing, there is a need for the pol ice force to restrict 
themselves to core functions of investigation of cases and maintenanc e of law & order.  
The Committee recommends that the MHA may task BPR&D to conduct a study to 
determine such functions of the police that can be outsourced wi th requisite training. 
The MHA can then advise States based on the outcome of the study. T hese measures 
will help reduce the workload of the police and improve their  efficiency. This will save 
manpower and promote police-community partnerships by involving n on-police 
communities.  
 (para 4.7.8) 
Escorting the Under-Trial Prisoners 
 The Committee notes that the State police has a multifarious role to perform but 
has a shortage of staff. Further, as pointed out by Mooshahary Committe e, arrests 
should be resorted to only in cases of heinous/ specified category of crimes and a 
reduction in the number of arrests will impact the issue of m anpower escorting under-
trial prisoners. Therefore, the States should use the manpower ju diciously. The 
Committee recommends that the MHA may advise the States to take up with  their 
respective courts and prisons to consider holding virtual trials of the prisoners, -
particularly those who are in high-risk groups - through video con ferencing. It will help 
in dedicating less police force for escorting under-trial pr isoners to courts and also save 
resources.  
 (para 4.8.4) 
Directorate of Prosecution 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the key factor in the  success of prosecution is 
proper coordination between the prosecutor and the inves tigator. Therefore, the 
prosecution set up in the States needs to be strengthened. Th e Committee notes that 
many States/UTs have not established the Directorate of Prose cution. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise these States for establishing the  Directorate of 
Prosecution within a time frame. 
(para 4.9.4) 
 The Committee notes that the Malimath Committee has not made a 
recommendation for the Assistant Public Prosecutor to be attached to the police stations 
or the SP. But, the Committee is of the view that there is a lac k of legal advice available 
to the investigating officers. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may 

87 
 
take up with the Ministry of Law & Justice and the States for re structuring of 
prosecution directorates to closely align the prosecutors/ legal ex perts with the 
investigators. It will help them in legal guidance during the in vestigation, collection of 
evidence, filing of charge sheets and securing conviction. 
(para 4.9.5) 
Police Establishment Board (PEB) 
 The Committee notes that as per available information, few States have 
established Police Establishment Boards, and recommends that MHA  may advise the 
remaining States to create Police Establishment Boards for the trans fer or posting of 
the IPS officers as well as officials posted at Zone/Range/Di strict level in a judicious and 
impartial manner.  
(para 4.10.7) 
Promotional Avenues of Constables 
The Committee notes that according to MHA, the State Government s are 
responsible to ensure the career progression of their police personnel. However, the 
promotional aspect is a very important aspect of police reform on w hich the Union 
Government is in contact with the State Government. The Committee further notes that 
the system of promotion of constables is different in the States and observes that most of 
the States do not follow incentive linked promotion schemes or an y kind of 
extraordinary performance-linked promotion schemes. The Committee  recommends 
that MHA may encourage States to improve the promotional avenues of the c onstables 
through regular departmental exams and incentive-linked promotion schemes to keep 
them motivated. 
(para 4.11.5) 
 
The Housing of Police Personnel 
The Committee is disappointed to note the poor housing satisfaction level s of the 
State police personnel in the country. The Committee further notes that in specific 
theatres of insurgency affected, the North-Eastern States and LWE af fected districts, 
construction including police housing was revived after approval to the umbrella 
scheme of Modernisation of Police Forces in September, 2017.   The Committee 
recommends that MHA may actively consider the allocation of funds to all States/UTs 
for housing under the 'Assistance to States for Modernisation of P olice'. The States may 
also be advised to take steps for improving the housing satisfa ction level of police 
personnel in a phased manner. For this, the Committee recomme nds that the Centre 
may establish a mechanism for providing adequate assistance to St ates for this specific 
purpose and persuade them to implement the housing projects fo r the police personnel 
emphatically and monitor it through quarterly reviews. 
(para 4.12.5) 
Independent Police Complaint Authority 
The Committee notes that 31 States/UTs have constituted Police Complain ts 
Authorities at the State and District levels for looking into complai nts against police 
officers. The Committee is of the view that the Police Complaint Auth ority should be 

88 
 
established outside the police force. Therefore, The Committee  recommends that the 
MHA along with the Ministry of Law & Justice may take up with State s to ensure that 
the Police Complaint Authority should comprise of retired High Cou rt Judges, retired 
senior civil servant/ police officers, eminent jurists along with  the representation of 
women. The Committee also recommends that BPR&D may conduct a s tudy to assess 
the effectiveness of the Independent Police Complaint Authori ty in States to check 
whether the complaints against police personnel have gone up or  reduced. The study 
may also include the types of complaints against police personnel an d action taken 
thereon.  
(para 4.13.8) 
   The Committee also recommends that the MHA may advise States that the  
internal grievance redressal cell of police should work in a time-bound manner so that 
the grievances of aggrieved police personnel are addressed in time.  
(para 4.13.9) 
 
Revisiting the laws  
   The Committee gathers that the MHA has constituted a Committee to review 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860, Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and Ind ian Evidence Act, 
1872. The Committee recommends that the MHA may discuss the matter wi th all the 
stakeholders including the States, keeping in view of the best  global practices in policing 
and constitutional rights and safeguards of the citizens. The Committee  would like to be 
apprised about the recommendations made by the Committee pertaining to these laws. 
 (para 4.16.4) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may con sider to 
take up with the concerned Ministry/ Department to review the ND PS Act, 1985, in the 
light of the concern raised by the Committee. 
 (para 4.16.5) 
 
Police-Community Relations 
 
The Committee strongly believes that policing system should be transp arent, 
independent, accountable and people-friendly. The Committee opin es that community 
policing involves a cooperative effort between police and the c ommunities where both 
can work together to solve the crime and crime-related problems.   Further, police and 
public partnerships are also key in enabling a more proactive  and agile approach to 
combating crime.  
(para 4.17.7)   
 
 The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the States to improve the 
relation of police with the community and recommends that the MHA may take  up with 
States to showcase the positive initiatives undertaken by the various State police to build 
a friendly image among people. The Committee also recommends that MHA may create 
a forum for the exchange of best practices of police-people interaction among the States. 
(para 4.17.8)   
 

89 
 
Challenges in Police Reforms 
 The Committee expresses its concern that a multitude of factors ar e impeding 
the pace of police reforms in the country. It believes that wi th sustained efforts in 
pursuit of police reforms, MHA in collaboration with States/UT s will overcome these 
challenges. The Committee, therefore, recommends that MHA may keep  endeavoring 
towards its goal steadily and bring out much-needed reforms in police force. 
(para 4.18.2) 
***** 
 
 

90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

91 
 
XVI 
 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Thursday, the 8 th July, 2021 in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
 
       RAJYA SABHA
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman 
2. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. Anil Jain 
4. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
6. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
7. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
8. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
9. Shri R.K.Singh Patel 
10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
12. Shri P.P. Mohammed Faizal 
13. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ajaya Kumar Mallick, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
 
 
1. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeeva Kumar, Secretary (BM) 
3. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj, Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Rakesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Sudhesh Kumar Shahi, Joint Secretary 
Representative of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy 
 
  
1. Shri Atul Karwal, Director  
2. Shri Modhusudana Reddy, Joint Director 

92 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. hear the view s of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (S VPNPA) on the subject 
‘Police - Training, Modernization and Reforms’. 
2. The Chairman informed the Committee that the 'Police' is  a state Subject under the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Police reforms have  been on the agenda of 
Central and State Governments for long. The Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal body for 
police modernization in the country and lends financial assistance as  well as guidance in 
equipping State police forces with the technological expertise, we aponry, forensic, 
communication, transport support and training to meet their unique challe nges. The primary 
role of police forces is to uphold and enforce laws which keep on getting amended, 
investigate crimes and ensure security for people in the regi on. Police-community relations 
are also major factor to keep in mind. The Committee has therefore, decided for detailed 
examination of the subject 'Police-Training, Modernisation and Reform s’ and make 
recommendations in its Report to the Parliament. The Chairman further informed the 
Committee that the two Reports (214 and 215) on the Central Armed Polic e Forces, and two 
Action Taken Reports (220 & 221) on them have already been given by th e Committee. The 
Committee may now focus primarily on the police forces other than  CAPFs while examining 
the subject.  
3. The Chairman informed the Members that in subsequent meetings  on the subject, the 
Committee may hear the views of State Governments of Gujara t, Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Telang ana, and NCT of Delhi 
along with North-Eastern Police Academy (NEPA) and Bureau of Polic e Research and 
Development (BPRD) for broad consultation and to gain a holistic view on the subject.  
4. The Committee also decided to undertake a study visit to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel 
National Police Academy (SVPNPA), Hyderabad to have first-hand inf ormation on the 
training facilities and future training requirements of the Academy. It was also decided by the 
Committee to resume the study visit to Ladakh and Jammu & K ashmir in the second half of 
August, 2021 if, the situation permits. This was originally schedul ed in second half of April 
2021 but had to be postponed due to sudden surge in COVID-19 cases. 
(On arrival of witnesses) 
5. The Chairman welcomed Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, and other senior officers of the 
Ministries of Home Affairs, Shri Atul Karwal, Director, Sardar Val labhbhai Patel National 
Police Academy (SVPNPA) to the meeting of the Committee. Br iefing about the subject, 
Chairman stated that while a major share of the modernization  budget is going for improving 
infrastructure but training the police forces for behavioural approach tow ards the public is 
most important and essential to improve the police performance. The recommendations of the 
Mooshahary Committee have been partially implemented by a few S tates. Chairman 
emphasized that the difficulties in implementation of recommenda tions of the above said 
Committee and on implementation of Model Act, 2006 may be shared wit h the Committee. 
The Chairman also asked them to inform the Committee about the reason for reduction in 
Demands for Grants for 2021-22 for MPF. The representatives of SVPNPA we re asked to 
clarify on the training, technology, cyber crimes, etc. 
6. The Home Secretary informed the Committee about the umbrella Scheme of 
Modernization of Police Forces; implementation status of recomme ndations of Mooshahary 

93 
 
Committee; modernization plan of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs ); new initiatives 
required in the training of police officers; police training and re search done by Bureau of 
Police Research & Development (BPR&D), North-Eastern Police Acade my (NEPA) and 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA); traini ng of police forces by 
State Police Academies; pendency of cases, etc. 
7. The Additional Secretary, MHA made a presentation before the Com mittee that inter-
alia included genesis and evolution of modernization of police forces sch eme; major projects 
and initiatives for modernization; funding and utilization of the f und for modernization of 
police; provision of incentives linked to better performance by th e States; modernization plan 
of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs); recommendation made by Mooshahary 
Committee; main features of Model Police Act, 2006; assessment  of best police stations; 
reforms linked to financial grants from the year 2018. 
8.  The Director, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academ y (SVPNPA) made a 
presentation before the Committee that inter-alia included mission and activity of the 
academy; number of officers trained in the academy for past five years; training modules; 
challenges before police leadership; efforts to improve training; fore ign exposure and best 
practices; new initiatives; training of senior officers; speci al tactics wing; strengthening of 
training in cybercrime investigation; etc. 
9. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some queri es  regarding 
umbrella Scheme of Modernization of Police Forces, difficulties/ hesit ancy faced by 
complainant at the time of registration of complaint/FIR due to unsa tisfactory experience 
while getting FIR lodged at Police Stations, Training Needs Ana lysis (TNA) to improve 
training of IPS officers, issue of undertrial prisoners in India, diversion of funds, independent 
and impartial functioning of police, training modules/guidelines for the training of lower rung 
of officers, sensitization of police forces, assessment of police traini ng, internet connectivity 
in police stations, status of implementation of zero FIR all across  the country, time gap 
between utilization certificate and release of next installm ent of funds for modernisation, 
under-utilization of funds by the States, free registration of cases,  functioning of Police 
Establishment Boards, incentives given to State police, im provement in village policing, 
implementation of Model Police Act, 2006 and its impact on the publ ic, number of cases 
registered under Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967 and numbe r of  convictions 
thereon and low housing satisfaction level of police personnel, etc. 
10. The Chairman and Members made some suggestions that includes emphasis on 
police-public relation, direct allocation of funds to State Police  Departments headed by 
DGsP, implementation of recommendations of Mooshahary Committee, c reation of national 
pool of experts for police reforms involving specialists/ scholars/consul tants in the training 
modules at SVPNPA, disincentivize non-performing States, critical  research on police, 
encouragement to community policing, recording of conversation of police of ficer and 
complainant at the time of filing of complaint/FIR, emphasis on deterrence and prevention of 
crime rather than punishment, expediting the implementation of Mo del Police Act, 2006, trial 
of prisoners through video conferencing, increasing the number of forensic labora tories, 
training modules for police in vernacular/local language, training of pol ice officers on 
revenue laws, onsite inspection by SVPNPA of senior officers traine d at the Academy to 
assess the performance and deliverance by the trained officers  at ground-level, applying 
correct Sections/Provisions of the laws while registering cases , placing of  chowkidar/dafadar 
under SPs instead of SDO/SDM as has been the case earlier, us e of unspent fund by taking it 
forward as backlog fund, implementation of recommendations of Malim ath Committee 

94 
 
Report on the reform of the Criminal Justice System,  study of public  impact on reforms, the 
need to change colonial style of functioning of police etc. 
11.  On other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written replie s to the Secretariat 
within 10 days. 
                                                   
(Witnesses withdrew) 
 
12. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.  
13. The Committee, then, adjourned at 2:12 p.m. 
 

95 
 
XVII 
 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 22 nd July, 2021 in Main Committee 
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
 
       RAJYA SABHA
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman 
2. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. Anil Jain 
4. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7. Shri Dilip Ghosh  
8. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
9. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
10. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
11. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
15. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
16. Shri Ravneet Singh 
17. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
 
1. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of State Government of Madhya Pradesh
 
 
1. Dr. Rajesh Rajora, Additional Chief Secretary (Home) 
2. Shri Anil Kumar, Additional Director General (Planning) 
3. Dr. Ashish, Deputy Inspector General (PHQ) 

96 
 
 
 
Representatives of State Government of Rajasthan
 
 
1. Shri Suresh Chand Gupta, Secretary (Home) 
2. Shri Govind Gupta, Addl. Director-General of Police (Planning, Modernizati on   
                      and Welfare) 
 
3. Shri Gaurav Srivastava, Dy. Inspector-General of Police, CID(CB)   
 
Representatives of State Government of Tamil Nadu 
 
1. Shri S.K. Prabhakar, Additional Chief Secretary 
2. Dr. C. Sylendra Babu, Director General of Police 
 
3.   Shri Sanjay Kumar, Inspector General of Police 
 
Representatives of State Government of Telangana
 
 
1.  Shri Ravi Gupta, Principal Secretary (Home Department) 
2. Shri M. Mahendar Reddy, Director General of Police 
3. Shri Jitendar, Addl, Director General of Police (Law & Order)  
4. Shri Sanjay Jain, Inspector General of Police  
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the  views of the representatives of 
the State Government of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and  Telangana on the 
subject ‘Police - Training, Modernization and Reforms’. 
2. The Chairman informed the Members that in the next round of meet ings on the 
subject, the Committee may hear the views of State Governments of Gujarat, Haryana, 
Odisha, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, National Capital Territory of Delhi  (Delhi Police), North-
Eastern Police Academy (NEPA), Bureau of Police Research and  Development (BPR&D) 
and other important stakeholders. The Committee also decided to hear the views of the State 
Government of West Bengal on the subject.  The Committee als o decided to send a 
questionnaire to the remaining States which could not be heard by the Committee. 
 (On arrival of witnesses) 
3. The Chairman welcomed representatives of the State Governmen ts of Madhya 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and other senior offic ers of Union Ministry of 
Home Affairs to the meeting of the Committee.   
4. The Additional Chief Secretary (Home) and Additional Director-General  (Planning), 
State Government of Madhya Pradesh, made a presentation before t he Committee that inter-
alia included training policy and existing institutional infrastructure for trainers and allied 
assets; need-based specific training and modernisation programme/sc hemes to face specific 
challenges like Naxalism/terrorism, cybercrime, infiltration, drug  peddling, cattle smuggling; 
aims and objectives of modernization of police forces at State level,  budget allocations and 

97 
 
utilization pattern of funds for police reforms in the last 5 yea rs; status of implementation of 
Model Police Act, 2006 and recommendations of Mooshahary Committee; s teps taken for 
community policing; status on the installation of CCTV cameras  in all police stations; 
existing vacancies in the State police force; use of technolog y in collection of evidence, best 
practices/initiatives of State police force; etc.  
  
5. The Additional Director-General of Police (Training, Modernization a nd Welfare), 
State Government of Rajasthan  made a presentation before the Committee that inter-alia 
included existing infrastructure for training; need-based Training; spec ialized courses; 
upgrading training capacity; modernization  to meet specific chal lenges, budget allocation 
and utilization, status of implementation of the recommendations o f Mooshahary Committee 
on Police Reforms; initiative taken for community policing; use of technology in crime 
prevention and investigation; modernization appraisal on organized cri me, hassle-free 
registration of cases; expeditious investigation; maintenance of l aw & order; suggestions on 
training, reforms and modernization, etc.       
 
6. The Director-General of Police, State Government of Tamil Nadu  made a presentation 
which inter-alia included an overview of the Tamil Nadu police; training of police  personnel; 
police training infrastructure; important initiatives taken under Mod ernization of Police 
Forces (MPF) Scheme;  Status on MPF fund utilization; impleme ntation status of Model 
Police Act; Police Welfare Initiatives Schemes like famil y welfare-related scheme, 
education-related welfare scheme, ex-gratia payments, police cante en, community policing 
initiatives, etc. 
7. The Director-General of Police, State Government of Telangana made  a presentation 
which inter-alia included police training policies; training infrastructure; mode rnization 
objectives like citizen-centric approach, operational excellence, orga nization efficiency, 
uniform service delivery; community visible policing & partnering wit h communities; 
improving the rate of conviction; SHE and BHAROSA initiatives  under women & child 
safety; road safety & traffic compliance; actionable intelligence ; forefront initiatives, 
SMART police stations; applications for mobile phone including e-G overnance applications, 
major achievement on modernization, budget, allocation and utiliza tion for modernization; 
status of implementation of the recommendations of  Mooshahary C ommittee on Police 
Reforms, etc. 
8. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some queries  regarding the 
mechanism to deal with the new and emerging crimes, linkage of cryptocurrency with 
economic offences/financial frauds,  reasons for delay in release of funds to some of the  
States, efforts of the police in handling the COVID-19 Pandemic,  uniform training on 
cybercrimes in the country,  steps taken by the police to combat the threats and incident s of 
drone attack particularly in the border States, issues related to Naxalism, number of all-
women police stations in  Rajasthan,  constitution of State Security Commission in the State 
of Madhya Pradesh ; creation of Police Establishment Boards and Independent Police 
Complaint Authority,  the number of cities to be covered under commissionarate systems;  
public survey to check the efficacy and response time of Emergency Response Support 
System (ERSS),   city-wise number of camera installed in the States;  number of forensic 
science laboratories and cases pending thereon ; proposal to establish academies to train 
police personnel in the new-age technology, number of complaints agains t police personnel, 
etc.  

98 
 
9. The Chairman and Members made some suggestions that inter-alia included 
installation of CCTV IP cameras in the police stations for monitoring by the senior police 
officers; release of the funds for police modernization in the first  or the second quarter of the 
financial year, creation of a training battalion, implementa tion of the recommendations of the 
Malimath Committee on Criminal Justice System for posting o f public prosecutors in police 
station and office of  IG/SP/DSP, adequate funds to provide housing t o the police personnel; 
creation of Police Establishment Boards; linkage of cluster of police stations to a universities/ 
colleges and taking feedback from scholars for effective policing,  special training of police 
personnel posted in the tribal belt, periodic interaction of the pol ice personnel with scholars 
and professionals like lawyers and professors, assistance of  Chartered Accountants/Company 
Secretaries to the Investigating Officers (IOs) in handling case s of economic offence; 
recruitment of the police personnel by the State Service Commiss ions/ Boards  instead of 
Police Recruitment Boards;  grievance redressal mechanism for pol ice organization and 
citizens to improve functioning of police and instill confidence in the society, etc.  
10.  On other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written replie s to the Secretariat 
within 10 days.                              
(Witnesses withdrew) 
11. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.  
12. The Committee, then, adjourned at 5:28 p.m. 
 
 

99 
 
XVIII 
 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 4 th August, 2021 in Main Committee 
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
 
       RAJYA SABHA
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. Dr. Anil Jain 
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
7. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
8. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
9. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh  
11. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
12. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
13. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
14. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
15. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
16. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
17. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
18. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
19. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
20. Shrimati Sharmishta Sethi 
21. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
22. Shri P.P. Mohammed Faizal 
23. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
 
1. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary 

100 
 
 
Representatives of State Government of Gujarat
 
 
1. Shri Pankaj Kumar, Addl. Chief Secretary. 
2. Shrimati Nipuna Torawane, Secretary (Home Department). 
3. Shri Ashish Bhatia, DG and Head of Police Force. 
4. Shri Vikas Sahay, DG (Training). 
5. Shri Narasimha Komar, Addl. DG (Modernisation & Planning). 
6. Shri R.B. Brahmabhatt, Addl. DG (Police Reforms). 
 
Representatives of State Government of Odisha
 
 
1. Shri Sanjeev Chopra, Addl. Chief Secretary. 
2. Shri Abhay, DG & IG of Police. 
3. Shri S. Dev Dutt Singh, IG (HQ) 
 
Representatives of State Government of Uttar Pradesh
 
 
1. Shri B.K. Maurya, Addl. DGP (Logistics). 
2. Dr. Sanjay M. Tarade, Addl. DG (Training). 
3. Shri B.P. Jogdand, Addl. DGP (PHQ). 
4. Shri Tarun Gaba, Secretary (Home Department). 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the  views of the representatives of 
the State Government of Gujarat, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh on the su bject ‘Police - Training, 
Modernization and Reforms’. 
2.    The Chairman further informed the Members that in the next round of  meetings on 
the subject, the Committee will hear the views of the State  Governments of Haryana and 
Punjab, National Capital Territory of Delhi (Delhi Police), North-E astern Police Academy 
(NEPA), Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) and ot her important 
stakeholders. He also informed that as per the request of the Members, permission of Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha is being sought to hear the views of  State Government of West 
Bengal on the Subject. 
 
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3. The Chairman welcomed representatives of the State Governments  of Gujarat, Odisha 
and Uttar Pradesh and senior officers of the Union Ministry of Home Affai rs to the meeting 
of the Committee.   
4. The representatives of the State Government of Gujarat, made a pre sentation before 
the Committee that inter-alia included infrastructure, sanctioned strength and types of 
training given in the police training academy, modernization of tr aining infrastructure, need-
based specific modernization program, coastal security- marine t ask force, safety & 
integrated traffic management system, cyber crime investigat ion, budget allocations and 
utilization pattern,  assessment of future requirements, impleme ntation status of Model Police 
Act, 2006 and recommendations of Mooshahary Committee, implementation of suraksha setu 
society project as part of community policing, major challenge s in police reforms, self 

101 
 
defence training for women, status on the installation of CCTV cameras in all police stat ions, 
existing vacancies in the state police force, use of technology  in collection of evidence, best 
practices/initiatives of State police force,  etc.  
  
5.     The representatives of the State Government of Odisha made  a presentation before the 
Committee that inter-alia included existing institutional infrastructure for training, budg et 
allocations and utilization pattern of funds for police reforms in t he last five years; status of 
implementation of Model Police Act, 2006 and recommendations of Mooshahary  Committee, 
Initiatives like ‘MO SARKAR’, 5T (Teamwork, Technology, Transparency , Transformation 
and Time Limit), senior citizen cell, Emergency Response Support  System (ERSS), women 
empowerment for gender – sensitive policing (WE – GSP), mahila & shis hu desk, time-
bound services, sanjeevani, etc. The Committee was also inf ormed about the Left-Wing 
Extremism (LWE) scenario in Odisha, creation of special intelli gence wing for collection of 
intelligence pertaining to Left-Wing Extremism (LWE), special op eration group, odisha 
special striking force, district voluntary force, special securi ty batallion, anti-extremist 
training to all police personnel and steps taken to tackle urban terror ism. the representative of 
the State Government of Odisha also suggested more capital inve stment to build a proper 
infrastructure and standards for online training in police organizati ons and scaling up of the 
training capacity to deal with cyber crimes, etc.  
6. The representatives of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh m ade a presentation 
which inter-alia included existing institutional infrastructure, trainers and al lied assets, 
learning management system & digital content, cyber security (prevention, monitoring and 
investigation), child welfare committees, course on Tactics, pol ice commando course, 
counter-naxal training, anti-human trafficking course, etc. Regarding Modernisation and 
Reforms, the Committee was informed about the budgetary allocations  and utilization pattern 
of funds for modernization of police in the last 5 years, status of  implementation of the 
recommendations of Mooshahary Committee on Police Reforms, village  police system, basic 
facilities at police stations, amendments proposed in Crimina l Procedure Code (Cr.PC), 
Indian Penal Code (IPC), Arms, Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances  (NDPS) Act, 
1985, best practices like women power line-1090,  mission Shakti, power the ft police station, 
cyber crime police station, anti-terrorist squad, State juvenile police unit, etc.  
7. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some queries  that inter-alia 
included the percentage of women in State police at all l evels, functioning of Police 
Complaint Board,  free registration of First Information Report (FIR ), zero FIRs, police-
community relations, increase in crimes against women and children , particularly during the 
COVID-19 Pandemic, trafficking of women and children,  installation of  Close Circuit 
Television (CCTV) cameras in police stations, functioning of t he Prosecution Directorate in 
States, availability of residential accommodation for police personne l, sanctioning of posts of 
adequate number of trainers, number of cases registered and charge sh eets filed in cases of 
cyber crime, use of post-mortem kits, steps taken to deal with org anized crime and economic 
offences, experience of separating investigation from maintenance of  law & order, 
provisioning of more funds for modernisation of police force, training given t o the police 
personnel to manage COVID-19 Pandemic, training given to  handle the ca ses of tribals and 
other vulnerable groups, steps taken for  qualitative improvement in policing prospective plan 
for policing in future, implementation status of   Justice Mali math Committee Report on 
Criminal Justice System, wastage of police resources in es cort of prisoners on daily basis, 
Section-311 of Criminal Procedure Code (Cr.PC) regarding examination of the witnesses by 

102 
 
the court, experience of using the Central armed Police Forces (CAPF s) in the State, use of 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)  by State police, etc. 
8. The Chairman and Members made some suggestions that inter-alia included 
digitization and creation of faceless enquiry for issuance of ch aracter certificates, passport 
verification reports and arms license verification reports by polic e, speedy redressal of 
grievances of police personnel, assistance of prosecutors and technology t o the investigating 
officers in the proper collection of evidence, conduct of trial of prison ers and appearance of 
witnesses through video conferencing, making study of the cultural gap among the tribes, 
their aspirations and traditions a part of the training curriculum of police personnel, etc.   
 
9.  On other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written replie s to the Secretariat 
within 10 days.                              
(Witnesses withdrew) 
10. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.  
11. The Committee, then, adjourned at 5:39 p.m. 
 

103 
 
I-A 
 
FIRST MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 27 th October, 2021 in Main 
Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
 
        RAJYA SABHA
 
 
1.  Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijlal 
3. Dr. Anil Jain  
4. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
7. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
8. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
9. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
10. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
 
 
3. Shri V.S.K. Kaumudi, Special Secretary (Internal Security) 
4. ShriPraveen Vashista, Additional Secretary (Internal Security-I) 
5. Shri Rakesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary (Police-I) 
 
Representatives of Delhi Police
 
 
1. Shri Rakesh Asthana, Commissioner of Police 
2. Smt. S. Sundari Nanda, Spl. Commissioner of Police 
3. Dr. Muktesh Chander, Spl. Commissioner of Police 

104 
 
4. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Commissioner of Police 
5. Shri Prem Nath, Joint Commissioner of Police 
6. Shri A.V. Deshpande, Addl. Commissioner of Police 
7. Shri S. Venkatesan, Financial Advisor 
 
Representatives of Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D)
 
 
1. Shri Balaji Srivastava, Director General 
2. Shri Neeraj Sinha, Additional Director General 
3. Shri B.S. Jaiswal, Inspector General (Trg.) 
4. Shri Vandan Saxena, DIG 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the m eeting of the Committee 
and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear  the views of the 
representatives of the Delhi Police and Bureau of Police Resea rch & Development (BPR&D) 
on the subject ‘Police - Training, Modernization and Reforms’. 
3. The Chairman informed the Members that in its previous tenure (2020-21 ) the 
Committee had heard the views of the Ministry of Home Affairs,  Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel 
National Police Academy (SVPNPA), State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Gujarat, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh on the subject in its meetings held 
on 8th July, 22nd July, and 4th August, 2021.  He apprised the Committee about the submission 
by the State Government on the status of implementation of the Mode l Police Act, 2006, and 
the recommendations of Mooshahary Committee and various initiative s taken by them for 
Modernization and effective policing in the States. 
 
3. He also informed that in subsequent meetings, the Committe e will hear the views of 
State Governments of Haryana, Punjab, West Bengal, and North-East ern Police Academy 
(NEPA), and that feedback on the status of police reforms initia ted by the State Governments 
would be solicited through the Ministry.  
4. He further informed the Committee that the proposed study visit  of the DRSC on 
Home Affairs to Hyderabad and Goa scheduled to be undertaken i n the month of November, 
2021 has been postponed due to unavoidable circumstances.  
(On arrival of witnesses) 
5. The Chairman welcomed the Commissioner of Police, Delhi and Director-General, 
Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) and their team  of senior officers and 
the representatives of the Union Ministry of Home Affairs, to the meeting.   
6. The Commissioner of Delhi Police made a detailed presentation be fore the Committee 
on the various aspects and steps taken by them to upgrade their infra structure, training and 
modernisation to combat the rising crime in the Nation's Capita l.  The presentation inter-alia 
included plans for existing & upcoming police infrastructure; facilitation provided to the 
citizens in reporting crime and monitoring thereof; the future socie ty and challenges vis-à-vis 
police response; restructuring training programme; need-based trainin g programme i.e. 
conventional as well as specialized; learning management syst em and online training; 
perspective plan for Delhi Police 2030; areas identified for moderni zation and reforms; 
separation of law and order and investigation; management of human  resources; current 
initiatives undertaken in technology based policing, existing em ergency response systems, 

105 
 
artificial intelligence (AI) based Safe City Project; Emergency Response Support System-112 
(C DAC-Core); logistics for future challenges; Computerized Invent ory Management System 
(CIMS); community policing for crime prevention and crime detection; cr ime investigation; 
professionalizing investigation — focus on collection of scientific evidence and cyber crimes;  
counter terror response; traffic management-challenge and its restruc turing; road safety 
education; perception management, rebranding visible assets of D elhi Police, Public 
Grievance Management System (PGMS), Housing, transport safety div ision, legal issues,  
etc.  
7. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some querie s inter-alia 
regarding  police training policy; training programme on police sensitization, use of forensic 
science and technology for collecting evidence, coordination and int elligence sharing 
mechanism among the various Government agencies as well as with  neighbouring states of 
Delhi; use of new equipment and techniques for policing; online fili ng of the charge sheet of 
the cases in the courts; safety concerns of the investigating officers, lawyers, other court staff 
in view of the increasing incidents of shootout in the court premis es.  Further, queries were 
raised on the safety concerns of the family members of official s involved in the investigation 
of the heinous crimes; provisions of a dedicated well-equipped ambulanc e vans with doctors 
for treatment of injured police personnel and victims of roadside a ccidents and criminal acts 
who require immediate medical assistance; low housing satisfacti on level and promotions of 
personnel in Delhi Police.  Queries were also raised in respect of steps contemplated  to 
ensure public participation in enforcing community policing; steps taken for improving 
fitness level of the police personnel; mechanism established fo r counselling of victims of 
crimes especially vulnerable sections of the society like chi ldren and women especially 
migrants in the cities; steps being taken to improve the response systems with the use of latest 
technologies for better policing; details on coordination mechanism between the Central 
Government and the National Capital Territory of Delhi on the use of CCTV camera installed 
to prevent crimes;  validity of challans for traffic rules viola tion issued on the basis of CCTV 
camera footage.  Members also expressed concerns regarding partic ipation of women in 
Delhi Police; cyber crimes; the fallout of drones technology in crim es through drones and 
drone attack; the threat of narco terrorism in the country including D elhi; study on new 
procedures and methodologies for the adoption of the latest technology, new equipment and 
techniques for policing to improve its operational efficiency; synergy a nd collaboration 
between the Central and the State Police academies and training institutes.  
8. The Chairman and Members made some suggestions that inter-alia included 
introduction of reforms in functioning of Delhi Police based on the dynamic study and survey 
of the demographic structure of Delhi and social base, updation of t he training manual based 
on the feedback from the scholars and institutions involved in research on policing; 
redefining of human rights as per the needs of the local people; cl assifying and codifying the 
acts of corruption into a definite number of groups for the police to take action to contain the 
corruption; regular training on use of firearms to the police personnel ; to impart legal training 
to the police officers, preparation of Standard Operating Procedure to contain the incidents of 
operations of gangs from prison premises by the inmates; installati on of CCTVs in all the 
cities of the country for better policing; monitoring the activities  of the repeated offenders of 
rape cases by the local police stations; publicity of efforts b eing made by way of community 
policing; exploring the option for working with starups and entrepreneurs for bet ter policing 
by Delhi Police in the lines of Atmanirbhar Bharat Scheme of the Ministry of Defence, etc.  
9. On other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written repli es to the Secretariat 
within 10 days.                              

106 
 
(Witnesses from Delhi Police then withdrew) 
10. Thereafter, the Director General,  Bureau of Police Research & Development 
(BPR&D) made a presentation before the Committee which inter-alia included mandate & 
expectation of BPR&D; research & reforms; capacity building markers ; best of both worlds 
(BPR&D’s own assets, leveraging external domain expertise and augme nting reach to the 
stakeholders); spatial distribution; training activities in last five years; prison training courses; 
publications/ SOPs; incubating ideas in mission mode; contemporarisi ng policing;  
modernisation milestones, etc.  
 
11. Few queries were raised by the Chairman and Members during the present ation, 
which were suitably replied to by the witnesses. 
(Witnesses from BPR&D then withdrew) 
12. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.  
13. The Committee, then, adjourned at 2:32 p.m. 
 

107 
 
II 
 
SECOND MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 16 th November, 2021 in Main 
Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
 
        RAJYA SABHA
 
 
1.  Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijlal 
3. Dr. Anil Jain 
4. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
9. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
10. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
11. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
12. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
13. Shrimati Vanga Geetha Vishwanath 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional-Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
 
 
1. Shri C.G. Rajnikanthan, Joint Secretary (PM) 
2. Shri Ashutosh Agnihotri, Joint Secretary (UT) 
 
Representatives of the State Government of Punjab
 
 
1. Shri Anurag Verma, Principal Secretary, Home Affairs & Justice 
2. Shri Iqbal Preeet Singh Sahota, Director General of Police 

108 
 
3. Ms. Gurpreet Deo, Addl. DGP (Community Affairs Division) 
4. Shri Ishwar Singh, Addl. DGP (Administration) 
5. Shri Ram Singh, Addl. DGP (Modernization) 
6. Ms. Anita Punj, Director (Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur) 
7. Shri Gautam Cheema, Inspector General of Police (Crime) 
8. Shri Pradeep Yadav, Inspector General of Police (Technical Services) 
9. Shri Sartaj Chahal, Assistant Inspector General (Intelligence) 
10. Dr. Seema Sharda, Director (Forensic Science laboratory, Mohali) 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the  views of the representatives of 
the State Government of Punjab on the subject ‘Police - Training, M odernization and 
Reforms’. 
2. The Chairman informed the Members that the Committee had already heard the views 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National P olice Academy 
(SVPNPA), State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tami l Nadu, Telangana, 
Gujarat, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi Police and Bureau of Poli ce Research & Development 
(BPR&D) in the course of four meetings on the subject, which were he ld on 8 th July, 22 nd 
July, and 4th August, 2021 and 27th October, 2021.   
 
3. He also informed them that in the next meeting the Commit tee will hear the views of 
State Governments of Haryana and West Bengal on the subject ‘ Police - Training, 
Modernization and Reforms’. 
4.
 He further informed the Committee that the proposed study visit  of the DRSC on 
Home Affairs to Hyderabad and Goa will be undertaken after the ensuing winter session of 
the Parliament. 
(On arrival of witnesses) 
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives from the Ministry of Home Affairs; the 
Principal Secretary, Department of Home Affairs and Justice, DGP and other representatives 
from the State Government of Punjab to the meeting.  
 
6. The representatives of the State Government of Punjab made a det ailed presentation 
before the Committee that inter-alia included promotional training procedure; need-based 
training programmes for specific challenges; flaws/lacunae in prese nt training setup;  budget 
allocation & utilization pattern for modernization; steps take n for strengthening of the second 
line of defense along the international border in Punjab; assessm ent for future requirements 
of modernization; implementation status of Model Police Act,  2006 and recommendations of 
Mooshahary Committee; steps taken for Community policing; ‘Saanjh’ i nitiative which is a 
platform for police-community partnership in grievance redressal, victim assistance and 
dispute resolution; status on the installation of Closed-Circuit Tel evision (CCTV) cameras in 
all police stations;  vacancies in Punjab police; best practices/initiatives of the Punjab police; 
etc. 
7. The representative of the State Government of Punjab also reque sted that the Union 
Ministry of Home Affairs should continue granting funds to provide housing fac ilities to 

109 
 
police personnel and facilitate mobility including construction works to im prove physical 
infrastructure, especially in border belts and major cities of Punjab; etc. 
8. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some queries  inter-alia 
regarding the delay in the release of funds for modernization by MHA to the S tate of Punjab; 
reasons for non-utilization of funds for modernization by Punjab police; e ffectiveness of 
‘Saanjh' Centres; number of all-women police stations; percentage  of CCTV cameras; 
proposal for installation of CCTV cameras in police posts; the rec ommendations of the 
Mooshahary Committee that have not been implemented in the Sta te and the reasons thereof; 
steps  taken to deal with the growing threats and incidents of drone attacks; drug menace in 
Punjab; revival of Kashmir-Khalistan agenda by the radical groups;  types of weapons 
available with the Punjab police; availability of training facil ity at district level; existence of 
Anti-Terrorist Squad (ATS) and Special Task Force (STF) in Punjab.  
9.
 In addition to above queries, the Chairman and Members made some  suggestions that 
inter-alia included firing training to police personnel on use of weapons; bal listic training for 
identification of prohibited and non-prohibited weapons; provisioning of riot equipments with 
the State police forces; periodic refresher trainings to station  level police personnel; 
liaisoning of Punjab police with residents of border areas for ga thering intelligence; 
strengthening of inter-State coordination mechanism to tackle terrori sm, organised crimes, 
drugs trafficking and movement and illicit weapons across State s; inclusion of  Punjab in 
Category-A to receive more funding in 90:10 ratio from Centre for modernisation of police; 
more allocation of funds to the Punjab for modernisation; estab lishment of all-women police 
stations in all districts; sensitization and training to str engthen the relation of police with the 
community for building trust and effective policing; increase in percentage of women in State 
police forces; exploring the option for working with startups and entrepreneurs  for better 
policing by Punjab Police in the lines of Atmanirbhar Bharat Scheme  of the Ministry of 
Defence, etc.  
10.
 On other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written replie s to the Secretariat 
within 10 days.                              
(Witnesses from the State Government of Punjab then withdrew) 
11. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.  
12. The Committee, then, adjourned at 1:27 p.m. 
 
 

110 
 
III 
 
THIRD MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Thursday, the 25 th November, 2021 in Main Committee 
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
 
        RAJYA SABHA
 
 
14.  Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan 
12. Shri Brijlal 
13. Dr. Anil Jain 
14. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
15. Shri Derek O’ Brien 
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
17. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
18. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
19. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
20. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
21. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
22. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
23. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
 
 
1. Shri C.G. Rajini Kaanthan, Joint Secretary (PM) 
2. Shri Rakesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary, Police – I 
3. Shri Ajit Kumar, Director (PM) 
Representatives of the State Government of Haryana 
 
1. Shri Vijay Vardhan, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Agrawal, Director General of Police 

111 
 
3. Shri Arshinder Singh Chawla, Addl. DGP (Administration) 
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar, Inspector General of Police (Law & Order) 
5. Shri Shashank Anand, Deputy IGP (CID) 
6. Shri Arvind Hooda, Assistt. Director (FSL), Madhuban 
 
Representatives of the State Government of West Bengal
 
 
1. Dr. H.K. Dwivedi, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Manoj Malaviya, Director General of Police 
3. Shri Debasish Roy, Additional DG and IGP (Training) 
4. Shri R.K. Singh, IGP (Modernisation & Coordination) 
5. Shri H.K. Kusumakar, Secretary, Co-ordination (Home and Hill Affairs) 
6. Shri Ashesh Biswas, Joint Commissioner of Police (Admn.) 
7. Shri Amitava Sengupta, WBCS, Special Secretary, (Home and Hill  
           Affairs) 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the  views of the representatives of 
the State Government of Haryana and West Bengal on the subject  ‘Police - Training, 
Modernization and Reforms’. 
2. The Chairman informed the Members that the Committee had h eld 5 meetings so far 
and extensively discussed the various aspects of the Subject. T he Committee had heard the 
views of the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel 
National Police Academy (SVPNPA), various State Governments, Del hi Police and also the 
Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) in this regard.  
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3.
 The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Af fairs; and 
representatives of the State Government of Haryana and West Bengal to the meeting.  
 
4. The representatives of the State Government of Haryana made a  detailed presentation 
before the Committee that inter-alia included aims and objectives of Haryana Police; existing 
training infrastructure; facilities available at these traini ng centers; specialized courses; 
achievements of Haryana Police in sports; strengthening police inf rastructure at cutting edge 
level; special initiatives of Haryana Police for supplementing police station infrastructure; 
implementation status of Model Police Act, 2006 and recommendati ons of Mooshahary 
Committee; reducing police response time to emergency calls; improved traffic management 
through modern resources; smart policing initiatives; steps taken to combat cyber crime; 
investigation and detection of crime; budget allocation & utiliza tion pattern for 
modernization; citizen-centric policing: Harsamay Portal; Durga S hakti App for women 
safety; community policing initiatives; police force composition and vacancies; etc. 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the State Government of West  Bengal made a 
presentation that inter-alia included aims and objectives of police training at State lev el; 
institutional infrastructure existing at present; trainers and all ied assets; training capacity; 
training for beat level personnel; need-based specific training program s; modernization 
programs/schemes to face challenges like naxalism/terrorism, i nfiltration, cyber crime, drug 
peddling, cattle smuggling, etc.; budget allocation & utilizati on pattern for modernization; 
implementation status of the recommendations of Mooshahary Committ ee; overview of West 

112 
 
Bengal and Kolkata police; major challenges in police reforms and  measures taken to 
overcome them; steps taken for community policing; status on insta llation of Closed Circuit 
Television (CCTV) cameras in all police stations; existing v acancies in the West Bengal 
police; use of technology in collection of evidence, investig ation and prevention of crime; 
best practices/ initiatives of West Bengal police; etc. 
6. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some queries  that inter-alia 
included recruitment of sportsmen in Haryana Police; performance of a ll women police 
stations; percentage of women in Haryana police; number of road accidents and the casualties 
in the State; utilization of fund for modernization;  community polici ng; need of dedicated 
educational institution for police services;  police-population ratio in the State; vacancies in 
State police force; investigation  of the cases under the Schedul ed Caste and Scheduled Tribe 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989; weaponry available with the  State police;  
implementation of the recommendations of the Mooshahary Committee; r esolution of cases 
by Khap Panchayats; sniffer dog squad; increase in cases of women  and child trafficking 
during COVID-19; status of fencing at Indo-Bangladesh borders; Cellular Mobil e News 
Gathering Unit (CMNGU) under Safe City Projects; pre and post elec tion violence in West 
Bengal;  trafficking of drugs and fake currency  through Golden Triangle ; functioning of 
Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System (CCTNS); shortage o f weaponry with West 
Bengal Police; functions of the civic police in West Bengal ; misuse of Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 Act; housing satisfaction of Wes t Bengal police 
personnel; increasing incidents of cyber crimes; drone policy of the State police; etc. 
7. The Chairman and Members made some suggestions that inter-alia included 
investigation of cases of heinous crimes like murder, rape, Sectio n 307 of IPC, etc. which 
may be conducted by an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintende nt of Police; 
creation of trauma centres at regular distances on the highwa ys to provide immediate medical 
aid to the victims of road accidents; strengthening of inter-Stat e coordination mechanism to 
tackle infiltration, terrorism and drug trafficking; adequate alloca tion of funds particularly to 
the border States; increasing use of technology and upgrading security gadg ets by the State 
police forces; provision of special training to the State police to deal with terrorism and drug 
trafficking; sharing and adoption of best practices by the police forces  of different States in 
the country, etc. 
8. On other queries, the Ministry was asked to furnish written repli es to the Secretariat 
within 10 days.                              
(Witnesses from the State Government of Punjab then withdrew) 
9.  A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.  
10. The Committee, then, adjourned at 02:25 p.m. 

113 
 
V 
 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
  The Committee met at 03:00 PM on Tuesday, the 8 th February, 2022 in Room 
No.‘4’, Block A, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.       Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman    
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri Brijlal 
4.        Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
7. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
8. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
9. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar 
10. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
11. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
12. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
13. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
14. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
16. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
17. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
18.       Shrimati Vanga Geetha Viswanath  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and inform ed them about the 
agenda of the meeting, i.e. to consider and adopt the draft 237 th Report of the Committee on 
the subject ‘Police-Training, Modernisation and Reforms’. 
 
3. The Chairman requested the Members to give their suggestions , if any, on the 
recommendations and observations in the draft Reports which would be in corporated suitably 
at the appropriate place.  

114 
 
4. Some of the Members of the Committee expressed anguish and shared their personal 
experiences about the discourteous behavior towards them by police officers positioned at the 
District levels.  Members were of the view that People’s re presentatives are not being treated 
properly inspite of their being placed very high in the order of the Warrant of Precedence. 
Therefore, it was suggested that the Ministry of Home Affairs may be requested to issue 
advisory to all States/UTs to sensitize all Government offici als to strictly adhere to the 
protocols associated with the Warrant of Precedence while attending/int eracting with the 
MPs/MLAs. 
5. Some of the Members also raised the issue of misuse of NDPS Act, 1985, by the 
concerned authorities.  It was stated that even in the cases of recovery of very small quantity 
of drugs, cases were framed in such a way as to mete out sev er punishments to the accused 
and to detain the accused for longer period in judicial custody. It  was opined that sufficient 
safeguards are needed to be incorporated in the Act to prevent i ts misuse, and denial of 
freedom and liberties to the affected persons. Therefore, it was als o suggested that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs may take up with the concerned Union Mi nistry/ Department to 
revisit the impugned provisions of the NDPS Act, 1985. 
6. The Committee adopted the draft 237 th Report, incorporating the above-mentioned 
suggestions made by the Members at the suitable places. 
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typing errors or factual 
errors and also to nominate Members for presentation/laying of the Reports to Rajya Sabha/ 
Lok Sabha on 10 th February, 2022 so that further necessary action can be initiated in t his 
regard. 
8.  xxx    xxx    xxx 
9. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee wa s kept.  
10. The meeting adjourned at 03:46 pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
xxx     Relates to other matter. 
 

115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
  

116 
 
Annexure I 
 
The details of the recommendations of these commissions/committees are 
as under:- 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Committees/ 
Commissions   
Date of  
constitution
 
Terms of reference Major 
recommendations made 
by 
Committees/Commissi
ons 
Date of submission of 
Report / Action taken by 
the Government 
1. National Police 
Commission under 
chairmanship of Shri 
Dharm Vira 
 
  
15.11.197
7 
 To redefine the 
role, duties, 
powers and 
responsibilities of 
the police with 
special reference 
to prevention and 
control of crime 
and maintenance 
of public order. 
 To examine the 
development of 
the principles 
underlying the 
present policing 
system, including 
the method of 
magisterial 
supervision, 
evaluate the 
performance of 
the system, 
identify the basic 
weakness of 
inadequacies, and 
suggest 
appropriate 
changes in the 
system and the 
basic laws 
governing the 
system. 
 To examine, if any 
changes are 
necessary in the 
existing method of 
administration, 
disciplinary 
control and 
accountability. 
 To inquire into the 
system of 
investigation and 
prosecution, the 
reasons for delay 
 Welfare measures 
for Police 
 Amendment of 
various sections 
Code of Criminal 
Procedure (CrPC) 
 To organise 
training courses for 
Police  
 Tenure of Chief of 
Police. 
 Education 
qualification. 
 Working hours for 
constabulary. 
 Linkage of 
promotion with 
training. 
 Police 
Commissionerate 
system. 
 Village Police 
System. 
 Merger of Women 
Police. 
 Improvement of 
Forensic Science 
Infrastructure. 
 Accountability of 
Police to Public. 
 Police complaint 
Board. 
 Reduction in 
number of Arrest. 
(Amendment of CrPC) 
 New Police Act. 
 A separate 
Economic Offences 
Wing in 
States/UTs. 
 State Security 
Commission. 
 Gram Nyayalya  
 Maintenance of 
Crime records and 
Submitted eight Reports 
during February 1979 to 
May 1981. 
 
The first Report was laid 
on the Table of Lok 
Sabha on 1.2.1980. 
 
 “Public Order” 
and “Police” are “State 
subjects” falling in Entry 1 
& 2 of List -II of the 
Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India.  The 
Reports of the NPC were 
forwarded to the State 
Governments and Union 
Territory Administrations 
for appropriate action. 

117 
 
and failure; the 
use of improper 
methods, and the 
extent of their 
prevalence; and 
suggest how the 
system may be 
modified or 
changed, and 
made efficient, 
scientific and 
consistent with 
human dignity; 
and how the 
related laws may 
be suitably 
amended. 
 To examine 
methods of 
maintaining crime 
records and 
statistics and 
suggest methods 
for making them 
uniform and 
systematic. 
 
 To review 
policing in rural 
areas, evaluate 
any new 
arrangements that 
have been made, 
and recommend 
changes that are 
necessary.  
 
 To examine the 
system of policing 
required in non-
rural and 
urbanized areas 
including 
metropolitan 
areas, and suggest 
the pattern that 
would be the most 
suitable. 
 
 To examine the 
steps taken for 
modernizing law 
enforcement, 
evaluate the work 
of police 
communications 
the computer 
network, scientific 
laboratories and 
agencies for 
statistics. 

118 
 
research and 
development, and 
examine whether 
modernisation can 
be speeded up; 
examine to what 
extent, as a result 
of the 
modernisation of 
police forces, 
streamlining of its 
functions and its 
re-structuring, it 
would be possible 
to economise in 
the manpower in 
the various areas 
of its activities. 
 
 To examine the 
nature and extent 
of the special 
responsibilities of 
the Police towards 
the weaker 
sections of the 
community and 
suggest steps to 
ensure prompt 
action on their 
complaints for the 
safeguard of their 
rights and 
interests. 
 
 To recommend 
measures and 
institutional 
arrangements: 
 
i. To prevent 
misuse of 
powers by 
the police, 
and to 
examine 
whether 
police 
behavior, 
outlook, 
responsivene
ss and 
impartiality 
are 
maintained 
at the correct 
level, and if 
not, the steps 
such as 
recruitment 

119 
 
and training 
which 
should be 
taken to 
improve 
them; 
ii. To prevent 
misuse of 
the Police by 
administrativ
e or 
executive 
instructions, 
political or 
other 
pressure, or 
oral orders 
of any type, 
which are 
contrary to 
law; 
iii. For the 
quick and 
impartial 
inquiry of 
public 
complaints 
made against 
the police 
about any 
misuse of 
police 
powers; 
iv. For the 
quick 
redressal of 
grievances 
of police 
personnel 
and to look 
after their 
morale and 
welfare; and 
v. For a 
periodic 
objective 
evaluation of 
police 
performance 
in a 
metropolitan 
area/District/
State in a 
manner 
which will 
carry 
credibility 
before the 
public. 
 To examine the 

120 
 
manner and extent 
to which police 
can enlist ready 
and willing co-
operation of the 
public in the 
discharge of their 
social defence and 
law enforcement 
duties and suggest 
measures 
regarding the 
institutional 
arrangements to 
secure such co-
operation and 
measures for the 
growth of healthy 
and friendly 
public-police 
relationship. 
 To examine the 
methods of police 
training, 
development, and 
career-planning of 
officers and 
recommend any 
changes that are 
required at any 
time in their 
service, to 
modernise the 
outlook, and to 
make the 
leadership of the 
force effective and 
morally strong. 
 To examine the 
nature of the 
problems that the 
police will have to 
face in the future, 
and suggest the 
measures 
necessary for 
dealing with then, 
and for keeping 
them under 
continuous study 
and appraisal. 
 To consider and 
make 
recommendations 
and suggestions 
regarding any 
other matter 
which the 
Government may 
refer to the 

121 
 
Commission; and 
 To any other 
matter of 
relevance or 
importance having 
an impact on the 
subject. 
2. Riberio Committee on 
Police Reforms under 
Chairmanship of Shri 
J.F. Riberio 
 
  
25.05.199
8 
 To review action 
taken by the 
Central 
Government and 
the State 
Governments/UT 
Administrations 
for 
implementation of 
the 
recommendations 
of the National 
Police 
Commission, Law 
Commission, 
National Human 
Rights 
Commission and 
Vohra Committee; 
 
 To suggest ways 
and means for 
implementation of 
the pending 
recommendations 
of the above 
Commissions/Co
mmittee; 
 
 Consider and 
make 
recommendations 
regarding any 
other matter which 
the Government 
may refer to the 
Committee or 
which the 
Committee 
considers 
necessary in this 
behalf. 
 
.  
 Establishment 
of the State Security 
Commission. 
 
 Establishment 
of Police Complaints 
Board 
 
 Committee for 
selection of DGP of 
States under 
Chairman of UPSC. 
1
st Report submitted on 
28.10.1998 
 
2nd and final report 
submitted on 18.03.1999 
 
 
 
 
 The Report of 
Riberio Committee on 
Police Reforms was 
forwarded to the State 
Governments and Union 
Territory Administrations 
for appropriate action. 
3. Padmanabhaiah 
Committee on Police 
Reforms 
 
  
05.01.200
0 
 To examine the 
specify the 
challenges that the 
police in India 
would face during 
the next 
millennium; 
 To evaluate the 
strength and 
weaknesses of the 
 Recruitment of 
Constables to be 
restricted in future, 
till a tooth to tail 
ratio of 1:4 is 
reached. 
 National Board for 
Police Recruitment 
may be set up for 
setting question 
Submitted on 30.08.2000 
 
 The Report of 
Padmanabhaiah 
Committee on Police 
Reforms were forwarded 
to the State Governments 
and Union Territory 
Administrations for 
appropriate action 

122 
 
police force, as it 
is organised and 
structured today, 
to see if it would 
be able to meet 
those challenges; 
 To understand and 
appreciate the gap 
between the public 
expectations and 
the police 
performance and 
whether this gap 
can be filled 
without making 
any basic changes 
in the structure, 
organisation and 
the attitudes of the 
police; 
 To envision a new 
look, cultured, 
people-friendly 
and a fighting-fit 
police force which 
is able to win the 
confidence and 
trust of the people 
and, at the same 
time, can tackle 
effectively the 
problems of 
organised crime, 
militancy and 
terrorism; 
 To examine and 
bring out the 
changes which 
should be made in 
the following 
systems to 
transform our 
police into a most 
professional and 
competent force:- 
a) Recruitment 
at different 
levels 
b) Training – 
both 
inductions 
and  in-
service 
c) Career 
planning at 
all levels 
d) Accountabili
ty of the 
police 
e) Redressal of 
papers for 
recruitment to the 
level of SIs. 
Conduct of 
examination and 
evaluation of 
papers should be 
done by States. 
 In-Service Training 
needs more 
attention. 
 The traditional 
system of village 
policing should be 
revived and proper 
utilization of the 
same should be 
made 
 Selection of 
Constables & SIs 
must be based on a 
prequalifying 
screening test, on 
the lines of J.E.E. 
 Promotions of 
policemen should 
be linked with 
training like in 
Army. 
 Police 
Commisionerate 
system (Cities with 
a population of one 
million and State 
Capitals) 
 Separation of 
Investigation wing 
from Law & Order. 
 The traditional 
system of village 
policing should be 
revised. 
 A minimum tenure 
of 2 years should 
be ensured for 
Police officers at 
various levels. 
 Steps should be 
taken to build 
world class forensic 
science facilities. 
 Outsourcing of 
some police duties 
such as serving of 
summons, issuing 
of parking tickets 
etc. 
 There is a need of 
statutory 
inspectorate of 

123 
 
public 
grievances 
f) Redressal of 
police 
grievances 
g) Police 
Station of 
the Next 
Millennium 
h) Village and 
city police 
i) Techniques 
of 
investigation 
j) Prosecution 
of cases 
k) Management 
of traffic 
l) Dealing with 
women and 
weaker 
sections of 
society 
 To suggestion 
measures to equip 
the police to 
adequately meet 
the challenges of 
the modern, hi-
tech criminal and 
of cyber-crime; 
 To recommend 
changes in the 
weaponry, 
communication 
and mobility of 
the police force; 
 To examine how 
the intelligence 
gathering 
machinery could 
be revamped both 
at the Centre and 
the States and how 
their mutual 
interaction for 
intelligence 
sharing could be 
made faster and 
more reliable; 
 To devise methods 
of insulating the 
police form 
politicisation and 
criminalisation. 
 To devise ways of 
securing public 
trust and 
cooperation in 
preventing and 
Police to carry out 
Annual inspection 
of Police. 
 A new Police Act. 
 Directorate of 
Prosecution under 
Home Department 
in States. 
 Provision to deal 
organized crime. 
 
 

124 
 
solving crime; 
 To examine the 
need to clarify 
some crimes as 
“federal crimes” 
and to create a 
Federal Law 
Enforcement 
Agency under the 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs. 
 To the structural 
changes that need 
to be introduced 
for the police to 
function more 
efficiently and 
professionally. 
 
 
4. Committee on 
Reforms of Criminal 
Justice System under 
Dr. Justice V.S. 
Malimath 
 
  
24.11.200
0 
 To examine the 
fundamental 
principles of 
criminal 
jurisprudence, 
including the 
constitutional 
provisions relating 
to criminal 
jurisprudence and 
see if any 
modifications or 
amendments are 
required thereto; 
 To examine in the 
light of findings 
on fundamental 
principles and 
aspects of criminal 
jurisprudence as to 
whether there is a 
need to re-write 
the Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure, the 
Indian Penal Code 
and the Indian 
Evidence act to 
bring them in tune 
with the demand 
of the times and in 
harmony with the 
aspirations of the 
people of India; 
 To make specific 
recommendations 
on simplifying 
judicial 
procedures and 
practices and 
 Separation of 
investigation from 
law and order. 
 Establishment of 
the State Security 
Commission. 
 Review of IPC, 
Cr.PC and 
Evidence Act 
 Enactment of Laws 
to deal with 
organised crime, 
federal crime and 
terrorism. 
 Network for CFSLs 
and FSLs in the 
Country needs to be 
strengthen.  
 Criminal Cases 
should be 
registered freely 
and promptly. 
 No arrest shall be 
made in respect of 
offence punishable 
only with fine. 
 A new Police Act 
must be enacted. 
 Serious fraud office 
should be 
established. 
 
 Suitable 
amendments to 
review the 
distinction between 
Cognisable and 
non-cognisable 
offences. 
 State level 
Submitted on 28.3.2003 
 
 
 The Report of 
Committee on Reforms 
of Criminal Justice 
System were forwarded 
to the State 
Governments and Union 
Territory 
Administrations for 
appropriate action. 

125 
 
making the 
delivery of justice 
to the common 
man closer, faster, 
uncomplicated 
and inexpensive; 
 To suggest ways 
and means of 
developing such 
synergy among 
the judiciary, the 
Prosecution and 
the Police as 
restores the 
confidence of the 
common man in 
the Criminal 
Justice System by 
protecting the 
innocent and the 
victim and by 
punishing 
unsparingly the 
guilty and the 
criminal; 
 
 To suggest sound 
system of 
managing, on 
professional lines, 
the pendency of 
cases at 
investigation and 
trial stages and 
making the Police, 
the Prosecution 
and the Judiciary 
accountable for 
delays in their 
respective 
domains. 
 
 To examine the 
feasibility of 
introducing the 
concept of 
“Federal Crime” 
which can be put 
on List I in the 
Seventh Schedule 
to the 
Constitution. 
commission should 
be constituted. 
 Strengthening of 
Prosecution 
machinery. 
 Arrears Eradication 
Scheme. 
 Reclassification of 
offences. 
5. Review Committee 
headed by       Shri  
R.S. Mooshahary  
21.12.200
4 
 To review the 
recommendations 
of the previous 
commissions/Com
mittees set up on 
Police Reforms, 
 To shortlist the 
recommendations 
Review Committee 
has shortlisted 49 
recommendations. It 
was done after 
analysis of 
recommendations of 
all the previous 
Commissions 
Submitted on 23.03.2005 
 
 The 
Recommendations of the 
Review Committee were 
forwarded to the State 
Governments and Union 
Territory Administrations 

126 
 
 
which have not 
been implemented 
or have been 
implemented only 
partially, and  
 To recommend the 
present course of 
action on such 
recommendations. 
pertaining to police 
reform and other 
aspects. The list of 
recommendations is 
given below. 
for appropriate action. 

127 
 
Annexure II 
 
Status on Implementation of 49 Recommendations of Review Committee headed by 
Shri R.S. Mooshahary 
 
 The status on implementation of 49 Recommendations on the basis  of information 
received from 24 States/UTs are as under: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Recommendation 
Implemented 
Fully  
Implemented 
partially 
 Accepted but 
no action 
initiated 
Under 
consideration 
Not Agreed Remarks 
1. Educational 
qualification & age 
limits for 
recruitment as 
Constables : 
10+2 should be the 
minimum 
educational level 
for the new 
entrants. 
Bihar, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Maharashtra, 
Delhi, Punjab, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Sikkim, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Tripura 
Manipur Goa, Meghalaya 
(Age of 
recruitment 18-
21 yrs with 
relaxation of 5 
years in case 
STs/SCs) 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Bihar 
(Not agreed on 
age limit), 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 
Age of recruitment 
should be between 
17-21 years so as 
to catch them 
young. 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Delhi, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat 
Manipur Goa, Meghalaya 
(Age of 
recruitment 18-
21 yrs with 
relaxation of 5 
years in case 
STs/SCs) 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Bihar 
(Age limit), 
Sikkim, 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
Punjab: Age 
limit 18-25 
years 
2. Educational 
qualification & 
age limit for 
Recruitment of 
Sub-Inspectors : 
Minimum 
educational 
should be 
graduation.  
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Bihar, Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Punjab, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Manipur  Nagaland,  
 
 
Age of 
recruitment 
should be between 
20-23 years.  
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, 
Chandigarh, 
Uttarakhand, 
Delhi, Punjab, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Manipur Meghalaya (21-
25 yrs with 
relaxation of 5 
yrs in case of 
STs/SCs),  
Sikkim, 
Madhya 
Pradesh, J&K, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu 
& Kashmir, 
Bihar 
3 Establishment of 
State Police 
Recruitment 
Boards: 
Recruitment of 
Constables should 
be entrusted to 
State Police 
Tamil Nadu, Bihar 
Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Sikkim, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Jammu & 
Chhattisgarh,  
Uttarakhand, 
Gujarat, 
Chandigarh, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Punjab 
Tripura, 
Manipur 
 Goa, Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra 
 

128 
 
Recruitment 
Boards 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
4 Scale of pay for 
Constables : 
 Salary should be 
substantially 
enhanced. 
Tamil Nadu, Bihar 
(Age limit), 
Mizoram, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Punjab 
Nagaland, Uttar 
Pradesh, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Chhattisgarh, 
Meghalaya, 
Manipur, 
Goa, Sikkim, 
Maharashtra 
Gujarat  
Should be 
commensurate with 
his responsibility & 
arduous duty. 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Mizoram, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Punjab 
Uttar Pradesh, Manipur, 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Bihar, Sikkim, 
Maharashtra 
 
5 Working hours for 
Constabulary : 
Shift system with 
8 hours a day, six 
days a week 
recommended. 
Meghalaya, Delhi, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab, Andhra 
Pradesh 
Mizoram, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Sikkim, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Kerala 
Chhattisgarh, 
Manipur 
Bihar, Goa, 
Gujarat, Tripura 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Chandigarh 
Introduced in 
51 Police 
Stations in 
Kerala. 
Overburdening 
should be avoided 
as also 
deployment for 
non-core duties. 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Uttar 
Pradesh, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Meghalaya, 
Manipur, 
Gujarat, Tripura, 
Delhi 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra 
 
6 Promotional 
prospects for 
Constables. 
At least 3 
promotions should 
be given in entire 
carrier. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Goa, Uttarakhand, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Mizoram, 
Sikkim, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Karnataka, 
Gujarat, Delhi 
Manipur, Nagaland  Chandigarh, 
Punjab: Not 
possible at 
present 
 
 
 
 
Merit based 
promotion criteria 
should be 
evolved. 
Bihar, Tripura, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Gujarat, Delhi Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Sikkim, 
Maharashtra 
 Chandigarh, 
Punjab: Not 
possible at 
present 
7 Training of 
policemen at all 
levels:-Adequate 
training for 
upgrading 
professional skills. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Uttarakhand, 
Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Manipur, Maharashtra   

129 
 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Punjab, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
Regular training 
for inculcating 
right attitude 
towards public. 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Sikkim, 
, Madhya Pradesh, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Chandigarh, 
Punjab 
Manipur, Maharashtra   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 Linkage of 
promotion with 
training:- Police 
promotion 
Examination Board 
should be 
established in each 
State. 
 
 
 
Tamil Nadu, 
Nagaland,Meghala
ya, Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Manipur, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tripura, Gujarat, 
Delhi, Jammu &  
kashmir 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
 
 
 
Sikkim, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
 
 
Bihar, Punjab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Promotion should 
be linked with 
mandatory 
completion of 
training for all 
ranks. 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, 
Chandigarh, 
Manipur, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Jammu &  
kashmir 
Gujarat, Tripura, 
Delhi 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Sikkim, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
  
9 Co-relation 
between training 
and posting: 
Co-relation 
between training 
and posting 
should be ensured. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Delhi, Punjab, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Jammu &  
kashmir 
Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Tripura, 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Sikkim, Chhattisgarh, 
Meghalaya 
Maharashtra  
Posting should be 
in areas relevant 
to training 
undergone. 
Bihar, Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, 
Delhi, Punjab, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Tripura, Mizoram, 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Sikkim,  Maharashtra  
10 Police Housing: 
Additional 
provision of 
barracks 
accommodation 
should be ensured 
at district 
headquarter. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura, Sikkim, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Chhattisgarh, 
Bihar Mizoram, 
Goa, Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal 
Pradesh,  
Chandigarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Telangana 
Nagaland, 
Manipur, 
Punjab 
Meghalaya,    
100% family 
accommodation 
should be 
provided for all 
non-Gazetted 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Tripura, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
Bihar, Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Sikkim, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Manipur, 
Chandigarh, 
Punjab, 
Jammu &  
kashmir 
   

130 
 
ranks. Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, 
Uttarakhand, 
Delhi, Telangana, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
11 Levels of direct 
recruitment to 
Police Service:  
 
In non-IPS 
category direct 
recruitment 
should be 
restricted to 
Constables & 
Sub-Inspectors 
only. 
Bihar, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Chandigarh, 
Punjab 
Tamil Nadu, 
Nagaland, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, 
Jammu &  
kashmir 
Sikkim, 
Manipur, 
Chhattisgarh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, 
Bihar (As for 
Recruitment of 
DSP is 
concerned), 
Mizoram, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Dropped by 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Delhi 
Direct recruitment 
to other levels 
should be 
eliminated in a 
phased manner. 
Chandigarh, 
Uttarakhand, 
Punjab 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Tripura, 
Sikkim, 
Manipur, 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar (As for 
Recruitment of 
DSP is 
concerned), 
Mizoram, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
12 Teeth-to-tail ratio 
in the police 
force: 
Ratio between SI 
and Constable 
should be 1:4 
(present ratio 
ranges from 1:7 to 
1:15). 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab, Delhi 
Chhattisgarh, 
Goa, Uttarakhand, 
Bihar, Manipur, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
Mizoram Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura, 
Nagaland, 
Sikkim, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra,  
Meghalaya  
Number of SIs in 
Police stations 
should be suitably 
increased. 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab, Delhi 
Bihar, Sikkim, 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
Mizoram Tripura, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra,  
Meghalaya  
13 Police 
Commissionerate 
System :  
All cities with 
population above 
10 lakhs should 
adopt 
Commissionerate 
system. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, 
Delhi, Punjab 
Uttarakhand, 
Gujarat, 
Chandigarh Chhattisgarh, 
Meghalaya, 
Bihar, Nagaland, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Goa, Manipur, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
No comment 
by Mizoram, 
Sikkim, 
Tripura 
Complexities of 
urban policing can 
be better handled 
in this system. 
Maharashtra, 
Delhi, Punjab 
Gujarat, 
Uttarakhand 
Chandigarh Bihar, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir, 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Manipur, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli 
14 Separation of 
investigation from 
Law & Order : 
This should be 
implemented in 
urban police 
stations to begin 
with. 
 
Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh,  
Maharashtra, 
Punjab 
Goa, Bihar, 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Delhi. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Nagaland, 
Mizoram, 
Uttarakhand, 
Tripura, 
Sikkim, Dadra 
& Nagar 
Haveli, Punjab 
Meghalaya, 
Chandigarh 
Jammu &  
kashmir 
 

131 
 
Non-core police 
functions should 
be out-sourced to 
free more 
policemen for 
investigation. 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Delhi. 
Tripura, 
Mizoram, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, 
Uttarakhand 
Bihar, 
Chandigarh 
Meghalaya, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 
15 Manpower strength 
in Police Stations :- 
Work study of 
police stations is 
necessary to arrive 
at manpower 
norms in a 
scientific manner. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand, 
Sikkim, Madhya 
Pradesh, Delhi, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh 
Chhattisgarh, 
Nagaland, 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra 
Tripura, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Punjab 
Bihar, 
Meghalaya, Goa, 
Mizoram, 
Gujarat, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
  
16 Orderly system :  
Existing system of 
orderly should be 
replaced by 
system of 
attachment of one 
constable/helper 
for assisting in 
attending to 
petitioners & 
telephones and 
allowance for 
engaging by each 
officer for mental 
jobs. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli. Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh 
Meghalaya, 
Uttarakhand, 
Sikkim, 
Chhattisgarh, 
Nagaland, 
Punjab 
Bihar, Mizoram, 
Goa, Manipur 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Tripura (Not 
in practice in 
the State) 
Delhi: The 
orderly 
system had 
been 
discontinued 
by MHA. No 
Police 
personnel is 
posted as 
Personal 
orderly to 
any officer in 
Delhi Police. 
This will result in 
considerable 
saving of 
manpower. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh 
Meghalaya, 
Uttarakhand 
Chhattisgarh, 
Nagaland, 
Chandigarh, 
Punjab 
Bihar, Mizoram, 
Goa, Manipur, 
Delhi 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 
17 Internal Security 
role of Police : 
State 
Governments 
need to facilitate 
Central 
Government to 
coordinate and 
direct police 
operations in 
situations 
threatening 
internal security. 
This involves 
Constitutional 
amendment 
incorporating 
internal security 
as entry in Union 
List. 
Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
J&K 
 Chhattisgarh, 
Uttarakhand, 
Tripura, 
Punjab 
Maharashtra Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, 
Meghalaya, 
Sikkim, 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli 
Dropped by:- 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Delhi, 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
No action 
required: 
Chandigarh 
 
18 Village Police 
System: 
The traditional 
system of village 
policing system 
should be 
reviewed and 
revamped. 
Chhattisgarh 
Tamil Nadu, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Punjab, Tripura, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Meghalaya, 
Gujarat, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Nagaland, 
Uttarakhand, 
Chandigarh, 
Bihar, Manipur, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Dropped by:- 
Delhi 
Suitable 
provisions should 
be made in the 
new Police Act. 
State 
Governments 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Sikkim, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Delhi, 
Tripura, Punjab, 
Andaman & 
Gujarat Chandigarh, 
Uttarakhand 
Bihar, Manipur, 
Uttar Pradesh 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
 

132 
 
should expedite 
sending their 
views on this 
issue. 
Nicobar Islands. 
19 Merger of Women 
police with 
regular police : 
Earmarked quota 
of 33% for 
women in police 
force. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, Mizoram, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Delhi, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Chhattisgarh, 
Nagaland, 
Manipur, Gujarat, 
Punjab 
  Meghalaya, 
Goa, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 
Police women 
should be 
functionally 
integrated with 
the force. 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Uttarakhand, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Manipur, Gujarat, 
Punjab 
  Meghalaya  
20 IPS Cadres for 
Central Police 
Organizations: 
This was 
considered in 
MHA and not 
found feasible 
Therefore, it may 
be dropped. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Punjab, 
 
 Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand, 
Sikkim 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Dropped by 
Delhi, 
Chandigarh, 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
No comment 
by Bihar. 
Nagaland 
Mizoram, 
Tripura, 
Mizoram, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra 
21 Method of 
selection of Chief 
of Police : 
The need for 
evolving and 
codifying a proper 
mechanism for 
selection of DGP is 
paramount 
(Supreme Court 
judgement may be 
noted). 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Uttarakhand, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Punjab 
Mizoram,  Nagaland,  Manipur, Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
Delhi, 
Chandigarh 
(Relates to 
MHA) 
 
State Governments 
should 
institutionalize an 
additional 
mechanism for 
selection of DGP 
(Supreme Court 
judgement may be 
noted). 
Bihar, Tripura, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Uttarakhand, 
Punjab 
Mizoram,   Jammu & 
Kashmir 
22 Tenure of Chief of 
Police :  
Minimum tenure 
of 2 years should 
be ensured for 
DGP (Supreme 
Court judgement 
may be noted). 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Nagaland, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli 
Manipur  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Delhi 
 (Relates to 
MHA) 
 

133 
 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Punjab 
Fixity of tenure 
should also be 
ensured for 
IGP/other senior 
officers. 
Bihar, Himachal 
Pradesh, Mizoram, 
Chandigarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Uttarakhand, 
Punjab, Tripura 
 Manipur Sikkim, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 
23 Fixity of tenure of 
key functionaries:  
Police officers 
should be 
effectively 
protected from 
whimsical & mala 
fide transfer. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Goa, Tripura, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Delhi, 
Punjab, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
Nagaland, 
Mizoram, 
Karnataka, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, 
Manipur, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Tamil Nadu,  
Statutory 
provisions should 
be made for 
effecting only 
bona fide 
transfers. 
 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Delhi, 
Punjab,Tripura, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Mizoram, Uttar 
Pradesh 
Uttarakhand Jammu & 
Kashmir 
  
24 Police 
Establishment 
Board :  
Separate State level 
PEB should be set 
up in each State for 
Gazetted and non-
Gazetted ranks. 
 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Punjab, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
Nagaland, 
Gujarat, 
Manipur, Bihar   
The Board should 
decide transfer, 
posting & 
promotion of 
officers 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Punjab, Tripura, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Nagaland, Gujarat Manipur Bihar   
25. Adequate 
financial powers 
for  DGsP and 
CPs : 
Adequate 
financial 
delegation should 
be made to 
DGsP/CPs, as in 
the case of DGs of 
Chhattisgarh, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Goa, Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab 
Tamil Nadu, 
Manipur, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Nagaland, 
Sikkim, 
Mizoram, 
Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 Does not 
relates to 
Delhi Police. 

134 
 
CPOs. 
A Financial 
Adviser should be 
attached to DGP. 
Bihar, Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Uttarakhand, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab 
Manipur,  Mizoram, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Tripura 
  
26 Modernization of 
Police Forces: 
State Government 
needs to step up 
utilization of 
funds in the 
priority areas. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Bihar, Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab 
Meghalaya, 
Manipur, 
 Maharashtra   
Proper monitoring 
and performances 
audit need to be 
done to ensure 
that objectives of 
modernization are 
achieved. 
Bihar, Himachal 
Pradesh, Mizoram, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Uttarakhand, 
Delhi, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab, Tripura. 
Manipur, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Maharashtra   
27. Upgradation of 
Police Training 
facilities:  
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Delhi, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Himachal Pradesh. 
Bihar, Meghalaya 
Mizoram, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Sikkim, 
Gujarat, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, 
Punjab, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Uttarakhand, 
Manipur, 
Nagaland, Goa, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Chandigarh 
  
States should 
ensure that these 
facilities are 
adequately staffed 
and fully utilized. 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Punjab, 
Delhi, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Himachal Pradesh. 
Bihar, Mizoram, 
Gujarat, Tripura, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Manipur, 
Uttarakhand 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Chandigarh 
  
28. Improvement of 
Forensic Science 
Infrastructure : 
State-of-the-art 
forensic science 
laboratories 
should be set up 
along with trained 
experts. 
 
Tamil Nadu, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Delhi, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Chhattisgarh, 
Bihar, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Sikkim,  
Maharashtra 
Manipur Punjab   
Necessary for 
improving quality 
of investigation 
and stepping up 
rate of conviction. 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Delhi, 
Chandigarh. 
Bihar, Mizoram, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Manipur,    

135 
 
29. Common Central 
Forensic Science 
cadre for Central 
organization: 
Delhi  Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand 
Uttar Pradesh,  Manipur, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli 
 Madhya 
Pradesh: 
(Action by 
Government 
of India). 
(Not related 
to 
Government 
of 
Maharashtra, 
Chandigarh) 
No comment 
by 
Chhattisgarh, 
Bihar 
Nagaland 
Meghalaya 
Mizoram, 
Tripura, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Sikkim, 
Gujarat, 
30. Computerisation 
of Police Stations. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Meghalaya, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Sikkim, Gujarat, 
Tripura, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Delhi, 
Chandigarh, 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Chhattisgarh, 
Bihar Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Delhi, 
Punjab 
Manipur Goa   
31. Restructuring of 
Police Stations :  
Fresh yardsticks 
of police stations 
jurisdiction to be 
worked out as per 
ground situation. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Nagaland, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Delhi, 
Punjab, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Himachal Pradesh. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, 
Manipur, 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Bihar, 
Meghalaya, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
  
32. Basic facilities in 
Police Stations: 
 Basic 
facilities should 
be provided in all 
police stations as 
per norms evolved 
by BPR&D. 
Tamil Nadu, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Delhi, 
Telangana, 
Chandigarh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Bihar Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, 
Chhattisgarh, 
Sikkim, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Punjab 
Nagaland, 
Manipur, 
Maharashtra   
33. Outsourcing of 
some police duties 
:  
Peripheral and 
non-policing 
activities (e.g., 
serving of 
summons should 
be out-sourced). 
 
This will save 
manpower and 
promote police-
community 
partnership by 
involving non-
police 
communities. 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh 
(Community 
Policing system 
implemented), 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Delhi, 
Chandigarh, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Nagaland, 
Uttarakhand,  
Sikkim, 
Manipur, 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, 
Punjab 
Bihar, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra 
Chhattisgarh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
 
34. Weeding corrupt 
Police Personnel  
System of 
performance 
review of officials 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Goa, Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Uttar 
Pradesh, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli,  
Uttarakhand, 
Sikkim 
Manipur, Jammu 
& Kashmir, 
  

136 
 
after a particular 
age should be 
mandatory. 
Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Delhi, Punjab, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Unfit/corrupt 
personnel should 
be weeded, and 
system should be 
implemented 
effectively, 
starting from top 
level. 
Bihar, Tripura, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Punjab, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Uttarakhand Manipur,   
35. Accountability of 
Police to Public : 
Citizen’s 
committee to be 
set up at 
district/sub-
division/PS level. 
Representatives of 
a various 
professional 
groups of the 
community and 
respectable 
persons should be 
included. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, 
Uttarakhand, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Punjab, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
Mizoram, 
Karnataka, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Manipur, 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Goa, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar 
 
36. Police Complaints 
Board 
Non-statutory 
bodies should be 
set up at 
district/range/Stat
e to examine 
complaints against 
police. 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar(with 
modification), 
Meghalaya, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, Delhi, 
Punjab, Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Himachal Pradesh 
Nagaland  Mizoram, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
No comment 
by 
Chhattisgarh 
37. Free registration 
of crime :  
Free registration 
should be 
encouraged. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, Bihar, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Nagaland, 
Karnataka, Tripura, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli, 
Delhi, Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab, Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 Manipur   No 
comment:- 
Gujarat, 
Over dependence 
on crime statistics 
for performance 
evaluation of 
officers should be 
abjured. 
 Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Maharashtra, 
Uttarakhand, 
Delhi, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab 
Bihar, Uttar 
Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
    
38. Reduction in the 
number of arrests. 
Arrest is not 
Bihar, Goa, 
Karnataka, Tripura, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli 
Uttarakhand, 
Manipur, 
Nagaland, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Tamil Nadu, 
Meghalaya, 
Madhya 
Agreed by 
Chhattisgarh, 
 
Andaman & 

137 
 
mandatory while 
investigating 
cognizable 
offences: it should 
be resorted to only 
in cases of 
heinous/specified 
category of cases. 
 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Delhi, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Pradesh,  Nicobar 
Islands: 
Matter 
pertains to 
States. 
Amendments 
should be made in 
Cr. PC to remove 
the impression 
that arrest is 
necessarily linked 
to cognizable 
offences. 
Meghalaya, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Punjab, 
Delhi. 
 Manipur, 
Uttarakhand 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
  
Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands: 
Matter 
pertains to 
States. 
39. New Police Act :  
Committee of 
experts set up by 
MHA to draft a 
Model Act. 
State 
Governments 
should expedite 
sending their 
views and 
comment for 
incorporation in 
the new Act. 
 
Chhattisgarh, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Bihar, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh,  Sikkim 
(SPA corrected 
and implemented), 
Punjab 
Chandigarh 
Gujarat Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand 
Nagaland, Goa, 
Manipur, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir. 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Delhi: Delhi 
Police Act 
1978 has 
been able to 
successfully 
face the 
challenges to 
the mega 
Capital. 
40. Directorate of 
Prosecution: 
Control over 
prosecution 
should rest with 
senior police 
officers. 
This is vital for 
maintenance of 
proper standards 
of prosecution. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Mizoram, 
Manipur, 
Meghalaya, 
Uttarakhand, 
Gujarat, Dadra 
& Nagar 
Haveli. 
Nagaland, Goa, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Punjab 
Bihar, 
Maharashtra 
Comment of 
Delhi: 
Government 
may like to 
reply. 
41. Legal advice to 
police : Legal 
services of 
prosecutors should 
be available at 
Headquarters / 
District. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Bihar, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Tripura, Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, Delhi, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli 
Manipur, 
Gujarat,  
Goa, Punjab   
Legal advisory role 
of prosecuting staff 
should be 
emphasized 
through 
departmental 
instructions. 
Bihar, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Uttarakhand, 
Delhi, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. 
 Meghalaya, 
Gujarat, 
Tripura. 
Punjab   
42. Confession under 
Sections 25 and 26 
of the Evidence 
Act : 
The matter is under 
consideration of 
Government of 
India. 
  Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand, 
Sikkim, 
Gujarat, 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, Punjab, 
Tripura (no such 
amendment has 
taken place). 
Dadra & Nagar, 
Haveli, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
 Action by 
Government 
of India :-
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Delhi 
No comment 
by 
Chhattisgarh, 

138 
 
Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, 
Bihar, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra 
 
 
 
43. Federal Offences :  
There should be a 
Federal law to 
deal with crimes 
of inter-
State/international 
ramification, 
State 
Governments 
should facilitate 
inclusion of this 
subject in the 
Union list through 
Constitutional 
amendment. 
Himachal Pradesh  Mizoram, 
Uttarakhand, 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Nagaland, Goa, 
Tripura, 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, Gujarat. 
Chhattisgarh 
Tamil Nadu, 
Sikkim, 
Madhya 
Pradesh, Dadra 
& Nagar 
Haveli, Punjab 
No 
comment:- 
Maharashtra. 
 
Delhi: 
Government 
may like to 
reply. 
44. Organized Crime:  
Special legislation 
by States, on the 
lines of the Act by 
Maharashtra, for 
tackling organized 
crime. 
Dedicated units 
should set up in 
every State for 
tackling organized 
Crime. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Delhi, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands 
Nagaland, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir, 
Meghalaya, 
Uttarakhand, 
Manipur, 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Bihar, Mizoram, 
Goa, Sikkim, 
Gujarat, Punjab, 
Tripura 
 No 
comment:- 
Maharashtra 
45. Tackling 
Economic  
Offences :  
Separate 
Economic 
offences wing 
should be set up 
led by a Senior 
Officer. 
Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, Goa, 
Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Delhi. 
Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Bihar, 
Tripura, Sikkim, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Punjab  
Uttarakhand, 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Manipur, Jammu 
& Kashmir, 
 No comment 
by 
Maharashtra 
The officers 
should be from 
various 
departments/disci
plines- IT, Taxes, 
Transport, Excise, 
Supply, Audit, 
etc. 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Punjab, 
Tripura, Delhi. 
Uttarakhand Bihar, Manipur,   
46. Distinction 
between non-
cognizable and 
cognizable 
offences. 
 
Himachal Pradesh  Uttarakhand, 
Gujarat, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Manipur,Tripura, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Punjab 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
No comment 
by 
Chhattisgarh,
. Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, 
Bihar, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Maharashtra. 
Delhi: Govt. 
may likely to 
reply. 
47. Amendments to 
Sections 161 and 
162 of Cr.PC :  
  Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand, 
Gujarat, 
Tripura, 
Manipur, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Punjab 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
No comment 
by 
Chhattisgarh, 
Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, 
Bihar, 
Himachal 

139 
 
Pradesh, 
Sikkim, 
Chandigarh, 
Maharashtra. 
Delhi:-
Government 
may like to 
reply. 
 
 
 
48. Amendment to 
Identification of 
Prisoners Act :  
Tamil Nadu  Uttarakhand, 
Gujarat 
Manipur, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Delhi Punjab 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
No comment 
by 
Chhattisgarh, 
Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, 
Bihar, 
Tripura, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, 
Maharashtra. 
Does not 
relate: Delhi 
49. State Security 
Commission   
A new mechanism 
should be devised 
for control and 
supervision in a 
transparent 
manner.State 
Security 
Commission 
should be 
constituted at the 
State level 
Tamil Nadu, Bihar 
(with some 
modification), 
Meghalaya, Goa, 
Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, 
Sikkim,Chandigar
h, Gujarat, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Punjab 
Nagaland, 
Maharashtra. 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli. 
Manipur, Uttar 
Pradesh 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Dropped by 
Chhattisgarh, 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Delhi, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
 
 
****** 

140 
 
Annexure III 
 
The details of the funds allocated and released to the States and  expenditure incurred 
by the States during the last five years and current year under the scheme of ‘Assistance 
to States for Modernization of Police’.  
 
Table 3.3 
 
S. 
No. 
State 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Allocation Released Allocation Released Allocation Released Allocation Released Allocation Released Allocation Released 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
22.68 32.56 22.68 41.1 29.87 31.62 26.48 50.8086 24.46 75.3649 24.46 5.83 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
3.64 3.05 3.64 2.69 4.79 3.42 4.25 1.034 3.92 0.00 3.92 0.00 
3. Assam  24.47 
+ 59.30 * 
3.29 
+ 59.30 * 
24.47 4.68 32.23 5.48 28.57 5.6722 26.4 0.00 26.4 0.00 
4. Bihar 25.62 26.57 25.62 19.15 33.73 5.73 29.90 13.1778 27.62 9.42 27.62 19.12 
5. Chhattisgarh 9.01 14.24 9.01 1.73 11.87 2.02 10.52 8.5634 9.72 8.35 9.72 7.16 
6. Goa 0.95 0.13 0.95 0.18 1.25 0.21 1.11 0.21 1.03 0.00 1.03 0.22 
7. Gujarat 23.72 23.75 23.72 43.22 31.24 33.05 27.69 52.623 25.58 41.19 25.58 0.0.0 
8. Haryana 10.64 14.74 10.64 19.29 14.01 14.04 12.43 12.947 11.48 18.48 11.48 0.00 
9. Himachal 
Pradesh 
3.25 0.44 4.88 5.58 4.28 4.09 3.79 3.3516 3.5 27.4947 3.5 0.83 
10. J&K 37.00 35.88 37.00 34.54 48.73 48.00 43.19 32.685 39.9 40.2032 -- -- 
11. Jharkhand 8.54 22.44 8.54 1.64 11.24 1.91 9.97 9.9142 9.21 7.08 9.21 0.00 
12. Karnataka 35.58 39.45 35.58 72.04 46.85 17.12 41.53 11.39 38.37 14.6135 38.37 9.14 
13. Kerala 14.94 2.01 14.94 11.09 19.68 16.12 17.44 17.784 16.11 54.012 16.11 0.00 
14. Madhya 
Pradesh 
25.14 26.8 25.14 21.86 33.11 30.47 29.34 37.968 27.11 14.45 27.11 0.00 
15. Maharashtra 43.69 50.88 43.69 12.8 57.54 9.78 51.00 9.579 47.11 65.9798 47.11 0.00 
16. Manipur 8.85 7.79 8.85 8.37 11.66 1.98 10.34 5.994 9.55 10.75  9.55 0.00 
17. Meghalaya  3.48 
+ 7.81 * 
0.47 
+ 7.81 * 
3.48 0.67 4.58 2.60 4.07 3.6628 3.75 6.63   3.75 0.00 
18. Mizoram 4.43 5.41 4.43 8.12 5.83 6.66 5.16 8.377 4.77 34.6311 4.77 1.14 
19. Nagaland 9.96 13.78 9.96 18.05 13.12 13.39 11.63 18.876 10.74 17.29 10.74 0.00 
20. Odisha 14.47 19.46 14.47 26.22 19.05 19.87 16.89 35.099 15.6 42.4531 15.6 0.00 
21. Punjab 15.23 20.67 15.23 27.6 20.05 20.07 17.77 36.515 16.42 31.3341 16.42 4.15 
22. Rajasthan 28.99 34.18 28.99 34.54 38.17 40.38 33.83 62.592 31.26 27.2806 31.26 13.53 
23. Sikkim 1.64 0.22 1.64 1.96 2.17 2.39 1.92 0.362 1.77 0.00 1.77 0.00 
24. Tamil Nadu 32.31 63.9 32.31 89.24 42.54 15.54 37.70 68.868 34.84 56.6206 34.84 0.00 
25. Tripura 7.28 7.00 7.28 1.4 9.58 1.63 8.49 7.078 7.84 4.97 7.84 5.72 
26. Telangana 16.22 16.32 16.22 29.4 21.35 22.60 18.93 64.168 17.48 57.5797 17.48 4.16 
27. Uttar Pradesh 58.59 69.99 58.59 35.8 77.16 28.20 68.39 118.671 63.19 64.81 63.19 32.02 

141 
 
 
Funds against allocations could not be released to most of the States as they had substantial unspent balances.  
** Greyhounds Training Centre in Andhra Pradesh.       
# Release under HM’s Contingency Reserve. 
 ^ Release of these funds are shown against relevant States.    
 
Note: The figures of allocation and release include funds releas ed to the Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) for 
the supply of weaponry to the States. Releases have varied  vis-à-vis allocations.  Where release is less than 
allocation, the same is on account of non-submission of Utiliz ation Certificates(UCs) and where release exceeds 
allocation, the same is on account of releases made for Mega-Cit y Policing or/and supplementary releases 
or/and better performance incentives or/and incentives for police reforms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28. Uttarakhand 3.12 3.74 4.68 8.53 4.11 4.35 3.64 13.601 3.37 3.37 3.37 0.00 
29. West Bengal 26.80 35.52 26.80 12.31 35.3 48.94 31.28 46.9332 28.9 46.53 28.9 0.00 
 Sub-Total 520.25 
+ 67.11* 
661.79 523.43 593.80 685.09 451.66 607.25 758.5048 561 780.8873 521.10 103.02* 
 Contingency 
Reserve ^ 
29.75  29.75  38.45  38.45  39.57  38.54  
 Mega City ^ 
Policing 
45.00  41.82  45.00  45.00  32.025  0.00  
 PMU + Misc. 
exp.   
 0.32  0.22 0.45 0.09 1.40 1.2416 0.45 0.2301 0.45 0.23 
 ‘Incentives for  
Police 
Reforms’^ 
      76.90  158.26  154.15  
 Separate 
Project** 
       9.08 20  56.52*  
 Grand Total 662.11 662.11 595.00 594.02 769.00 
(RE 
452.10) 
451.75 769.00 768.8264 811.30 
(RE 
791.30) 
781.1174 770.76 
RE: 
103.27) 
103.25 