PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
THE NOTARIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 1999) 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 1999) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY , 1999/PHALGUNA , 1920 (SAKA) 

C.S. (H.A.) - 95 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
THE NOTARIES (AMENDMENT) BILL , 1997 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 1999) 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY , 1999) 
935 RS F- 1-A 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 1999/PHALGUNA , 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMrtTEE 
2. REPORT 
3. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS oF THE CoMMI1TEE 
4. ANNEXURES 
1. The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997 
II. Report of the Committee {1994) constituted to study· all 
aspects relating to appointment of Notaries and other matters 
reh.tttrlg to the administration of the Notaries Act, 1952 
PAGES 
(i)-(iv) 
1- 7 
17-21 
22--45 

• COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE (1997-98) 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab · Mukherjee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri . Anantray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
11. Shri N. Rajendran 
12. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
13. Shri Raj Babbar 
14. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
15. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
16. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
17. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
18. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
19. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
20. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
21. Shri Vijay Goel 
22. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swami 
23. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
24. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
25. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
26. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
27. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
28. Prof. M. Kamson 
29. Shri ldris Ali 
30. Shri Gopal Tandel 
31. Shri Khelsai Singh 
32. Shri Rajesh Pilot 
33. Shri P.J. Kurien 
34. Shri Taslimuddin 
35. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
36. Shri Sudhir Giri 
37. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
38. Shri N. Dennis 
39. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
40. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
41. Shri Kanshi Ram 
42. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
43. Shri Torno Riba 
44. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
(i) 
935 RS F- 2-A 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1998-99) 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
5. Shri M. Yenkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
7. Shri Prafull Goradia 
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
11. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
13. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
14. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
15. Shri Yiduthalai Yirumbi 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
19. Sb.ri Yijay Goel 
20. Shri Pushpadan ·shambhudan Gadhavi 
21. Shri Yaidya Vishnu Datt 
22. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shrimati Meira Kumar I 
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
29. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
30. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
31. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
32. Shri Motilal Yora 
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
34. Shri Sudhir Giri 
35. Shri Samar Choudhury 
36. Shri Mohan Singh 
37. Shri C. Sreenivasan 
38. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
39. Shri Lalu Prasad 
40. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
41. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
42. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi 
43. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
(iii) 
'I 
-

(iv) 
44. Shri A.f. Golam Osmani 
45. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 

REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee . to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this Fifty-second Report of the Committee, relating to the Notaries 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997: 
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, 
referred•• the Notaries (Amendment) Bill 1997, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 4th 
August, i997 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and report. 
3. The Notaries Act, 1952 (Act No. 53 of 1952) was enacted by Parliament on the 9th 
August, 1952 and came into force w.e.f. the 14th February, 1956. Before the Notaries Act 
came into force, the notarial functions were regulated by the Negotiable Instruments Act, 
1881 (Act No. 26 of 1881). A need was felt to provide a separate Act dealing with all 
aspects of notaries when it was found that the provisions of the negotiable Instruments Act, 
1881 were not sufficient to cater to the needs of developing India. The Notaries Act is a 
Central Act but the subject "Legal Profession" falls in the Concurrent List of the 
Constitution and hence the Central Government as well as the State Governments are 
administratively competent to appoint notaries . 
. 4. No major amendments in the Notaries Act, 1952 have been made .so far. The 
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs received several references from various State 
Governments to amend the Notaries Act, 1952 regarding renewal of the certificate; fee 
chargeable by the notaries; qualifications prescribed for appointment of notaries; 
standardization of seal used by notaries; and the fee for appointment etc. of notaries. The 
Ministry examined the suggestions/recommendations received from various State 
Governments and also the suggestions received from various Notaries' Associations in India. 
5. With a view to studying all. aspects relating to the functioning of the Act, a 
Committee was constituted by the Ministry under the Chairmanship of Dr. V.K. Agarwal, 
the then Additional Secretary , Department of Legal Affairs. The Committee included 
representatives of the States of Maharashtra, Punjab, Karnat aka, U.P. and West Bengal. 
The Committee recommended* .. the amendment of Section 2(c), i.e. the definition of 'Legal 
Practitioner'; amendment of Section 5, i.e. Renewal of Certificate; amendment of Section 
10, i.e. Removal of names from the Register of Notaries maintained by the CentraVState 
Government; amendment of Section 12, i.e., a person falsely representing as a Notary and 
the penalty prescribed thereof; and amendment of Section 15(2)(a) , i.e. the power to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
*Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary , Part-II, Section 2 dated the 4th August, 1997. For a copy of 
the Bill, please see Annexure-!. 
••Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II dated the 5th August, 1997. 
•••see Annexure II for the Report (1994) of the Committee to review all aspects relating to the Administration 
of Notaries Act, 1952, and Notaries Rules, 1956, Ministry of Law, Justice & Company ~ffairs . 
1 
935 RS F-3·A 

2 
6. An All India Notaries' Conference took place at Panjim in Goa on the 16th 
February, 1997. ,The Conference was attended by the notaries from most of the States in 
india. It was .inaugurated by the then Union Minister of State for Law & Justice. The 
Conference considered the Report of the Committee. It disagreed with the recommendation 
of the Committee for the amendment of Section 5. It was stated in the Conference: 'Once a 
notary always a notary is our moto. Rigours of renewal should be dispensed with specially 
when the notaries have already put in professional experience of 10 years and are also 
eligible for Higher Judicial Service.' The Conference was also against prescribing any age 
limit or number of renewals. Similar views were also received from various State Notaries' 
Associations before and after the Conference. The then Minister had accepted the 
suggestion that renewal should be for five years; there should be no limit on renewals; and 
there sho~Ild be no age limit. However, he had also agreed with the view that the renewal 
should not be automatic. 
7. The then Minister had d~sired that the notaries may be involved in the court process 
to ease the burden of courts and tribunals throughout the country; that they could make 
useful contribution in the Alternative Dispute Redressal System by working as arbitrators, 
mediators and conciliators for settling petty cases. He was of the view that with the opening 
of the world economy increase in trade would result in a new regime of legal system and 
notaries would have grea~er role with an increasing demand for documentation. He, 
therefore, suggested that the notaries who have 10 years' experience at the Bar should be 
eligible for appointment as pro tem judges or magistrates in the absence of sitting judge or 
magistrate on being so directed. They should also be able to act as commissioners to record 
evidence in any civil and criminal trial if so directed by any court or authority. 
8. The amendments in the Notaries Act were also considered by the Law Ministers from 
various States in their Conference held on the 301h June and the P1 July, 1997. The Law 
Ministers unanimously accepted the proposed amendments. 
9. The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997 seeks to amend the Notaries Act, 1952 to 
provide inter alia for:-
' 
(a) rationalisation of the procedure for renewal of certificate of practice; 
(b) the exercise of the functions of pro tem judge, magistrate, commissioner, arbitrator 
etc. by a notary when so directed; 
(c) the removal of the name of a notary on convictiOn by a court for any offence 
involving moral turpitude or for failing to get the ~ertificate renewed; 
(d) enhancing the quantum of punishment for falsely representing as a notary or doing 
any notarial act in contravention of Section 9 from three months to one year. 
10. Based on the papers supplied by the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
(Department of Legal Affairs), certain questions/issues were framed and comments of the 
Ministry were sought thereon which have been summadsed as follows: 
935 RS F-3·B 

3 
Question/issue 
(I) Which are the circumstances or conditions under which the renewal of certificate 
may be refused by the Government to a notary? Will the Government have 
absolute discretion in such matters or whether it will not be desirable as 
recommended by the Committee on Notaries to provide grounds in the law itself on 
the basis of which the renewal of a certificate of practice may be refused to a 
notary? 
Government's reply 
Discretion is always exercised judiciously. If a notary files his return in time 
requesting Government to renew the certificate, deposits requisite fee for renewal in 
time, no case is pending against him, he is of sound health and is not otherwise 
unfit, normally his certificate will be renewed. For the renewal of a certificate of 
practice he has to follow the above noted procedure. 
Committee's views/observations 
The reply is not at all satisfactory. The pointed question has not been replied. 
Question/issue 
(II) Whether Government has ever conducted any survey to evaluate the performance 
of notaries? Whether it will not be desirable to have some kind of standing 
mechanism to monitor the functioning of the notaries and bring about necessary 
improvements from time to time? 
Government's reply 
The Government has standing mechanism to monitor the functions of the Notaries. 
The District Judges, being the competent authority appointed by State Government, 
have the power to check the notarial register used by a notary while discharging his 
functions . .The competent authority appointed for the purposes of the Act also 
receives the annual return from the notaries and scrutinizes it. The specimen 
signatures and rubber stamps/seals are checked from time to time. These measures . 
are ad.opted to streamline their functions. · 
Committee's views/observations 
The reply is unsatisfactory. 
Question/issue 
(III) The Committee on Notaries Act has made some observations concerning the 
Notaries Rules, 1956, particularly about fixation of upper age limit for Notaries, 
qualifications for their appointment, fees payable to a notary and enlarging , the 
source for appointing. the notaries. What is Government's views regarding these 
observations/recommendations and whether the Notaries Rules are also proposed to 
be amended accordingly? 
Government's ' reply 
The amendment of the Notaries Rules, 1956 will be taken up after the notaries Act, 
1952 is amended. 

4 
Committee's views/observations 
The reply is evasive. 
11. The previous Committee heard the then Law Secretary in its meeting held on the 
29th September, 1997. In the said meeting of the Committee , several queries were put 
relating to provisions of the Bill which were replied to by the then Secretary. The main 
thrust of the discussion in the Committee, however, revolved around clause 4 of the Bill 
proposing to empower the notaries to act as a pro tern judge or magistrate in the absence of 
a sitting judge or magistrate; to act as a commissioner to record evidence in any civil or 
criminal trial; and to act as an arbitrator, mediator or a conciliator. The Committee in 
particular wanted to know as to how and under what circumstances the notaries would be 
required to act as pro tern judge/magistrate/commissioner/conciliator; whether the 
Government would fix responsibility and accountability on them consequent upon giving 
them additional powers which would be in the nature of judicial functions; whether 
Government was contemplating to make rules and regulations more stringent to ensure their 
responsibility and accountability; what would be the additional qualifications concomitant 
with higher responsibility and corresponding accountability attached to the additional power. 
12. A view was expressed in the Committee that the proposed amen·dment would have 
far reaching cpnsequences. An apprehension was also expressed that the proposed 
amendment in Section 8 of the Principal Act ·giving powers to the Government was 
arbitrary. In the same genre a question was posed whether it was proper to give too much 
power to any entity including the Government. What would happen if that person acting as 
pro · tem judge or magistrate pronounced some judgement which was bad in law, was among 
the several other questions posed. 
13. In response to the above questions/queries and apprehensions the then Law 
Secretary inter alia stated that clause 4 of the Bill seeking to amend Section 8 of the 
Principal Act was not recommended by the Committee on Notaries. It was based on the 
suggestion by the then Law Minister in the All India Notaries Conference. It was more• in 
the nature of an enabling provision. If there was any shortage of judges/magistrates or in 
any case the courts did not find time for recording evidence, then they could call a notary 
and ask him to sit and record evidence. It was only to expedite the process. If the court 
decided, then only notaries could be permitted to discharge the functi9ns. 
14. The Secretary went on to explain that the intention behind the proposal was that if a 
judge/magistrate was on leave or unavailable and if the Government thought it proper, it 
could direct a particular notary to record evidence in a civil or criminal trial. The Secretary 
observed that even presently advocates were being given this function under the C.P.C. The 
notaries were also advocates and without this amendment they could be directed to record 
evidence. To act as arbitrators they did not need any authority under the Act. Any person 
can be appointed as an arbitrator. 
15. The Secretary went on to say that so far as the pro tern judge or magistrate was 
concerned, such a ·system was prevailing in Goa sometime back under the Portugese Law 
and this had been included in the Bill on the suggestion of Law Minister. 
16. The Secretary further, observed that the Ministry was ·considering to add a provision 
in the C.P.C. conferring power on Government to appoint a person as a pro tern judge and 
in that case a notary too would be entitled to be appointed as such. The present Bill. only 
makes a notary eligible to be appointed as a pro tern judge. 

5 
17. Thereafter, a Member of the previous Committee while stating that -the Law of 
Notaries in the country was defective in many ways, shared with the Committee at length his 
knowledge of the functioning of notaries during the French Rule in Pondicherry . He inter 
alia requested the Committee to visit Pondicherry and study the institution which was 
prevalent during the French Rule. 
18. In conclusion, the previous Committee felt the need to study in greater detail the 
various aspects related to the proposed amendments and in this context decided to examine 
the system of Notaries prevailing in the U.K., Switzerland, Sweden, France, the U.S.A. and 
Malaysia. In order to facilitate the work of the Committee, the Chairman of the Committee 
had specifically asked the then Law Secretary to furnish notes on the current status of the 
institution of the Notaries as it obtained in the aforesaid countries and how the functions of 
the Notaries were being discharged there. 
19. The pr~vious Committee also decided to visit Pondicherry at a convenient date to 
study the operation of the Law of Notaries there vis a vis the one prevalent during the 
French Rule and interact with some of the persons associated with the a4ministration of the 
Law during that period . The Committee further decided to hear the representatives of Delhi 
Notaries Association in the matter . 
19.1 In this connection , the then Chairman had also asked the then Law Secretary ·to 
study various aspects of the institution of Notary as it obtained in Pondicherry during French 
Rule and send a report thereon to the Committee. 
20. Sub~quent to the meeting of the Committee held on 29th September, 1997 the 
Department of Legal Affairs vide their O.M. dated the 17'h October, 1997 had forwarded 
copies of relevant Acts of England on Notaries. In the said communication that Department 
had stated that the Notaries Act of the various countries like France, Switzerland, Malaysia, 
Sweden, the U.S .A. had not been traced out in any Library. However, that Department had 
been searching for the relevant material. 
20.1 On the 23rd October, 199'7 a communication was sent from the Secretariat to the 
Department of Legal Affairs reminding them to take jmmediate necessary action to furnish 
detailed notes on (i) current status of the institution of Notaries obtaining in the aforesaid 
six countries and whether some of the features thereof could be adopted to suit our needs 
and (ii) Institution of Notary in Pondicherry during French Rule. 
20.2 As no reply was forthcoming, the Department of Legal Affairs was again reminded 
on the 17th November, 1997. Thereafter, there had been no response from the Department 
in the matter. Subsequently, the previous Committee got dissolved consequent upon the 
dissolution of the Eleventh Lok Sabha on the 4th December , 1997. The then Chairman of 
the Committee directed the Secretariat that since the Lok Sabha had been dissolved the 
matter may be placed before the new Committee. 
21. After constitution of the present Committee, a reference was made to the 
Department of Legal Affairs on the 4'h August, 1998 to let the Committee know the 
willingness of the Government in pursuing the Bill in its present form. The Department after 
nearly three months responded on the 29'h October, 1998 stating that the Government 
wanted to pursue the Bill in Parliament in its present form. 
22. The Committee in its sitting held on the 8'h Februar y, 1999 took up consideration of 
the Bill from w.here it was left by the previous Committee . 
23. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Committee of the decisions taken by the 
935 RS F--4-A -

6 
predecessor Committee particularly in regard to the study of the system of Notaries 
prevailing in the U.K., Switzerland, Sweden, France, the USA and Malaysia and also with 
regard to operation of the Law of Notaries in Pondicherry vis a vis the system prevalent 
there during the French rule. In this regard the Chairman informed the Committee that 
despite specific directions given by it to the then Law Secretary to furnish requisite notes/ 
materials on the system of Notaries prevailing in the above mentioned six countries and in 
Pondicherry and subsequent reminders to the Department of Legal Affairs, that 
Department did not respond in the matter and failed to furnish the requisite material 
excepting the· copies of. the relevant Acts of England on Notaries. At this stage, the 
Chairman apprised the Committee that in the meantime the Secretariat had been able .to 
procure relevant materials/documents pertaining to the Law of Notaries in the said 
countries through Indian High Commissions/Embassies in those countries. 
24. After some discussion the Committee deplored the indifferent attitude of the 
Government in complying with the directions of the Committee. The Committee desired 
that its displeasure in the matter may be taken note of by the Government and it strongly 
urged upon the Government not to deal with the Committees in such a careless; manner 
when it came to submitting documents/notes to it. 
25. With regard to the Committee's proposed visit to Pondicherry in order to g..:.:t a 
feel of the French system which was functioning there during the colonial rule, the 
Chairman stated that the visit did not materialise because of dissolution of the last Lok 
Sabha. 
26. Thereafter, the Committee decided that since the amendments proposed to be 
carried out in the Notaries Act, 1952 were of non-contentious nature, it may dispose of the 
Bill and report to Parliament with its observations/recommendations. 
27. In this context the Committee finds that except one provision . in the Bill, namely, 
clause 4 (a) (ha), relating to exercise of the functions of pro tem judge or magistrate by a 
Notary when so directed, all other provisions were innocuous. With regard to the aforesaid 
clause, the Committee finds it totally incongruent with the uther Jaws of the country. The 
Committee opines that the functioning of a Notary is different from that of a judge or 
magistrate. Since a notary's duty is basically to authenticate, verify, certify documents, 
promissory notes etc., it will be inadivisable and unjustified to ask him to act as a judge or 
a magistrate in the absence of a sitting judge or a magistrate on being so directed. A note of 
caution has been expressed in the Committee that such a provision may also be misused. 
· 28. The Committee accordingly concludes that Notaries may not be entrusted with the 
work of a judicial nature. However, they may act as commissioner to record evidence in any 
civil or criminal trial if so directed by any court or authority and may also act as an 
arbitrator, mediator or conciliator, if so required. 
29. The Committee then took up clause by clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting 
held on the gth February, 1999. 
30. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its sitting held on the 19th 
February, 1999. 
31. The observations of the Committee with regard to the principal changes proposed 
in the Bill are given below:-
935 RS F-4-B 

7 
Clause 4 
31.1 The Committee recommends deletion of the proposed clause (ha) after clause (h), in 
sub-section (1) of Section 8 of the Principal Act, enabling a Notary to act as a pro tem judge 
or magistrate in the absence of a sitting judge or magistrate on being so directed. 
31.2 The Committee approves the other two provisions in clause 4 of the bill, namely, 
empowering a Notary to act a s a commissioner , arbitrator, mediator or a conciliator . 
31.3 The clause is adopt ed as amended . 
31.4 Clauses 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 are adopted without any change. 
Clause 1, The Enacting Formula and the Title 
31.5 Clause 1, the Ena cting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which 
are c onsequential or draftin g nature namely '1997 ' a nd 'Forty Eighth' to be substituted by 
'1999' and 'Fiftieth ' respectively. 
32. The Committe e recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating the 
amendm ents suggested by it. 
NEw D ELHI; 
February 25, 1999 
PRANA B MUKHERJEE , 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home A ffairs. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE (1997-98) 
*III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 29th September, 1997, in Room 
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Smi Ram Nath Kovind 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri N. Rajendran 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
6. Shr1 Jagatvir Singh Drona 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
9. Shri Vijay Goel 
10. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swami 
11. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
12. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
13. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
14. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
15. Prof. M. Kamson 
16. Shri Idris Ali 
17. Shri Khelsai Singh 
18. Shri P.J. Kurien 
19. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
20. Shri N. Dennis 
21. · Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
22. Shri Torno Riba 
J 23. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
SECRET~AT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary -~ 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Deputy Seq·etary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATNES OF MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
"' "' * "' 
*Minutes of first and second meetings of the Committee (1997-98) relates to some other matter . 
• ••omitted portions relate to some other matters. 
9 
935 RS F-5·A 

10 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
1. Dr. V.K. Aggarwal, Secretary 
2. Shri U.K. Jha, Additional Legislative Counsel 
2. * * 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997, for its 
consideration. The Chairman of the Committee, at the outset, brought certain aspects of 
the amendments as proposed in the Bill to the notice of the Secretary, Department of 
Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, and asked him to clarify those aspects, 
particularly, when they were not strictly in conformity with the recommendations of the 
Committee which w~s constituted by the Ministry to study all aspects reliHing to the 
appointment of Notaries and other matters relating to the administration of the Act. The 
Secretary informed the Committee that the proposed amendments in the Bill had been 
brought forward following discussions with the All India Notaries' Association. The Law 
Ministers' conference held on the 31st July and 1st August, 1997, had also concurred 
with these amendments. 
4. The Members then sought clarifications from the Secretary about the rationale 
behind making a provision vide Clause 4 in the Bill for the Notaries to act as Pro tern 
Judge or Magistrate in the absence of sitting Judge or Magistrate; Commissioner to 
record evidence in any civil or criminal trial; "and arbitrator, mediator or conciliator, if 
so, required. The Secretary replied that many of these functions such as recording of 
evidence were already being performed by the advocates and the proposed amendment 
vid~ Clause 4 was just in the nature of an enabling provision with a view to give somE­
respectability to the status of the Notaries. The Committee, however, did not feel 
convinced with this argument as the amendment sought to give judiciaVquasi judicial 
powers to the Notaries without any accountability being attached thereto. Ope of ~he 
members of the Committee drew the attention of the Committee to the institution of 
Notaries prevalent in Pondicherry under French rule and suggested that the same could, 
if adopted, be an ideal proposition for the country. 
5. The Committee, therefore, felt the need to study in greater detail the various 
aspects related to the proposed amendments and in this context decided to examine the 
system of Notaries prevailing in the United Kingdom, Switzerland, United States of 
America, Malaysia, Sweden and France and directed the Secretary to give a note in this 
regard. The Committee also decided to visit Pondicherry at a convenient time in near 
future to study the operation of the law of Notaries there vis-a-vis the one prevalent 
during the French rule and interact with some of the persons associated with the 
administration of the law during that period. The Committee directed the Secretary, 
Department of Legal Affairs to look into the Pondicherry model and send ,detailed 
replies to various points raised by the members on the subject. The Committee further 
decided to hear some of the representatives of the Delhi Notaries Association in the 
matter. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet agam at 11.00 A.M. on 
Tuesday, the 30th September, 1997. 
• ** Omitted portions relate to some other matters. 
935 RS F-S·B 

·xxv 
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 8th February, 1999 in Committee 
Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
5. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
6. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
7. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
8. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
9. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
10. Shri Viduthalai Virumbi 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
12. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
13. Dr. Swami Sachchidananc,t Hari Sakshi 
14 . . Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
15. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
16. Shri Motilal Vora 
17. Shri .Samar Choudh ury 
18. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
19. Shri Chad a Suresh Reddy 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of the Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997 which 
was referred to the previous Committee. 
3. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Committee of the decisions taken by the 
predecessor Committee particularly in regard to the study of the system of Notaries 
prevailing in the U.K., Switzerlandl Sweden, France, the USA and Malaysia and also with 
regard to operation of the Law of Nntaries in Pondicherry vis a vis the system prevalent 
there during the French rule. In this regard the Chairman informed the Committee that 
despite specific directions given by it ·to the then Law Secretary to furnish requisite notes/ 
materials on the system of Notaries prevailing in the above mentioned six countrie s and in 
•Minutes of first to twenty fourth meeting of the Committee (1998-99) re late to some other matter s. 
11 

12 
Pondicherry and subsequent reminders to the Department of Legal Affairs, that Department 
did not respond in the matter and failed to furnish the requisite material excepting the 
copies of the relevant Acts of England on Notaries. At this stage, the Chairman apprised the 
Committee that in the meantime the Secretariat had been able to procure relevant materials/ 
documents pertaining to the Law of Notaries in the said countries through Indian High 
Commissions/Embassies in those countries. 
4. After some discussion the Committee deplored the indifferent attitude of the 
Government in complying with the directions of the Committee. The Committee desired that 
its displeasure in the matter may be taken note of by the Government and it strongly urged 
upon the Government not to deal with the Committees in such a careless manner when it 
came to submitting documents/notes to it. 
5. With regard to the Committee's proposed visit to Pondicherry in order to get a feel 
of the French system which was functioning there during the colonial rule, the Chairman 
stated that the visit did not materialise because of dissolution of the last Lok Sabha. 
6. The Chairman then stated that after constitution of the Department-related Standing 
Committees, it was customary to seek the views of the Government with regard to its 
willingness to pursue the Bills pending with the Committees in their present form. The 
Chairman further stated that sometimes the new Government took unduly long time to 
formulate its views on legislations pending in the Committees with the result that the work 
of Standing Committees suffered. The Chairman went on to state that the present 
Government was creating an impression as though the Standing · Committees were 
responsible for delaying the enactment of Bills in Parliament. In this regard the Chairman 
informed the Committee that in order to set the record straight, he had submitted a status 
notes in respect of each Bill under consideration of Committee of Home Affairs to Hon 'ble 
Chairman, Hon'ble Speaker and Minister of Parliamentary Affairs. 
7. Thereafter, the Committee decided that since the amendments proposed to be carried 
out in the Notaries Act, 1952 were of non-contentious nature, it may dispose of the Bill an'd 
report to Parliament with its observations/recommendations. 
8. In this context the Committee found that except one provision in the Bill namely, 
Clause 4 (a) (ha), relating to exercise of the functions of pro tem judge or magistrate by a 
Notary when so directed, all other provisions were innocuous. With regard 'to the aforesaid 
clause, the Committee found it totally incongruent with the other laws of the country. The 
Committee opined that the functioning of a notaries was different from that of a judge or 
magistrate. Since a notary's duty was basically to authenticate, verify, certify documents , 
promissory notes etc., it would be inadvisable and unjustified to ask him to act as a judge or 
a magistrate in the absence of a sitting judge or a magistrate on being so directed. A note of 
caution was expressed in the Committee that such a provision may also be misused. 
9. The Committee, accordingly, concluded that Notaries may not be entrusted with the 
work of a judicial nature. However, they may act as commissioner to record evidence in any 
civil or criminal trial if so directed by any court or authority and may also act as an 
arbjtrator, mediator or conciliator, if so, required. 
10. The Committee then took up clause by clause consideration of the Bill. 
Clauses 2 & 3 
11. Clauses 2 & 3 were adopted without any change. 

r 
f 
13 
Clause 4 
11.1 The Committee recommended deletion of the proposed clause (ha) after clause (h), 
in sub-section (1) of Section 8 of the Principal Act, enabling a Notary to act as a pro tem 
judge or magistrate in the absence of a sitting judge or magistrate on being so directed. 
11.2 The Committee approved the other two provisions in Clause 4 of the Bill, namely, 
empowering a notary to act as a commissioner, arbitrator, mediator or a conciliator. The 
clause was adopted as amended. 
Clause 5 to 7 
11.3 Clauses 5, 6 and 7 were adopted without any change. 
Clause 1, The Enacting Formula and the Title 
11.4 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes 
which w~re consequential or drafting nature namely '1997' and 'Forty Eighth' to be 
substituted by '1999' and 'Fiftieth' respectively. 
12. The Committ¢e then adjourned at 3.40 P .M. to meet again at 11.3'0 A.M. on 
Tuesday, the 9th February, 1999. 
935 RS F-6·A 

• I 
·xxvu 
TWENTY -SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 19th February 1999 m Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1: Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj - in the Chair 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri H . Hanumanthappa 
3. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
4. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
5. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
9. Dr. Swami· Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
10. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
11. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
12. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
13. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
14. Shri Motilal Vora 
15. Shri Samar Choudhury 
16. ' Shri Mohan Singh 
17. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
18. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mahesh c. Tiwari , Committee Officer 
2. * 
3. * 
4. * 
5. * 
6. * 
7. * 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Minutes of twenty -sixth meeting relate to some other matter. 
***Omitted portions relate to sori1e other matters . 
14 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
,, 
935 RS F-6·8 

15 
8. * 
:jc 
* 
9. * * * 
9.1 * * * 
9.2 * 
:~ 
* 
9.3 * * * 
9.4 * * * 
9.5 * * * 
9.6 * 
:i' 
* 
9.7 * * * 
9.8 • * * 
9.9 * * * 
10. * * * 
11. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Fifty-first Report on the 
Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998 and the draft Fifty-second Report on the Notaries 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997 and adopted them without any change. 
12. The Committee decided to present the Reports to the Rajya. Sabha and lay ,the 
same in the Lok Sabha in the first week of the forthcoming Session, on a date to be decided 
by the Chairman. The Committee also decided to lay the Evidences tendered before it in 
connection with the said Bills, on the Table of the two Houses. Accordingly, the Committee 
authorised its Chairman to present/lay the Reports/Evidences in the Rajya Sabha. The 
Committee also authorised its Chairman to choose another Member of the Committee from 
the Rajya Sabha (besides him) and two Members of the Committee from the Lok Sabha for 
presentation/laying of the Reports and Evidences in the two Houses. 
13. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
.. 
***Omitted portions relate to some other matters. 

53 of 1952. 
25 of 1961. 
935 RS F-7-A 
ANNEXURE-I 
As INTRO DUCED IN THE R AJY A SABHA ON 
4 Aug., .1997 
Bill No. XLIV of 1997 
THE NOTARIES (AMENDMENT) BILL , 1997 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Notaries Act, 1952. 
BE it enact ed by Parliam ent in the Forty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Notaries (Amendm ent) Act, 1997. Short title. 
2. In section 2 of the Notaries Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as Amendment of 
the principal Act) , for clause (c) the following clause shall be section 2. 
substituted , namefy:-
(c) "legal practitioner" means an advocate entered in any roll 
under the provi sions of the Advocates Act , 1961. 
3. In Section 5 of the principal Act,-
(a)· in sub-section (1),-
(i) in the opening portion. for the word ''s hall", the word 
" ~ ay", shall be subst ituted; 
(ii) in clause (b), for the words " three years", the words 
"five years" shall be substitut ed; 
17 
Amendment of 
section 5. 

18 
, (b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) The Government appointing the notary, may, on receipt of 
an application and the prescribed fee, renew the certificate of practice 
of any notary for a period of five years at a time.". 
Amendment of 4. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (!),­
section 8. 
(a) after clause (h), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(ha) act as protem judge or magistrate in the absence of sitting 
judge or magistrate on being so directed; 
(hb) act as a Commissioner to record evidence in any civil or 
criminal trial if so directed by any court or authority; 
(he) act 'as an arbitrator, mediator or conciliator, if so 
required;". 
Amendment of S. In section 10 of the principal Act,­
section 10. 
/ 
(i) in clause (d), the word "or" shall be inserted at the end; 
(ii) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(e) is convicted by any court for an offence involving moral 
turpitude; or 
(f) does not get his cerlificate of practice renewed.". 
Amendment of 6. In section 12 of the principal Act, for the words ''three 
section 12. months'', the words "one year" shall be substituted. 
Amendment of 7. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause 
section 15. (c), the following clause shall be substituted , namely:-
"(c) the fees payable for appQintment as a notary and for the 
issue and renewal of a certificate of practice , area of practice or 
enlargelment of area of practice and exemption whether wholly or in 
part, from such fees in specified classes of cases;". 
935 RS F-7-B 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND RE ASONS 
Though the Nota.ries Act, 1952 has·been in force for more than forty years, 
no major ame ndm ents have been made to th e Act since 9th day of August, 1952 
when it was broug~) int o force. With g vie\\/ to studyi ng all aspects relati ng to 
appointment o'f, . nota~ies and oth~r matters 'reh~ting to th e administratio n of the 
Act a Cot~miaee was constituted. The said Committee after making an indcpth 
study of the Act and the rules made thereunder submitted its recommendations 
on 30.9.1994. The Co mmittee made recommendations regard'ing amend ments to 
certain provisions of the Act and accordingly it is propos ed to amend the Act to 
provide, inter-ali a, for, -
(a) rat ionali sation of the procedure for renewal of certificntc of 
practice; 
(b) the exercise of the functions of protem judge, magistrate, commis­
sion er, arbitrator etc. by ;1 notary when so directed; 
(c) the removal of the name of a notary on convict ion by a court for 
any offence involving moral turpitude or for failing to get the 
certificate renewed; 
(d) enhancing the quantum of punishment for falsely represent ing as a 
notary or doing any notarial act in contr aven tion of section 9 from 
three months to one year ; and 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
N~DELHI; RAMAKANT D. KHALAP. 
The 29th July, 1997. 
19 

Definitions. 
Entry of names 
in the Register 
and issue or 
renewal of 
certificates of 
practice. 
• 
• 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS fROM THE NOTARIES ACT, 1952 
(53 OF 1952) 
• • • 
l. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • 
• 
• 
(c) " legal practition er" means a ny advoca te o r agent of the 
Supreme Court or any advocate, vakil or attorney of any High 
Court or any pleader authorized under any law for the time 
being in force to practis e in any Court of law; 
• • • • 
·5. (1) Every notary who intends to practise as suc h shall, on 
payment to the Government appointing him of the prescribed fee, if 
any, be entitled-
(a) • • • • 
(b) to a certificate authorizing him to practise for a period 
of three years from the date on which the cert ificate is issued to 
him. 
(2) Every such notar y who wishes to con tinu e to practise after 
the expiry of the period for which his certificate of practice has been 
issued und er this section shall, on , appl icatio n made to the 
Government appointing him and payment of the prescribed fee, if 
any, be entitled to have his certif icate of prdcticc renewed for three 
years at a time . 
• • • • * 
Removal of 10. The Government appointing any notary may, by order, 
name from remove from the Register maint ained by it under sectio n 4 the nam e 
Register. of the notary if he-
Penalty for 
falsely 
representing to 
be a notary, etc. 
• • • • • 
12. Any person wh~ 
(a) falsely represents that he is a notary without being 
appointed as such, or 
(b) practises as a notary or does any notarial act in 
contravent ion of section 9, 
shall be punishable with imprisonmen t for a term which may ex tend 
to three months, or with fine, or with both . 
• * * * • 
20 

. .,. 
21 
15. (J) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters namely:-
• * * • * 
(c) the fees payable for appointment as a notary and for the issue 
and renewal of a certificate of practice, and exemption, whether 
wholly or in part, from such fees in specified classes of cases; 
• * • • • 
-
935 RS F-8· 
Power to make 
rules. 

. 
; 
' 
ANNEXURE II 
COMMITTEE TO REVIEW ALL ASPECTS RELATING TO THE ADMINISTRATION OF 
NOTARIES ACT, 1952 AND NOTARIES RULES, 1956 
Report 
1994 
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS 
NEW DELHI 
23 

CHAPTER 
1. Constitution of the Committee 
2. Terms of Reference 
3. Notaries Act, 1952 
4. Notaries Rules, 1956 
5. Summary of Recommendations 
6. Form I (Memorial) 
7. Form lA (Memorial) 
INDEX 
25 
27 
29 
30 
35 
41 
46 
49 

CHAPTER-I 
CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMITTEE 
A Committee was constituted by the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs, 
Government of India vide Order No. 5(i5}(94-Judl. dated 30.3.1994 to review and study all 
aspects relating to the administration of NOtaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952) and Notaries Rules , 
1956 and to make its recommendations. The.:Committee consisted of the following Members: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
,(vi) 
(vii) 
Dr. V.K. Agarwal, 
Additional Secretary, 
Department of Legal Affairs 
Ministry of Law, Justice & C. A., 
Government of India. 
Shri R.S. Gaikaiwari, 
Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser, 
Government of Maharashtra. 
Shri K.K . Kueker, 
Joint Legal Remembrancer & 
Joint Secretary, 
Department of Legal & 
Legislative Affairs, 
Government of Punjab. 
Shri D. Basavaraju, 
Additional Secretary (Law), 
Department of Law & 
Parliamentary Affairs , 
Government of Karnataka. 
Shri A. K. Singh, 
Joint Secretary & 
Joint Legal Remembrancer, 
Judicial Department, 
Government of Uttar Pradesh. 
Shri R.P. Samajdar, 
Special Secretary, 
Judicial Department 
Government of West Bengal. 
Shri P.C. Kannan 
-Chairman 
-Member 
-Member 
-Member 
-Member 
-Member 
-Member 
Secretary 
The Committee is glad to note that during the period of its deliberations two of its 
members got promotion. Shri K.K. Kueker has been promoted to Additional Legal 
Remembrancer and Additional Secretary, Law Department. Shri R.P. Samajdar has been 
promoted as Secretary, Judicial Department. 
\ 
Shri A.K. Singh, Member of the Committee and Joint Secretary and Joint Legal 
27 

28 
Remembrancer, Government of Uttar Pradesh participated in the deliberations of the 
Committee. However, he was transferred as Additional District Judge to Kanpur and 
therefore he could not sign the report. 

CHAPTER-II 
TERMS OF REFERENCE 
The Terms of Reference of the Committee were that it shall study all aspects relating to 
the appointment of Notaries and other matters relating to the administration of the Notaries 
Act, 1952 (Act 53 of 1952) and the rules made thereunder and submit a Report together 
with its recommendations. 
2. The Committee was required to submit its Report to the Minister of State for Law, 
Justice and Company Affairs within a period of three months. As the Committee could not 
complete the work within the prescribed time extension of three months was sought. The 
Government very kindly agreed to extend the time for submitting its Report upto 30th 
September, 1994. 
3. The Committee held its meetings at Delhi on 22.4.94, 27.5.95 , 27.9.94 & 28.9.94 and 
considered various provisions of the Notaries Act, 1952 and the Notaries Rules, 1956 
relating to the appointment of notaries, qualifications for appointment as notary. the Form 
of memorial to be submitted by a candidate, fees payable to the appropriate Government for 
issuing certificate of practice, extension of area of practice, renewal of certificate of practice 
and revision of fees payable to notaries. _, 
29 

CHAPTER-III 
THE NOTARIES ACT, 1952 
The present Notaries Act, 1952 (Act 53 of 1952) was passed by the Parliament on 
9th August, 1952. Before this Act came into force, the notaral functions were regulated by 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (Act 26 of 1881). After India, became independent , it 
was felt that these provisions were insufficient to satisfy the needs of developing India and 
there should be a separate Act comprehensively dealing with all aspects of notaries. Hence , 
iii '19521 Parliament enacted the Notaries Act, 1952. It came into force on 4th February , 
1956. No major amendment has been made in the Act since then. 
2. The Notaries Act, 1952 extends to the whole of India including the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. It was extended to the State of Sikkim by an order of the Government of 
India No. S.0.210(E) dated 16th May; 1975. 
3. Amendment of Section 2(c) 
3.1 Section 2 of the Notaries Act, 1952 contains definitions. It does not define the word 
'Advocate'. Sub-section (c) of Section 2 defines the word 'legal practitioner'. The said 
definition is as follows: 
" 'legal practitioner' mean S" any advocate or agent of the Supreme Court or any 
ad'o(ocate, vakil or attorney of any High Court or any pleader authorised under any 
law for the time being in force to practise in any court of Jaw." 
3.2 The Committee felt that after coming into force of the Advocates Act , 1961 this 
definition is no more relevant. Various categories of legal practitioners, such as, vakil~ 
pleaders, mukhtars, attorneys do not exist any longer. Now, advocates enrolled under the 
Advocates Act, 1961 alone are entitle to practise law in any courts. In view of the above, 
the Committee is of the opinion that this definition requires to be amended in terms of the 
provisions of the Advocates Act, 1961. 
3.3 The Committee therefore, recommends that the said definition of the word 'legal 
practitioner' may be substituted by the following definition: 
" 'legal practitioner' means an advocate entere·d in any roll under the provision~ of 
the Advocates Ac.t, 1961 (Act 25 of 1961)." 
4. Amendment of. Section 5 
4.1 Section 5 of the Notaries Act, 1952 is an important provision. Sub-section (2) of 
Section 5 gives a right to a notary who wishes to continue practise, after the expiry of the 
period for which he was appointed as notary, that on payment of the prescribed fee, he shall 
be entitled to the renewal of his certificate of practice for three ye.ars at a time. It is as 
follows: 
"Every such notary who wishes to continue to practise after the expiry of the period 
for which his certificate of practise has been issued under this section shall, on 
application made to the Government appointing him and payment of the prescribed 
fee, if any, be entitled to have his certificate of practice renewed for three years at a 
time." 
4.2. The Committee noted that this· provision gives a right to a notary to get his 
30 

31 
certificate of practice renewed for a period of three years. Once a notary submits an 
application for the renewal of his certificate of practice and pays the prescribed fee, the 
certificate of practice has to be renewed. The use of the word "shall" in section 5(2) creates 
a vested right in favour of a person once appointed as a notary. Further the said provision 
does not place any limit on the number of renewals. A certificate of practice can be renewed 
for indefinite number of times. In other words, the extension of the term of a notary is 
automatic and perpetual. The appropriate Government has no discretion in the matter. The 
said provision does not give power to the appropriate Government, even to scrutinise the 
application at the time renewal is sought, with a view to ascertaining whether the certificate 
of practice of a notary deserves to be renewed or not. 
4.3 The experience of some of the representatives of the State Governments has been 
that this provision has not worked well in the past. The Government had no choice in the 
matter of renewal of a certificate of practice even if it is of the opinion, for valid reasons, 
that the ·certificate of practice should not be renewed. 
4.4 The Committee generally agreed that it is necessary to fix a limit beyond which a 
certificate of practice must not be renewed. With this end in view, various options were 
considered. Some members of the Committee were of the view that limit should relate to the 
age of a notary. After the notary has attained a particular age, he should not be eligible for 
seeking renewal of the certificate of practice. In this context various age limits, such 13S 65 
year, 75 years, 80 years were suggested . Other members felt that the fixation of age limit for 
the purposes of renewal of the certificate of practice would not be appropriate, 'the reason 
being that an advocate is more in need of money when he is old and unable to attend the 
court work. To deprive him of the benefit of notaryship at that age will not be appropriate. 
After long deliberations, the Committee came to the conclusion that this provision which 
deals with renewal should not be linked with age. 
4.5 The Committee, therefore, feels that the limit sh9uld be linked to the renewals. A 
certifi'cate of practice should not be renewed for more than three time, each renewal being 
of 3 years. Thus, the total ·period permissible to a person, once appointed as a notary, 
should not be more than 12 years - three years being initial appointment period and nine 
years being three renewals of three years each. Further that such renewals should not be 
automatic and compulsory. The appropriate Government should have a right to. scrutinise an 
application for renewal and may renew the certificate of practice at its discretion. 
4.6 The GovemmeJ.I)t, however, should not have absolute discretion in the matter. The 
said discretion should be· guided or regula ted by law. The law should provide grounds on the 
basis of which the renewal of a certificate of practice may oe refused. Such ground may 
include public interest, medical grounds, ethical grounds, and so on. Further, the principles 
of natural justice demands that before an application for renewal of a certificate of practice 
is rejected, the notary should be given an · opportunity of being heard. · Thus, if a 
Government proposes to reject an application for the renewal of the certificate of practice, 
the notary should be given a show cause notice to reply within 15 days. 
4.7 The Committee has expressed the view that the total period during whfch a person 
can act as notary should be 12 years. The Committee does not wish to debar a person from 
becoming notary again after 12 years, if he is found fit for such an appointment by the 
Government. Hence, it should be specifically provided that after 12 years a notary may be 
eligible for re-appointment. 
4.8 The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the existing sub-section (2) of 
Section 5 should be repealed and substituted by the following sub-section:-

32 
"Every such notary who wishes to continue to practice after the expiry of the 
period for which his certificate of practice has been issued under this section may 
make · an , application to the Government appointing hil]l for renewal of his 
certificate of practice. On receipt of such application the Government appointing 
him may ' renew his certificate of practice for a further term of three years on 
payment of the prescribed fees, subject to a maximum of three such renewaJs. No 
application of a notary for renewal of a certificate of practice shall be rejected 
unless he has been given a notice to show cause. The notary who has ceased to be 
so may be eligible for re-appointment." 
5. Amendment of Section 10 
5.1 Section 10 of the Act prescribes grounds for removal of name of a notary from the 
Register of Notaries maintained by the Government under Section 4 of the Act. It is a& 
follows: 
"Removal of names from Register:- The Government appointing any notary may, 
by order, remove from the Register maintained by it under Section 4 of the name 
of the notary if he -
(a) makes a request to that effect; or 
(b) has not paid any prescribed fee required to be paid by him; or 
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(d) has been found , upon inquiry in the prescribed manner, to be guilty of such 
professional or other misconduct as, in the opinion of the Government , 
renders him unit to practise as a notary. " 
5.2 This section contains four grounds. If any of the ground exists, the name of a notary 
can be removed from the Register of Notaries. These grounds do not include conviction of a 
notary, by a criminal court, for an offence. Thus, the name of a notary can't be removed 
from the Register of Notaries even if he commits an offence or is sentenced by a court. The 
conviction of a notary by a court of competent jurisdiction for an offence involving moral 
turpitude is a serious matter. Such a person looses the confidence of the society and should 
not be allowed to practice -as a notary. Further, conviction for an offence involving moral 
turpitude is also a disqualification under various other laws. The Committee, therefore, is of 
the view that conviction by a court for an offence involving moral turpitude should be a 
ground for the removal of his name from the Register of Notaries. 
5.3 While recommending amendment of Section 5(2), the Committee has recommtnded 
that the Government should have a right to scrutinise an application for the renewal of the 
certificate of practice. If for valid reasons, the Government decides that a particular 
certificate of practice should not be renewed, then, it should be a ground for the removal of 
name of the notary from the Register of notaries. In fact this is a consequential amendment. 
If the certificate of practice has not been renewed, he cannot practice as a notary and his 
name has to . be removed from the Register of Notaries. 
5.4 Another ground which needs to be added in this section is a failure to renew a 
certificate of practice. If a notary does not apply for the renewal of the certificate of practice 
and the period for which it was issued or previously renewed has expired, his name has to be 
removed fro~ the Register of Notaries. Though in the normal course also when a certificate 
of notary is not validly in existence, the notary ceases to be so. Nevertheless, the Committ ee 
feels that since amendments to the Notaries Act, 1952 are being considered, it is better to 

33 
make a specific provision rather than to leave it for future dispute~ and varying court 
interpretations. 
5.5 The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the existing section 10 should be 
substituted by the following:-
"Removal of names from Register:-The Government appointing any notary may, 
by order, remove from the register maintained by it under section 4 of the name of 
the notary if he-
(a) Makes a request to that effect; or 
(b) has not paid any prescribed fee required to be paid by him; or 
(c) .is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(d) has been found, upon inquiry in the prescribed manner, to be guilty of such 
professional or other misconduct as, in the opinion of the Government, 
renders him ·unfit to practise as a notary; 
(e) is convicted by any court for an offence involving moral turpitude; 
(f) ·does not get his certificate of practice renewed; and 
(g) the certificate of practice is not renewed by the Government appointing him." 
On the removal of the name, the person shall cease to be a notary from the day the order 
is passed removing the name from the Register of notaries. 
6. Amendment of Section 12 
6.1 Existing Section 12 provides for punishment to a Notary who falsely represents that 
he is a notary without being appointed as such or practices as a notary or does any notarial 
act in contravention of Section 9. The punishment provided is imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months or with fine or with both. It is as follows: -
"12. Penalty for falsely representing to be a notary, etc. - Any person who -
(a) falsely represents that he is a notary without being appointed as such, or 
(b) practises as a notary or does any notarial act in contravention of section 9, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine, or with both." 
6.2 The Committee feels that the period of imprisonment of three -months is inadequate. 
It does not have sufficient deterrent effect. In order that this provision should act as a 
deterrent for a person to commit the offence mentioned above, the quantum of punishment 
should be increased. Some Members of the Committee were of the opinion that in order 
that this provision really acts as a deterrent, a minimum punishment of six months should be 
provided. A discretion should be given to the court to provide a punishment of less than six 
months for reasons to be recorded in writing. The other Members were of the opinion that 
the ··nature of offence prescribed by Section 12 is not such as to warrant a minimum 
punishment. After a long deliberation, the Committee decided against prescribing a 
minimum punishment. On the question of maximum punishment, the views of the Members 
were unanimous. It was agreed that the punishment should be increased from three months 
to one year. " 
6.3 The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that in Section 12, quantum of 
punishment should be increased to one year thus the words by "one year or with fine or with 

34 
both" may be substituted for the words "three months or with fine or with both. The 
amended Section 12 should read as follows: 
"12. Penalty for falsely representing to be a notary, etc. - Any person who­
(a) falsely represents that he is a notary without being appointed as such, or 
(b) practises as a notary or does any notarial act in contravention of Section 9, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both." 
7. Amendment to Section 15. 
7.1 Section 15(1) of the Act enables the Central Government to make rules to carry out 
the purposes of the Act: Sub-section (2) of Section 15 enumerates matters in respect of 
which rules can be made. 
Clause (a) of Sub-section (2) of Section 15 enables the Central Government to make 
rules regarding qualification of a notary, the form and manner in which applications for 
appointment as, a notary !Jla.Y be made and the disposal of such applications. 
This sub-section does not provide for prescribing age limit' for the purposes of eligibility 
for appointment as a notary. The Committee is of the view that this sub-section .should be 
suitably amended to enable the Central Government to frame rules to prescribe the age limit 
for the purpose of eligibility for appointment as a notary. 
7.2 Clause (e) of Sub-section (2) of Section 15 enables the Central Government to make 
rules regarding fees payable by a notary to the appropriate Government for appointment as 
a notary for issue and renewal of a certificate of practice. This suh-sedion reads as follows: 
-"(c) The fees payable for appointment as a notary and for the~issue and renewal of a 
certificate of practice, and exemption, whether wholly or in part, from such fees in 
specified classes of cases." 
7.3 Sometimes, the notaries submit applications seeking extension or enlargement of the 
area of practice. There may be various reasons for a notary seeking enlargement of the areas 
of practice. In many such cases the Government also does not have any objection to such an 
enlargement of the area of practice . However, as there is no provision for levying fees for 
such services the Governments have in the past been reluctant in doing this service or 
charging fees for such service without authority of law. 
7.4 The Committee is, therefore,' of the view that Section 15(2)(a) and 15(2)(c) may he 
amended so as to read as follows: 
"(a) The qualifications of a notary, age limit for the purpose of eligibility of 
appointment as a notary, the grounds for refusal for renewal of a certificate of 
practice, the form and manner in which applications for appointment as a notary may 
be made and the disposal of such applications; 
(c) the fees payable for appointment as a notary for the issue and renewal of a 
certificate of practice and for the enlargement of the area of practice, and exemption, 
whether wholly or in part, from such fees in specified classes of cases." 

CHAPTER-IV 
THE NOTARIES RULES, 1956 
1.1 After having examined the provisions of the -Notaries Act, 1952, the Committee 
desires to make use of this opportunity to consider the Notaries Rules, 1956 also. In 
pursuance of the power conferred by Section 15 of the Notaries Act, 1952 (Act 53 of 1952) 
the Central Government has made the Notaries Rules, 1956. These rules were notified on 
14th February, 1956. 
1.2 Section 3 of the Act gives a power to the Central Government to prescribe 
qualifications of the persons who may be appointed as notaries. Section 15(2)(a) of the Act 
also gives a power to the Central Government to ma~e rules prescribing the qualifications of 
a notary, the form and manner in which applications for appointment as a notary may be 
made and the disposal of such applications. In pursuance of the aforesaid provision , rule 3 
has been made prescribing qualifications for appointment as a notary. It is as follows: 
"Qualifications for appointment as a notary - No person shall be eligible 
for appointment as a notary unless on the date of the application for such 
appointment - (a) he is notary to be appointed by the Master of Faculties in 
England; or (b) he has been practising as a legal practitioner for atleast 10 years." 
1.3 The Committee feels that clause (a) has become redundant and may be deleted. 
1.4 The Committee felt that one of the important objective of the Notaries Act, 1952 is 
to provide facilities to the public to get their notarial functions performed without much 
difficulty. The provision limiting the appointment of notaries from the legal practitioners of 
atleast 10 years standing has restricted the choice of the Government. Tl)ere is a need for 
enlarging the source from where the notaries can be appointed. The Committee also felt that 
officers working in the Law Ministries of the Central and the State Governments are also 
adequately qualified and should be appointed as notaries. This will help the Governments as 
well as the public in easy availability of notaries. 
1.5 The Committee observed that at present there is no age limit for the appointment of 
a person as a notary. At a very old age, a person may be unable to function as a notary. His 
faculties may not be that alert as are necessary for functioning as a notary. The Committee, 
therefore, felt that some age limit should be prescribed beyond which a person should not be 
eligible for appointment as a notary. During the discussion, various age limits were 
suggested by the members. Some members were of the view that the maximum age of 
eligibility for appointment as a notary should be 60 years. Since the Committee has 
suggested in para 5 of Chapter III that no person should be allowed to function as a notary 
for more than 12 years (three years on appointment and three renewals of three years each 
i.e. nine years making the total to twelve years), this will ultimately mean that a person can 
practise as a notary up to the age of 72 years. Other members were of the view that the age 
limit of 72 years for a man to stop practising as a notary will be too short. They were of the 
view that age at the time of appointment plus the 12 years period should be fixed in such a 
way that the person should not exceed 80 years of age. After much deliberations, the 
35 

,. 
36 
Committee felt that maximum age limit of 75 years as eligibility for appointment as a notary 
will be reasonable. The reason being many persons at that age do not come forward for 
appointment as a notary. Generally, the appointment as a notary takes place at a young age. 
Therefore, the limitation of 75 years will be more or less observed by way of upper limit. 
1.6 The Committee, therefore, recommends that rule 3 may be substituted by the 
following: · 
"No person shall be eligible for appointment as a notary unless on the date of the 
application for such appointment:-
(a) he has been practising as a legal practitioner for atleast ten years; and 
(b) he is or has been a member of Indian Legal Service under the Central 
Government or has been a member of judicial service for atleast 10 years or has 
been an officer under any CentraVState Government for · atleast 10 years 
· requiring special knowledge of law. 
Provided that no person shall be eligible for appointment as a notary on 
attaining the age of 75 years." 
2. Amendment to Rule 4 -
2.1 This Rule provides the format of application for appointment as a notary. Sub-rule 
(3) of Rule 4 says that the person desirous of appointment as a notary should submit a 
memorial to the appropriate Government. The memorial must be signed by the applicant. In 
the case of an applicant other than 'l practising notary public appointed by the Master of 
Faculties in England, the rnemoriai\rnust also be counter-signed by atleast 10 persons 
representative of the Magistrates, bC~nkers, merchants and principal inhabitants of the local 
area in which the applicant desires to practise as a notary. The Committee feels that this is 
too large a number of persons to sign the memorial. There is no need for two Magistrates, 
and two bankers and two Merchants to sign the memorial. The same objectives can be 
achieved if the memorial is signed by one magistrate, one banker, one merchant and one 
principal inhabitant of the local area of the notary·. The total number of persons signing the 
memorial should not exceed five. 
2.2 Since the Committee has suggested some changes in Rule 3, it is necessary to 
introduce the consequential changes ' in Rule 4 to modify the format of application for 
appointment as a notary. The Committee feels. that the officers of the CentraVState 
Government need not submit the memorial as is pr~scribed for legal practitioners 
Such persons can make application for appointment as a notary on a much simpler form. 
The Committee has prepared a format of such form and is marked as Form lA. 
2.3 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the existing Rule 4 may be substituted 
by the following rule: 
(1) 
"Application for appointment as a notary-
a person may make an application for appointment as a notary (hereinafter called 
the applicant's) in the form of a rn~morial addressed to suc·h officer or authority 
(hereinafter referred to as the ·competent Authority) of the appropriate 
Government as that- Government, may by notification, in the Official Gazette 
designated in this behalf. 
(2) The memorial shall be drawn as nearly as many be in accordance with Form 1 by 
the person corning under Sub-rule (a) of rule 3 arid the persons coming under Sub-• . rule (b) of rule 3 m Form lA. 

37 
(3) The memorial of person covered under rule 3(a) shall be signed by the applicant and 
shall also be countersigned by atleast five persons of which one person each shall be 
a magistrate, a manager of any bank, a merchant and two principal inhabitants of 
the local area in which the applicant desires to practise as a Notary." (Formats 
annexed as Annexure 'A' and 'B'). 
3. Amendment to Rule 9 
3.1 This rule prescribes fees for issue of a certificate of practice, for the extension of 
area of practice and for the renewal of certificate of practice. It is as follows: 
"The fee for the issue of a certificate of practice shall be three hundred and fifty 
rupees; the fee for the extension of area· of practice shall be two hundred and fifty 
rupees and the fee for the renewal of a certificate of practice shall be one hundred 
rupees; and the fee for a duplicate certificate shall be fifty rupees." 
3.2 The Committee feels that the said fees was prescribed in 1956 when the Notaries 
Rules were made. The same have not been increased since then. The Government has to 
spend a lot of time and mone)l in processing the application of a person for issuing a 
certificate of practice, extensioo of area of practice, renewal of certificate or for issuing a 
duplicate certificate. The Committee, therefore, feels that fees pre.5cribed in Rule 9 should 
be increased. 
3.3 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the said rule may be substituted by 
the following: 
Rule 9: 
"The fee for issue of certificate of practice shall be Rs. 700/-; the fee for extension 
of area of practice shall be Rs. 500/-; the fee for renewal of certificate of practice 
shall be Rs. 250/-; and the fee for issue of a duplicate certificate of practice shall 
be Rs. 100/-." 
4. Amendment to Rule 10(1) 
4.1 Rule 10 prescribes fees payable to a notary for performing notarial function. These 
fees were also fixed in 1956 when the Notaries Rules, 1956 were made. With the passage of 
time, the amounts mentioned in this Rule have lost their significance. The fees prescribed in 
this rule, therefore, deserves to be increased. 
4.2 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that Rule 10 may be revised as follows: 
Rule 10(1): 
Fees payable to a Notary for doing any notarial act. 
(1) Every notary shall charge fees at the rates mentioned below:­
(a) for noting an instrument:-
if the amount of 
the instrument 
does not exceed 
if it exceeds 
Rs. 
10,000 
10,000 but does not 
exceed 
Rs. 
25,000 
Fee 
Rs. 
15 
25 

if it exceeds 
-do-
Rs. 
25,000 but does 
not exceed 
50,000 & above 
(b) For protesting an instrument:-
if the amount of 
the instrument 
does not exceed 
if it exceeds 
-do-
-do-
Rs. 
10,000 
10,000 but does 
not exceed 
25,000 -do-
50,000 -do-
-do- 1,00,000 & above 
38 
Rs. 
50,000 
Rs. 
25,000 
50,000 
1,00,000 
(c) for recording a declaration of payment for honour 
(d) duplicate protests: 
(e) for verifying, authenticating, certifying or attesting the 
execution of any instrument. 
(f) for presenting any promissory note, hundi or bill of 
exchange for acceptance or payment or demanding better 
security. 
(g) for administering oath to, or taking affidavit from any 
person. 
(h) for preparing any instrument intended to take effect in 
any country or place outside India in such form, and 
language as may conform to the law of the place where 
such deed is intended to operate. 
(i) for attesting or authenticating any instrument to take 
effect in any country or place outside India in such form 
and language as may conform to the law of the place 
where such deed is intended to operate. 
(j) for translating and verifying the translation of any 
document from one language to another. 
(k) for noting and drawing up ship's protest, boat protest or 
relating to demurrage and other commercial mauers. 
(1) for certifying copies of document as true copies of the 
original. 
(m) for any other notarial act such sum as the appropriate 
Government may fix time to time. 
Note: Travelling allowance per k.m. road and per k.m. 
by rail. 
Fee 
Rs. 
40 
45 
Rs. 
10 
20 
40 
60 
70 
Rs. 10 
half the charge 
of original 
)() 
25 
5 
100 
50 
50 
50 
Rs. 2 per 
page 
@ Rs. 21- per 
k.m. 

39 
NOTE: The Table of fees to be charged by the Notaries is to be Displayed in a Conspicuous 
Place inside as well as outside his Chamber. 
5. Amendment to Rule 12 
5.1 The present rule describes the seal of a Notary. The Committee observed that at 
present the notaries make different kinds of seals in the form of rubber stamps. There is a 
need for uniformity about the size, design and contents of the rubber seals to be used by the 
notaries. 
5.2 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that rule 12 may be revised as follows: 
"12. Seal of a Notary:-
Every Notary shall use a plain circular seal of a diamete·r of 5 em. bearing his 
name, the name of the area within which he has been appointed to exercise his 
functions, the registration number and the circumscription "NOTARY", and the 
name of the Government which appointed as specified in the drawing given below: 
6. Amendment to Rule 
~/~' 
't/ "· 
/ -----' Nn"~-..~ _ · 
-------
6.1 Rule 13 prescribes the procedure for making inquiries into the allegations 
of p{ofessional or other misconduct of a notary. Sub-rule (7) provides that if a 
notice issued to a notary is returned by the postal authorities with the endorsement 
that the addressee cannot be found at the address mentioned on the• letter, the 
appropriate Government shall, if Lhe inquiry was initiated on complaint, ask the 
complainant to supply to it the correct address of the notary. This provision is 
harsh. It is unreasonable to demand the correct address of a notary from the 
complainant. Many times, the complainant may not know the correct -address of 
the erring notary. Further, when the Government maintains a Register of 
Notaries, containing the address, the complainant may not be asked to give the 
address. 
6.2 The Committee, is therefore, of the view that sub-rule (7) may be 
amended and the amended sub-rule (7) should read as follows: 
"Every notice issued to a notary under this rule shall be sent to him by registered 
post. If any such notice is returned unserved with an endorsement indicating that 
the addressee has refused to accept the notice or the notice is not returned 
unserved within 30 days the notice shall be deemed to liave been served." 

40 
The Committee wishes to place on record its appreciation for the services rendered by 
Shri U.K. Jha, Assistant Legal Adviser and other Secretarial staff of the Ministry of Law, 
Justice and Company Affairs for rendering assistance to the Committee. 
Sdi-
Shri R.S. Gaikaiwari 
Member 
Sdi-
Shri D. Basavaraju 
Member 
Shri R.P. Samajdar · 
Member 
Sdi-
Dr. V.K. Agarwal 
Chairman 
Sdi-
Shri K.K. Kueker 
Member 
Sd/-
Shri A.K. Singh 
Member 
Sdi-
Shri P. C. Kannan 
Member-Secretary 

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
THE NOTARIES ACT, 1952 
1. Amendment of Sec. 2(c) 
3.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the said definition of the word 'Legal 
practitioner' may be substituted by the following definition: 
" 'legal practitioner' means an Advocate entered in any roll under the· provisions 
qf the Advocates Act, 1961 (Act 25 of 1961)". 
2. Amendment of Section 5(2) 
4.8 The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the existing sub-Section (2) of 
Section 5 should be repealed and substituted by the following sub-section: 
"Every such notary who wishes to continue to practice after the expiry of the 
period for which his certificate of practice has been issued under this section may 
make an applicatior:t to the Government appointing him for renewal of his 
Certificate of Practice. On receipt of such application the Government appointing 
him may renew his certificate of practice for a further term of three years on 
payment of the prescribed fees, subject to a maximum of three such renewals. No 
application of a Notary for renewal of a certificate of practice shall be rejected 
unless he has been given a notice to show cause. The notary who has ceased to be 
so may be eligible for re-appointment." 
3. Amendment of Section 10 
5.5 The Committee is,' therefore, of the opinion that the existing section 10 should be 
substituted by the following: 
"Removal of names from Register: The Government appointing any notary may, 
by order, remove from the Register maintained by it under section 4 of the name 
of the notary if he-
(a) makes a request to that effect; or 
' (b) has not paid any prescribed fee required to be paid by him; or 
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
.(d) has been found, upon inquiry in the prescribed manner to be guilty of such 
professional or other misconduct as, in the opinion of the Government, ·renders 
him unfit to practise as a notary; 
(e) is convicted by any court for an offence involving moral turpitude; 
(f) does not get his certificate of practice renewed; and 
(g) the Certificate of Practice is not renewed by the Government appointing him." 
On the removal of the name, the person shall cease to be a notary from the day the 
order is passed removing the name from the Register of · Notaries. 
41 

42 
4. Amendment of Section 12 
6.3 The Committee is, therefore, of the opmton that in Section 12, quantum of 
p·unishment should be increased to one year. Thus the words by "one year or with fiqe or 
with both" may be substituted for the words "three months or with fine or with both." The 
amended Section 12 should read as follows: 
12. Penalty for falsely representing to be a notary, etc.-Any person who­
(a) falsely represents . that he is a notary without being appointed as such, or 
(b) practises as a notary or does any notarial act in contravention of section 9, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine, or with both." 
S. Amendment to Section 15 (a) 
The Committee is, therefore, of the view that section 15 (2) (a) and 15 (2) (c) may be 
amended so as to read as follows: 
"(a) The qualification of a notary , age limit for the purpose of eligibility of 
appointment as a notary, the grounds for refusal for renewal of Certificate of Practice, 
the form and manner in which application for appointment as a notary may be made 
and the disposal of such application; 
(c) the fees payable for appointment as a notary, for the issue and renewal of a 
certificate of practice and for the enlargement of the area of practice, and exemp tion, 
whether wholly or in part, from such fees in specified classes or cases." 
THE NOTARIES RULES, 1956 
1. Amendment of Rule 3 
1.6 The Committee, therefor e, recommends that rule 3 may be substituted by the 
following: 
"No person shall be eligible for appointment as a notary unless on the date of the 
app1ication for such appointment: 
(a) he has been practising as a legal practitioner for atleast ten 'years; and 
(b) he has been a member of Indian Legal Ser.vice under the Central Government or 
has been a member of judicial service for atleast 10 years or has been an officer 
under any CentraVState Government for atleast 10 years requiring special 
knowledge of Jaw. 
Provided that no person shall be eligible for appointment as a notary on attaining the 
age of 75 years." 
2. Amendment of Rule 4 
2.3 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the existing rule 4 may be s~bstituted 
by the · following rule: 
"Application for appointment as a notary-
(!) a person may make an application for appointment as a notary (hereinafter called 
the applicant's) in the form of a memorial addressed to such officer or authority 
(hereinafter referred to. as the Competent Authority) of the appropriate 
Government as that Government, · may be notification in the Official Gazette 
designated in this behalf. 

43 
(2) The memorial shall be drawn as nearly as may be in accordance with Form 1 by the 
person coming under sub-rule (a) of rule 3 and the persons coming under sub-rule 
(b) of rule 3 in Form 1~. 
(3) The memorial of person covered under rule 3(a) shall be signed by the applicant 
and shall also be countersigned by atleast five persons of which one person each 
shall be a magistrate, . a manager of any bank, a merchant and two principal 
inhabitants of the local area in which the applicant desires to practise as a Notary." 
3. Amendment of Rule · 9 
3.3 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the said rule may be ·Substituted by 
the following: _ 
Rule 9: 
"The fe-e for issue of certificate of practice shall be Rs. 700/-; the fee for extension 
of area of practice shall be Rs 500/-; the fee for renewal of certificate of practice 
shall be Rs. 250/-; and the fee for issue of a duplicate certificate of practice shall 
be Rs. 100/-." 
4. Amendment to Rule 10 (1) 
4.2 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that Rule 10 may be revised as follows: 
Rule 10 (1): 
Fees payable to a Notary for doing any notarial act. 
(1) Every Notary shall charge fees at the rates mentioned below: 
(a) for noting an instrument: 
If ·the amount 
of the instrument 
does not exceed 
if it exceeds 
-do-
-do-
Rs. 
10,000/-
Rs. 
10,000/- but does not 
exceed 25,000/-
25,000/- -do- 50,000/-
50,000/- & above. 
{b) For protesting an instrument: 
if the amount 
of the instrument 
does not exceed 
if it exceeds 
-do-
-do-
-do-
Rs. 
10,0001-
Rs. 
10,00GI- but 25,000/-
does not exceed 
25 ,0001-do-50 ,0001-
50,000/-do-1 ,00,000/-
1,00,<XJOI- & above 
( d) for recording a declaration of payment for honour. 
{d) duplicate protests; half the charge of original. 
Fee 
Rs. 
15/7 
25/-
401-
451-
Rs. 
10/-
20/-
401-
60/-
70/-
10/-

44 
(e) for verifying, authenticating, certifying or attesting the execution of 
any instrument . 10/-
(f) for presenting any promissory note, hundi or bill of exchange for 
acceptance or payment or demanding better security. 25/-
(g) for administering oath to, or taking affidavit from any person. 5/-. 
(h) for preparing any instrument intended to take effect in any country 
or place outside India in such form , and language as may conform 
to the law of the place where such deed is intended to operate. 100/-
(i) for attesting or authenticating any instrument to take effect in any 
country or place outside India in such form and language as may 
conform to the law of the place where such deed is intended to 
operate. 50/-
G) for translating and verifying the translation of any document from 
one language to anot her. 50/-
(k) for noting and drawin·g up ship's protest, boat protest or relating to 
demurrage and other commercial matters. 50/-
(1) for certifying copies of document as true copies of the original. Rs. 2/­
per page. 
(m) for any other notarial act such sum as the appropriate Government 
may fix time to time . . 
Note: Travelling allowance per K.m. road and per K.m. by rail. @ Rs. 21- per 
K.m. 
Note: The table of fees to be charged by the Notaries is to be displayed in a conspicuous 
place inside as well as outside his chamber. 
Amendment to Rule 12 
5.2 The Committ~e is, therefore, of the view that rule 12 may be revised as follows: 
"12. Seal of a Nolllry: 
Every Notary shall use a plain circular seal of a diameter of 5 em. bearing his name , the 
name of the areas within which he has been appointed to exercise his functions, the 
registration number and the circumscription "NOTARY", and the name of the Government 
which appointed as specified in the drawing given below: 

45 
Amendment to Rule 13 (7) 
6.2 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that sub-rule (7) may be amended and the 
amended sub-rule (7) should read as follows: 
"Every notice issued to a notary under this rule shall be sent to him by registered p;:>st. 
If any such notice is returned unserved with an endorsement indicating that the 
addressee has refused to accept the notice or the notice is not returned unserved within 
thirty days, the notice shall be deemed to have been served." 

FORM 1 (MEMORIAL) 
The Memorial of (name of the applicant) ................................................................... .. 
.......... ........... (in block letters). 
Showeth: 
1. That the memorialist is a person eligible for appointment as a Notary under the 
Notaries Act; 1952, and the Notaries Rules, 1956. The bio-data of the memorialist is given 
in annexure. 
2. That the memorialist has resided in ................................... (here state the name of 
the local area name of court where he intends to practise) and will reside for upwards of 
................................ (state how long). 
3. That the number of notaries practising at ....................... (here state the name of 
the area where he intends to practise) is as follows: 
Notaries .............. (here state number). , 
4. That the average annual income of the memorialist during the preceding three years 
is ............... (here state the figure) (state whether he is Income tax Assessee). 
5. That the above number of notaries practising in the local area is insufficient for the 
requirements thereof. (The grounds of the statement should be added). 
6. That no previous application of the memorialist has been rejected or withdrawn by 
him, within the preceding six months. 
The memorialist, therefore, prays that the Government be pleased to appoint and admit 
him a notary under and by virtue of the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952) Rule 3(a) of the 
Notaries Rilles, 1956, to practise in ............................. (here state the name of the local 
area). 
Dated ................ day of.. ......... 19 
46 
Signature of Memorialist 
Address: 

47 
We the undersigned magistrate, banker, merchant, and others residing in and 
about.. ........... (here state the name of the local area), have read the foregoing memorial 
of.".· .............. (here state the name of the applicant) and are satisfied that the statements 
contained therein are true and that he is a fit and proper person to be appointed a notary 
and we join in the prayer thereof. 
Name and address 
of signatories 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Profession or 
occupation of the 
signatories . 
Name & address of Signatures & Seal 
the firms of which 
signatories are 
members 

BIO-DATA (FORM 1) 
Name 
Father's Name 
Date of Birth 
Address- Residence 
Chamber 
Educational Qualification 
Date of Enrolment 
Practising in Civil Side 
Criminal Side 
Taxation 
Revenue Courts 
Whether Income-tax 
Assessee 
(Encl. photocopy of return) 
Photocopy/ Attested copy 
of certificates attached. 
NOTE: The Memorial should be complete in all respects. 
48 
Tel. 
Tel. 
Please affix 
recent taken 
passport size 
(two) Photographs. 

FORM lA (MEMORIAL) (SEE RULE 3 (B)) 
The Memorial of (name of the applicant) ...................................... ...... ........................ . 
........... .... ...... (in block letters). 
Showeth: 
1. That the memorialist is a person eligible for appointment as a Notary under the Notaries 
Act, 1952, and Rule 3(b) of the Notaries Rules, 1956. The bio-data of the memorialist is 
given in annexure. 
2. That the memorialist has resided in ................................... (here state the name of the 
loca] area name of court where he intends to practise) and will reside for upwards of 
................................ (state how long). 
3. That the number of notaries practising at. ............ .......... (here state the name of the 
area where he intends to practise) is as follows: 
Notaries .............. (here state number). 
4. That the average annual income of the memorialist during the preced ing three years 
is ............... (here state the figure) (state whether he is Income Tax Assessee). 
5. That the above number of notaries practising in the local area is insufficient for the 
requirements thereof. (The grounds of the statement should be added). 
6. That no previous application of the memorialist has been rejected or withdrawn by him, 
within the preceding six months. 
The memorialist, therefore, praY.~ that the Government be pleased to appoint and admit 
him a notary under and by virtue of the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952) Rule 3(b) of. the 
Notaries Rules, 1956, to practise in ............................. (here state the name of the local 
area). 
Dated ............ .... day of ........... 19 
Signature of Memoriali st 
Addres s: 
NOTE: Persons eligible for appointment under Rule 3(b) of the Notarie s Rules, 1956 shall 
submit their memorial complete in all respects alongwith photocopy of Matriculati on 
Cerificate, LL.B. Certificate, Enrolment Certificate (if any) duly attested/certifi ed, 
directly to the Competent Authorit y, Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affair s, 
Shastri Bhavan , New Delhi. 
49 

1. Name 
2. Father's Name 
3. Date of Birth 
4. Address-Residence 
Office 
BIO-DATA (FORM 1 A) 
5. Educational Qualification 
6. Date of Joining 
Central Govt./State 'Govt./ 
Judicial Service 
.7. Date of Retiremeht 
8. Post held at the time of retirement. 
Tel. 
Tel. 
Please affix 
recent taken 
passport size 
(two) Photographs. 
c. 
Signature 
'· . NOTE : Please attach necessary proof about your eligibility under Rule 3(b) of the 
:· Notary Rules 1956. Memorial should . be complete in all respects. 
50 

I 