PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY -NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997 
(PRESENTED TO RAJY A SABHA ON THE 17TH DECEMBER, 1998) 
(LAID IN LOK SABHA ON THE 17TH DECEMBER, 1998) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER , 19981 AGRAHA Y ANA , 1920 (SAKA) 

C.S. (B.A.) - 87 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997 
(PRESENTED Tp RAJYA SABHA ON THE 17TH DECEMBER, 1998) 
(LAID IN LOK SABHA ON THE 17TH DECEMBER , 1998) .. 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI . 
DECEMBER, 199&/ AGRAHA Y ANA, 1920 (SAKA) 
933 RS F-l·A 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. CoMPOsmON OF THE CoMMriTEE (iHiii) 
2. REPORT 1-7 
3. APPENDIX 
List of organisations/associations/individuals 9--11 
from whom memoranda on the Bill were received 
4. RELEVANT MJNUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE CoMMITTEE 13--22 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1997-98) 
1. Shri Som Pal __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
11. Shri N. Rajendran 
12. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
13. Shri Raj Babbar 
14. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
15. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
16. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
17 .. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
18. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
19. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
20. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
21. Shri Vijay Goel 
'22. Shri Ish war Dayal Swami 
23. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
24. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
2S:. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
26. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
27. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
28. Prof. M. Kamson 
29. Shri ldris Ali 
30. Shri Gopal Tandel 
31. Shri Khelsai Singh 
32. Shri Rajesh Pilot 
33. Shri P.J. Kurien 
34. Shri Taslimuddin 
35. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
36. Shri Sudhir Giri 
37, Shri N.S.V .. Chitthan 
38. Shri N. Dennis 
39. Shri Kumyar Sarvraj Singh 
40. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
41. Shri Kanshi Ram 
42. Dr: Jayanta Rongpi 
43. Shri Torno Riba 
44. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
933 RS F-2·A 
" ' 
(i) 

41. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
42. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi 
43 .. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
44. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
45. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
(iii) 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 

I 
REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Forty-ninth Report of the 
Committee on the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997*. 
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Presiding Officer, Rajya Sabha referred**. The Code of Civil Procedure 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 14th August, 1997 and 
pending therein, to the earlier Committee (1997-98) for examination and report . 
3. The Committee (1997-98) considered the Bill in its meeting held on 30th September, 
1997 and heard the Secretary of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law, Justice and 
Company Affairs on the provisions contained in the Bill. 
4. In the said meeting of the Committee, having regard to the special importance of the 
Bill which sought to streamline the procedural delays in the judicial process a~d amend 
certain Sections and Orders of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908, decided to invite 
memoranda from individuals/organisations/ins titutions etc. interested in the subject matter 
of Bill. The Committee directed that a Press Communique may be issued in this behalf 
fixing November 10, 1997 as the last date for the receipt of memoranda. An advertisement 
was, accordingly, published in all the leading English and Vernacular dailies on 11th 
October, 1997. The matter was also broadcast/telecast repeatedly on All India Radio and 
Doordarshan to give it wide publicity. 
S. Since the intended amendments were of far-reaching importance to the .community of 
lawyers and litigants and would have a significant impact on the administration of justice, it 
was also decided to .invite views/suggestions from the Bar Council of India, State Bar 
Councils and Bar Associations of Allahabad, Bombay, Calcutta , Delhi, Guwahati, Kerala, 
Madras and two District Bar Associations from each S tate. Accordingly, !hey were 
requested to send their views/suggestions on the Bill. 
6. Before the Committee (1997-98) could proceed further with the consideration of the 
Bill, it got dissolved consequent upon the dissolution of the Eleventh Lok Sabha on 
4.12.1997. 
6.1 While the ~arlier Committee started receiving a large number of memoranda from 
different quarters, it also received requests for extension of time from the Bar Council of 
India and some Bar Councils! Associations of a few States seeking extension of time for 
submission of their views on the Bill. Before those requests for extension could be 
considered, the Committee got dissolved as mentioned earlier and the same continued to 
remain pending. 
7. The present Committee (1998-99) was constituted on 5th June, 1998. Due to change 
in Government ' at the Centre, it was decided that a reference may be made to the 
Legislative Deparnnent to let the Secretariat know the views of the present Government 
• Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-11, Section 2, dated the 14th August, 1997. 
•• Rajya Sabha P<Jrliamentary Bulletin Part-11 dated the 19th August, 1997. 
1 
933 RS F-3-A 

2 
with regard to the enactment of the Bill in its present form. Accordingly, a reference was 
made to the Legislative Department . on 3rd August, 1998. In response thereto, the 
Legislative Department vide their communication dated 6th August, 1998 informed that the 
matter was under consideration of the Department and after the decision of the competent 
authority was obtained, a further communication in the matter would follow shortly. 
Consequently on 19th August 1998 that Department was reminded to expedite their 
response. The Department vide communication dated 3rd September, 1998 stated that 
instructions of the Cabinet were being sought for taking up the consideration of the Bill in 
Parliament. Thereafter on 28th October/3rd November, 1998 another reminder was sent to 
the Department in the matter. The Legislative Department vide their latest communication 
dated 5th November, 1998 stated that having obtained the Cabinet's approval, the 
Government proposed to further pursue the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 
1997 in Parliament. 
8. In the meetings of the Sub-Committee (of the Standing Committee on Home Affairs) 
on Judicial Reforms, held on 9th and lOth November, 1998, the Chairman of the Committee 
apprised the Members of the latest communication of the Ministry on the CPC 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997. The Sub-Committee briefly discussed about the consideration of 
the Bill by the full Committee. It was when decided that a meeting of the full Committee 
may be convened to take up further consideration of the Bill. 
9. The Committee in its meeting held on 24th November, 1998 took up further 
consideration of the Bill. The requests for extension of time for submission of views on the 
Bill, received from Bar Council of India, six Bar Councils of different States and one Bar 
Association, were considered by the Committee and it decided to give them another 
opportunity to submit their views within a week. In response thereto, the Bar Council. of 
India and the Madras Bar Association sent their views/suggestions on 4th and 7th 
December, respectively. 
9.1. In all 97 memoranda have been received from different quarters. Out of which only 
57 contained suggestions on the Bill while the rest of them are not directly related to the 
provisions of the Bill (See Annexure for list of 57 organisations/individuals). 
10. The Committee while considering the Bill took note of the following documents:­
(i) Background Paper on amendments to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908. 
} 
received from 
(ii) Note on amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, LeD gislattive t 
1908: epar men 
(iii) Statement of Objects and Reasons and the Notes on Clauses appended to the 
CPC (Amendment) Bill, 1997. 
(iv) Evidence of Secretary (Legislative Department) before the Committee on 
30.9.1997. 
(v) Note submitted by Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj, Member, Rajya Sabha and Member 
of the Standing Committee, on the provisions of the Bill. 
(vi) Views/suggestions received on the Bill from different quarters. 
11. The Bill contains 36 Clauses and seeks further to amend the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, the Limitation Act, 1963 and the Court Fees Act, 1870. The Bill has been 
prepared by the Legislative Department in the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs with a view {o implementing the recommendations of Justice Malimath Committee 
. 
933 RS F-3-B 

3 
Report, 77th and 129th Reports of Law Commission of India and the 1st Report of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation (Eleventh Lok Sabha). 
11.1 The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill says that the law 
relating to the procedure in suts and civil proceedings in India (except those in the State of 
Jammu & Kashmir and Nagaland and tribal areas of Assam and certain other areas) is 
contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The Code has been amended from time to 
time by various act of Central and State Legislatures. The Code is mainly divided into two 
parts, namely, Sections and Orders. While the main principles are contained in the Sections, 
the detailed procedures with regard to the matters dealt with by the Sections are specified in 
the Orders. under Section 122, the High Courts have powers to amend, by rules, the 
procedure laid down in the Orders. In exercise of these powers, various amendments have 
beep made in the Orders by the different High Courts. 
12. The Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs in his deposition on 30th September, 1997 apprised the Committee of the basic thrust 
of the Bill and its salient features. He explained the manner in which the amendments would 
help in the expenditious disposal of the pending cases in the various Courts and informed 
the Committee that the Bill was the first of its kind in the series to achieve the objective of 
ensuring the speedy trial of cases. The Secretary further stated that the Bill sought to 
implement the recommendations of the Report of the Arrears Committee (1989-90) 
constituted by the Government of India on the recommendations of the Chief Justices' 
Conference held at New Delhi on 11-13 December, 1987 (popularly known as the Justice 
Malimath Committee) and the 129th Report of the Law Commission on "Urban Litigants, 
Mediation as Alternative to Adjudication" which inter alia had suggested amendments to the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 with a view to making the consiliation scheme effective and to 
allow recording of the evidence by Commission. The Secretary went on to state that the Bill 
also incorporated the recommendations contained in the resolution adopted by the Law 
Ministers' Conference held in July, 1997 and the 1st Report of the Committee on 
subordinate Legislation (Eleventh Lok Sabha) which inter alia had observed that granting of 
unnecessary adjournment had become a regular feature. 
13. The background paper sent by the Ministry state$ that the problem of delay in 
disposal of cases has shaken the confidence of the people in the capacity of the courts to 
redress their grievances and to grant adequate and timely relief. Over the years the issue has 
been the subject matter of study and examination by the various Committees and 
Commissions. Notable among them are Rankin Committee (1925); High Court Arrears 
Committee (1949), High Court Arrears Committee (1969) and a number of reports of the 
Law Commission of India. The Law Commission's Report went into all aspects relating to 
reform of judicial administration (14th Report) and some of the Reports dealt with the 
measures for reducing delay at various stages of trial, both in civil and criminal cases. 
Reference may be made in particular to the 27th, 54th, 70th and 129th Reports. 
13.1 On the lines of the recommendations of the 27th, 54th and 55th Reports of the 
Law Commission, the Code of Civil Procedure was comprehensively amended by enacting 
the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976. 
13.2 Pendency of cases in various courts of the country was also discussed in the Annual 
Chief Justices' Conferences and in one of such Conference held in 1983 a Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Justice Satish Chandra was constituted. Certain recommendations of 
the said Committee have been implemented through various legislative and administrative 
measures. On the recommendation of the Chief Justices' . Conference held in 1987, the 
Government of India constituted a Committee in the year 1989 known as Justice Malimath 

4 
Committee, headed by Justice V.S. Malimath, the then Chief Justice of Kerala High Courts, 
to make indepth study of the problem of arreas in Courts and to suggest remedial measures. 
It is undisputed that for efficient discharge of the responsibility of the court, it is essential 
that the broad confidence which the people nave in them and the high prestige and great 
respect they have enjoyed should be maintained and not be subject to any eclipse. For this it 
is essential that the long delays in the disposal of cases at the stage of trial as well as at the 
appellate stage are to be curtailed. 
14. With a view to implementing the recommendations of the various committees , 
commissions and conferences as mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, Government 
thought that it is necessary to obtain the views of the State Governments on the subject also. 
In the Law Ministers' Conference held in New Delhi on 30th June and 1st July, 1997, the 
Working Paper on the proposed amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure was discussed. 
On the basis of the resolution adopted in the said Conference and with a view to­
implementing the recommendations supra, the Government introduced, the Bill in the Rajya 
Sabha on 14th August, 1997 to amend the Code of 1908, keeping in view, among others, 
that every effort should be made to expedite the disposal of civil suits and proceedings so 
that justice may not be delayed. 
15. Some of the more important changes proposed to be made in the Bill are as 
follows:-
( a) any plaint to be filed shall be in duplicate and shall be accompanied by all the 
documents on which the plainti(f relies upon in support of his claim. It is also to be 
supported by an affidavit stating the genuineness of the claim of the plaintiff and of 
the documents on which he relies upon; 
(b) the written statement in duplicate shall be accompanied by all the documents and 
shall be filed within a period of thirty days from the date of service of summons. 
Written-statement is also to be supported by an affidavit; 
(c) in order to obviate delay in service of summons, it is proposed that plaintiff shall 
take the summons from the court and send it to the parties, within two days of the 
receipt thereof, by post, fax, e-mail, speed post, courier service or by such other 
means as may be directed by the court; 
(d) with a view to implement the !29th Report of the Law Commission of India and to 
make conciliation scheme effective, it is proposed to make it obligatory for the 
court to refer the dispute after the issues are framed for settlement either by way of 
arbitration, conciliation, mediation, judicial settlement or through Lok Adalat. It is 
only after the parties fail to get their disputes settled through any one of the 
alternate dispute resolution methods that the suit shall proceed further in the court 
in which it was filed; 
(e) as the maximum time is consumed in recording oral evidence by the courts which 
causes delay in disposal of cases, it is proposed to reduce such delay by making 
provisions for filing of examination-in-chief of every witness in the form of an 
affidavit. For the cross-examination and re-examination of witnesses it is proposed 
that it shall be recorded by a Commissioner to be appointed by the court and the 
evidence recorded by a commissioner shall become part of the record of the suit; 

5 
(f) with a view to implement the recommendations of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation (Eleventh Lok Sabha) relating to steps to reduce unnecessary adjoum­
ments, it is proposed to make it obligatory for a judge to record reasons for 
adjournment of a case as well as award of actual or higher cost and not merely 
notional cost against the parties seeking adjournment in favour of opposite party. 
Further, it is proposed to limit the number of adjournments to three only during the 
hearing of a case; · 
(g) as the party in whose favour an injuction has been granted usually causes delay on 
filmsy and unreasonable grounds, it is proposed that the party who applies for 
injunction shall also furnish security so that that party may not adopt delaying 
tactics during the trial of the case; 
(h) in matters relating to property disputes, particularly in matter of unauthorised 
construction on the land of others, it has been found that, under the existing 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, no application for injunction can be 
moved unless the suit is filed first in the court having competent jurisdiction . With a 
view to obviate this hardship, it is proposed that a person may make an application 
to the court of competent jurisdiction for appointment of a commission to ascertain 
the factual status of the property so that at the time of the filing of the regul~r suit 
the report is available to the Commissioner relating to the factual status. of the 
property in dispute; 
(i) with a view to implement the recommendations of Justice V.S. Malimath Commit­
tee, it is proposed that no further appeal against the judgement of a single judge 
shall lie even in -a petition under article 226 or 227 of the Constitution; and 
(j) with a view to reduce delay, it is proposed that the court shall on the date of 
pronouncement of judgement simultaneously provide authenticated copies of the 
judgement to the parties. Appeal shall be filed in the court which passes the decree 
and no notice shall be served on the advocates of the parties in the court of first 
instance. 
16. The Committee considered the Bill clause-by-clause in its sittings held on 8th and 
lOth December, 1998. 
17. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its sitting held on 15th 
December, 1998. 
18. The observations/recommendations and changes suggested by the Committee in the 
Bill and the reasons therefor are set out hereinafter. 
Clause 9 
18.1 Section 96 of the Code provides for an appeal from original decree. Since the time 
provisions were made, the value of money had considerably decreased and the pecuniary 
limits of three thousand rupees' required to be revised. Clause 9, therefore, sought to 
substitute twenty five thousand rupees in place of three thousand rupees' in Section 96. The 
Committee, however, felt that the enhancement of pecuniary limit suggested was on the high 
side and, therefore, recommended that the monetary limit may be kept at ten thousand 
rupees. 
18.2 The Committee adopted the clause, as amended. 
933 RS F-4-A 

6 
Clause 26 
18.3 Order XVII Jays down the procedure for granting adjournments. The Committee 
on Subordinate Legislation (Eleventh Lok Sabha) recommended that it should be made 
obligatory in the judgement to record reasons for adjournment of cases as well as award of 
actual and not merely notional cost against the party seeking adjournment in favour of the 
opposite party. It is proposed to make it obligatory by amendment of proposed Order. It is 
proposed to make it obligatory for the judges to record the reasons in writing where the 
court grants adjournment and to award the actual cost to the opposite party. Further limit 
upto three adjournm~nts has also been fixed in a case. 
18.4 However. the Committee felt that the cost for granting adjournment should not be 
awarded to any of the parties. Instead that should either be deposited in the Government 
Treasury or should go to legal Aid Services Head of Account so that it would act as 
disincentive to the litigant parties wanting adjournment. 
18.5. As the idea mooted by the Committee was a new concept, the Committee desired 
that the same may be examined by the Ministry with regard to feasibility of depositing the 
cost in the Treasury;State Fund instead of paying it to the party concerned in the court. 
18.6 The matter has been examined by the Legislative Department and vide their 
communication dated 12th December, 1998 has stated as under:-
The hon'ble members of the Committee observed that generally the cost is not being 
paid to the parties concerned and in most of the cases the counsels of such parties 
receive the cost for their own. In this regard, it may be stated that sub-section (1) of 
section 35 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that "Subject to such conditions and 
limitations as may be prescribed, and to the provisions of any law for the time being in 
force, the cost of and incident to all suits shall be in the discretion of the Court, and the 
Court sh~ll have full power to determine by whom or out of what property and to what 
extent such costs are to be paid, and to give all necessary directions for the purposes 
aforesaid." Further, section 35B of the Code provides that costs for causing delay would 
be paid by such party to other party as may be ordered by the court. 
The aforesaid sections read with section 151 of the CPC, confer inherent power on -the 
court which is wide enough to include to give direction to deposit the cost in treasur)Vcourt 
instead of its payment in the court to the_concerned party. 
However, as per the terms and conditions of "V AKALATNAMAS" which are normally 
being filed in the courts in suits, the advocate of the concerned party is authorised to receive· 
or deposit money, etc. in the court on behalf of his client. 
In case, it is provided in law that the co~t imposed will firstly be deposited in the court! 
treasury and thereafter, the same may be paid to the entitled party in accordance with the 
procedure for taking out the money from the couftttreasury, the procedure may again be a 
complicated procedure and may further increase the burden of the concerned party for 
which he has again to depend upon advocates and to pay additional fee. Alternatively, if it is 
provided that cost imposed will be deposited in the State Fund, same shall be unreasonable 
and disadvantageous to the party entitled for such cost as the purpose of such cost is to meet 
the reasonable expenses of the ready party. Adjournment cost are intended to compensate 
the other party for the expenses it has incurred for the date fixed for hearing of the suit. 
18.7 In view of the position explained by the Legislative Department, the Committee 
adopted the clause without any change. 
933 RS F-4·B 

7 
Clause 29 
18.8 Order XXVI enables the court to issue commission only in cases where witness 
resides outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court. It is proposed to amend Order 
XXVI by inserting a new rule 4A so as to enable the court to issue commission in any case 
where the interest of justice so demands. 
18.9 The Committee wanted to know whether the objective behind the amendment 
could be achieved by amending the existing provisions of Order XXVI instead of inserting a 
new rule as proposed. It directed the Ministry to examine the matter. The Ministry 
subsequently clarified the position. The Committee accepted the clarification. 
18.10 The clause was adopted without any change. 
Clause 31 
18.11 Clause 31 seeks to insert a new Order XXXIX.A. under the existing provisions of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 no application for interim injunction can be moved unless 
the suit is filed first in the court having competent jurisdiction. In matters relating to 
property disputes particularly it may help a person if such a person can make ·an applicati9n 
to the court of competent jurisdiction for appointment of a Commission to ascertain the 
factual status of the property so that at the time of filing of the regular suit the report of the 
Commissioner is available relating to the factual status of the property. 
18.12 The Committee feels that the proposed amendment is likely to be misused and 
may create further complications resulting into harassment of the people. 
-18.13 The Committee recommends that the proposed new order XXXIXA may be 
dropped and the status quo maintained. 
Clause 36 
18.14 The proposed amendment is consequential to the insertion of n6w Order 
XXXIXA in the First Schedule proposed to be inserted vide clause 31 of the Bill. The 
proposed amendment pre~cribes fee in these cases where a person applies for inspection 
before institution of the suit. 
18.15 In view of the Committee's decision on Clause 31, it recommended. that this 
clause may also be dropped. 
19. Clauses 2 to 8, 10 to 25, 27, 28, 30, 32 to 35 were adopted by the Committee 
without any change. 
20. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes 
which were of consequential or drafting nature, namely, "1997" and "Forty-eighth" to be 
substituted by "1998" and "Forty-ninth", respectively. 
21. The Committee recommends that the Bill, as reported by it, be passed. 
December 15, 1998 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE 
Chairman 
Committee on Home Affairs 

ANNEXURE 
LIST OF PERSONS I ORGANISATIONS/ INSTITUTIONS WHO SUBMITTED 
MEMORANDA 
1. Mysore Bar Association, Mysore. 
2. The Bar Council of Tamil Nadu, High Court Complex, Madras-600 104. 
3. Shri A. Ramachandra Babu, Advocate & Notary Public (Member, Bar Council of 
Tamil Nadu), Om Sakthi Ellam, 94, Yanam Venkatasalam Pillai Street, pon­
dicherry-665001. 
4. Shri C. Devarajan, Advocate, Member of Bar Council of Tamil Nadu, 
14, Perundurai Road, Erode (Tamil Nadu) 638011. 
5. Shri E. George, Member, Bar Council of Tamil Nadu, Kuzhithurai (Tamil Nadu). 
6. The Bar Council of Rajasthan (Shri Harsh Mehta, Member), Shree Bhawan , 
Opposite Fateh Memorial, Udaipur - 313001. 
7. Bombay Bar Association, Room No. 57, High Court, Mumbai. 
8. Mangalore Bar Association, Distt Court Building, Mangalore - 575003. 
9. Dr. K. P. S. Mahalwar, Reader, Faculty of Law, Maharshi Dayanand University, 
Rohtak - 124001. 
10. Shri Ram Channdra Mishra, Village - Mohanpur,. Sub-P.O. Ratanpur, 
Distt - Darbhanga (Bihar) - 847307. 
11. Shri Jagir Singh (M.L.G.), C.S.l.O., Sector-30, Chandigarh. 
12. Shri P. Chatterjee, 1876, New Shovapur Colony, Jabalpur - 482005. 
13. Shri Adil Aftab Ahmad, Addl. Civil Judge (J.D.), Faizabad (U.P.). 
14. Dr. Hari Sharan Saxena, MF-1, Saraswati Nagar, Bhopal - 462003. 
15. Shri S. N. Prashanth Chandra, Advocate, No. 2214, 1st Floor, 3rd Cross, 
Malleswaram , Bangalore - 560 003. 
16. Dr. Nirmal Kumar Sarkar, 4/69, Ram Mohan Mullick Garden Lane, Calcuta -
700010. 
17. Shri Samir Kumar Gandhi, General Secretary, Bengal House Owners Association, 
27 B, C.R. Avenue, Calcutta - 72. 
18. Shri I.S. Supehia, Advocate, 7, Parasmani Society, Near Ranna Park, 
Ahmedabad - 380 061. 
19. Shri K.S. Prasannan, TC/321953, Near St. Marys High School, Beach Post, 
Trivandrum - 698 007. 
20. Shri Narendra S. Shah, Advocate, 32, Krishna Society, Jail Road, Mehsana- 384 002 
(Gujarat). 
21. Shri H.S. Pathak, Director, Sheth A.G. Charity Trust, University School of Law, 
Gujarat University, Near Dada Saheb Pagla, University Campus, Navrangpura, 
Ahmedabad- 380 009. 
9 

I 
10 
22. Shri K. Sankarappan, Advocate , "Honey Court", 15, New Colony, Tuticorin-
628 003. 
23. Shri Yogendra Kumar Gupta, Advocate, Nursery of Guptaji, P.O. Izzatnagar , 
Barely- 243122 (U.P.). 
24. Shri S.N. Aggarwal, Advocate, Civi'l Courts, 165, Hargobind Nagar, Phagwara-
144 401 (Punjab). 
25. Shri Vijay Syal, Govt. House No. 1, Nabha Gate, Sangrur (Punjab). 
26. Shri Ravi R. Hegde, Advocate, President of Bar Associations, Siddapur 
(Uttar Kannada) - 581355 (Resiana-Dhar-Mashree, Rabindra Nagar, Sidda Pur, 
Uttar Kannada, Karnataka- 581355). 
27. Shri K.K. Avadhani, Retired Civil Judge, Post - Karki, Taluk- Honavar, 
Uttar Kannada, Karnataka- 581341. 
28. Shri Onkar Nath Misra, Advocate, Kalpvas, Betia Compound, Gorakhpur (U.P.). 
I 
29. Shri I.C. Kumar, Advocate, 205, Lawyer's Chambers, Delhi High Court, 
New Delhi - 3. 
30. Shri D. Gopinathan Thampi, Joint Secretary to Government (Retd.), Anupna, 
T. C. 12124, Plammoodu, Trivandrum - 695004. 
31. Dr. T. Vijayam, D-2, Ellora, Anushakti Nagar, Mumbai - 400 094. 
32. Shri Ram Avtar, S/o Shri Ram Prakash, 11 C, 7, Nehru Nagar, Gaziabad ~U.P.). 
33. Shri J. Sa~ai, 14/3, Type-IV, P.W.D. Colony, Nirman Nagar, Lucknow - 226 012. 
34 .. Shri S~kti Prasad Datta Purkayastha, Kailashavar (Near Townhall) (North Tripura). 
35. Shri S.P. Paramasivaiah, Advocate, Sompura, Koratagere Taluk, Tumkur, Distt. 
Karnataka - 572 121. 
36. Shri Sanjay V. Joshi, Advocate, Ambika Bhawan, First Floor, 206, J.S. Road, 
Girgaum, Bomaby - 400 004. 
37. Shri Hariram Chaudhary, Special Executive Magistrate, Shriji Kripa, 6th Road, 
Prabhat Colony, Santacruz (E), Bomaby -. 400 055. 
38. Shri V. Tirumala Rao, Advocate, 9th Lane, Opposite ILTD Company, Srinivasarao 
Thota, Guntur - 522004 (Andhra Pradesh). 
39. Shri Satyanarayan Prasad, Advocate, Mohalla Garh Par, Nawada, P.O. & Distt 
Nawada, (Bihar) - 805 110. 
40. Shri Gurcharanjit, Advocate, 1317/2, Street No. 6, Simla Puri, Ludhiana - 141 003. 
41. Shri Asish Kumar Das, c/o Shri A.C. Das, 3811, Dharmatala Lane, P.O. Shibpur, 
Distt. Howrah, Pin - 711 012 (West Bengal). 
42. Shri Jaydip Brahma, 10/7, Charu Avenue, Tollygunge, Calcut~a - 700 033. 
43. Shri Martin Rowlands, Senior Manager (legal), Standard Chartered Bank, Office of 
the Special Representative for India, 4th Floor, Standard Chartered Bank Building, 
23-25, Mahatma Gandhi Road, Mumbai - 400 001. 
44. Shri Thakur Chandra Bhushan Singh, 605/42, Radha Nagar Colony No. 1, 
Khasmahal, Tatanagar (Bihar) - 831 002. 

11 
45. Shri V.R. Vaze, Retd. Small Causes Judge, 1204/11, Vivek, R.S. Vaze Road, 
D. G. Pune - 411 004. 
46. Shri J.C. Sharma, N-36, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi-15. 
47. Kamal Sheet, clo Sri Gangadhar, Advocate, At. & P.O. Lahiriasrai, 
Distt. - Darbhanga (Bihar). 
48. The Indian Federation of Women Lawyer, Kerala Branch, High Court Buildings, 
Ernakulam, Cochin - 682031 (Kerala). 
49. Shri Ravi Kumar Mishra, Distt. Organisation Secretary, Punjab Pradesh Congress 
(I), Sewa Dal, 15-A, Congress Bhawan, Chandigarh, (Residence: House No. 10844, 
Street No. 11, Kot Mangal Singh, Ludhiana - 141 003. 
50. Shri R.S.P. Patnaik, Retd. Distt. Court and Session Judge, Qr. No. C-5/4, Unit-6, 
Bhubaneshwar, Distt. Khurda, Orissa-751001. 
51. Shri Dinesh Chandra Tripathy, Social Servant, Village-Allapur, P.O. Resoolpur, 
Tehsil - Dumariyaganj, Janaped - Siddarth Nagar (U.P.). 
52. Shri Awadh Bihar Sharan, Advocate, Mohalla Dahiawn, P.O. Chapava, 
Distt. Saran, Pin 841 301. 
53. Shri A. Mannasaheb, Advocate, Renebennur, Distt. Dharwad (Kamataka). 
54. Shri Laldip Narayan Singh, Advocate, Chapara (Bihar). 
55. Shri Gurjodh Singh Virk, 48, Hargovind Enclave, Vikas Marg Extension, Delhi - 92. 
56. Bar Council of India, 21, Rouse Avenue, New Delhi. 
57. Madras Bar Association, Chennai (Tamil Nadu). 

I 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
•IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30th September, 1997, in Room 
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Rrun Naili Ko~nd 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri N. Rajendran 
LOK SABRA 
5. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
6. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
7. Shri Vi jay Goel 
8. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swami 
9. Shri Man gat Ram Sharma 
10. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
11. Prof. M. Kamson 
12. Shri ldris Ali 
13. Shri Khelsai Singh 
14. Shri Torno Riba 
15. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE 
DEPARTMENT) 
1. Shri K.L. Mohanpuria , Secretary 
2. Dr. Raghbir Singh, Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. K. N. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary & Leg. Counsel 
4. Shri N .L. Meena, Additional Leg. Counsel 
2. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S'i1~ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shn G. C. Mig, ani, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committ ee Officer 
* * 
•Minutes of First to Third meetings of the Committee (1997-98) relate to some other matters. 
•••Omitted portions relate to some other matter. 
13 
* 

14 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 
1997, for its consideration and the Secretary, Legislative Department made a presentation 
dwelling at some length on the amendments proposed in the Bill which were aimed at 
expediting the disposal of civil suits instituted in the courts and thus reduce pendency of 
cases which had assumed very serious proportions. He highlighted important aspects of the 
proposed amendments with respect to filing of documents by the plaintiff, service of 
summons, mandatory adherence to the alternate dispute resolution methods by the courts, 
appointment of Commissioners for recording evidence, curbing unnecessary adjournments 
and insistence on furnishing of security by the parties applying for injunction. The members 
sought clarifications from the Secretary on various aspects of the proposed amendments and 
the latter gave replies to some of them. He, however, could not satisfy the Committee when 
asked about the date of submission of the 77th Report of the Law Commission and what 
view had been taken by the Government about the recommendation contained in the said 
Report to the effect that the period for disposal of cases should not normally exceeds a 
period of one year. Thereupon, he was directed to furnish to the Committee the salient 
features of the recommendations contained in various Reports and · the ones arrived at 
different conferences to reduce pendency of cases in the courts, alongwith the Government's 
views thereon. The Secretary assured the Committee that he would furnish the requisite 
details to the Committee within a period of ten days. 
4. The Committee, thereafter, after some further discussion, having regard to the public 
importance of the Bill, decided to invite suggestions/views in the form of memoranda from 
the interested individuals/institutions/organisations, etc. on the amending provisions 
contained in the Bill and directed the Secretariat to issue necessary advertisement in this 
regard in the print media and give it wide publicity through the electronic media as well. 
The Committee also decided to invite the views of the Bar Council of India, Bar Councils of 
some of the High Courts having significant level of pendency of cases and some District Bar 
Associations from different States on the Biil and directed the Secretariat to take action 
accordingly . 
5. • * .. 
6. • • * 
7. • • • 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 P.M. 
••• Omitted portions .:refer to some other matter. 

*XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 24th November, 1998, in Room 
No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
4. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
5. Shri Prafull Goradia 
6. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
8. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
9. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
11. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari 
12. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
13. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
14. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
15. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
16. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
17. Shri Ishvarbhal Khodabhai Chavda 
18. Shri Sudhir Giri 
19. Shri Samar Choudhury 
20. Shri Mohan Singh 
21. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
22. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi 
23. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C . Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer. 
2. • • • 
3. •••The Chairman further informed the Committee that the Government had since 
expressed its desire for enactment of the Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997 and the Code of 
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997, which were also introduced in the Rajya Sabha, in 
their present form. • • • 
• Minuts of First to Sixteenth Meetings of the Committee (1998-99) relate to some other matters . 
. • • • Omitted portions relate to some other matters. 
15 

16 
3.1 The Chairman then summed up the position by stating that having thus received the 
final views of the Government, the Committee was in a position to take up consideration/ 
further consideration of three Bills, namely, the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 
1997, the Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997 and the Companies Bill, 1997. 
4. The Committee then took up further consideration of the CPC (Amendment) Bill, 
1997. The Chairman stated that all rele'lant background material on the Bill, including a 
note prepared by the Secretariat and another one on the clauses of the Bill submitted by 
Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj, Member, Lok Sabha and a Member of the Committee, had been 
circulated amongst the Members . He informed the Committee that 95 memoranda had been 
received from various quarters, out of which 55 memoranda contained suggestions on the 
provisions of the Bill, while the rest were not directly related to the Bill. He further 
informed that 14 persons had expressed their willingness to appear before the Committee. 
4.1 The Chairman recollected that Bar Council of India, six Bar Councils of different 
States and one Bar Association, had sought extension of time for submission of their views, 
which could not be considered because the previous Committee got dissolved on the 
dissolution of the 11th Lok Sabha. After brief discussion, the Committee decided to give 
them another opportunity to submit their views within a week of receipt of communication 
from the Secretariat in that regard. 
4.2 In view of the public importance of the Bill and being an important step in the 
direction of Judicial Reforms, Members were of the view that the Bill should be considered 
by the Committee urgently and reported to Parliament during the current Session so as to 
enable its passage during the Session. After brief discussion, the Committee decided to meet 
on 8th, 9th & lOth December, 1998 to complete clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill 
and thereafte:t: present its report to Parliament. 
5. ~ 
6. • 
7 .• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 A.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, 
8th December, 1998 . 
. . 
' 
•••omitted portions relate, to some other matters. 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 8th December, 1998, in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri P~anab Mukherjee-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri H~msraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri Prafull Goradia 
5 ... Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
LOJ.{. SABHA 
6. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
8. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
9. Shri 'Ram Nagina Mishra 
10. Smt. Meira Kumar 
11. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
12. Shri Motilal Vora 
13. Shri Sudhir Giri 
14. Shri Samar Choudhury 
15. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
16. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
Shri N.L. Meena Joint Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE & COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
Shri N.L. Jaint, Secretary 
2. • 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
• 
• 
* 
• • 
• • 
• • 
• * 
3. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the CPC 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997. 
3.1 The Chairman recapitulated the deiiberation of the Committee held on 24th 
November, 1998 wherein it was decided that the Committee would sit for three consecutive 
days to complete clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill, in view of the public importance 
of the proposed legislation. The Chairman observed that the subject had been debated over 
the years in various fora, namely, the Law Ministers' and Chief Justices' Conferences, by 
Justice Malimath Committee and the Committee on Subordinate Legislation (Eleventh Lok 
•••omitted portions relate to some other matters. 
17 

18 
Sabha). He also referred to the discussions on the issues held in the Sub-Committee (of the 
Standing Committee) on Judicial Reforms. In view thereof it was felt that there was no need 
to further debate the general principles of the Bill and that the Committee may straightway 
proceed with the clause-by-clause consideration. 
3.2 At this point the representative of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs 
(Legislative Department) informed the Committee that the Bill was referred to Chief Justice 
of India for being discussed in the Chief Justices' Conference held on 28th and 29th 
November, 1997. As per the Resolution adopted in the said Conference, the Chief Justice of 
India had constituted a Committee consisting of three Chief Justices of High Courts to 
examine the Bill. That Committee had submitted its Report to the Chief Justice of India and 
a copy thereof had been forwarded to the Law Ministry. The representative of the Ministry 
stated that the Chief Justices' Committee had accepted almost all the clauses of the Bill 
excepting a few wherein they had made some suggestions. The representative of the 
Legislative Department then handed over a copy of the communication dated 23rd July, 
1998 received by them from Department of Justice, to the Secretariat. 
3.3 The Committee took note of the said information. 
Clauses 2 to 8 
3.4 These clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 9 
3.5 Section 96 of the Code provides for an appeal from original decree. Since the time 
provisions were made, the value of money had considerably decreased and the pecuniary 
limits of three thousand rupees' required to be revised. Clause 9, therefore , sought to 
substitute 'twenty five tliousand rupees' in place of 'three thousand rupees' in Section 96. 
The Committee, however, felt that the enhancement of pecuniary limit suggested was on the 
high side and therefore recommended that the monetary limit may be kept at ten thousand 
rupees. The clause was adopted, as amended. 
Clauses 10 to 18 
3.6 These clauses were adopted without any change. 
4. The Committee then decided to cancel its sitting fixed for 9th· December, 1998. 
5. The Committee decided to resume clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its 
next meeting to be held at 3.30 P..M. on lOth December, 1998. 
6. The Committee also decided to meet on 16th December, 1998 to adopt its draft 
Report on the Bill. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 P.M. 

XVlll 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the lOth December, 1998, in Committee 
Room . 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherje~hairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
3. Shri Prafull Goradia 
4. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
7. Shri Vi jay Goel 
8. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan G~dhavi 
9. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
10. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
11. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
12. Shri Motilal Vora 
13. Shri Sudhir Giri 
14. Shri Samar Choudhury 
15. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
2. • • 
2.1 
3. 
4. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997 
• 
• 
* 
5. The Committee then resumed clause-by-clause consideration of the Code of Civil 
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997. 
Clauses 19 to 25 
5.1 These clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 26 
5.2. Order XVII lays down the procedure for granting adjournments. The Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation (Eleventh Lok Sabha) recommended that it should be made 
obligatory in the judgement to record reasons for adjournment of cases as well as award of 
actual and not merely notional cost against the party seeking adjournment in favour of the 
•••omitted portions relate to some other matters. 
t9 

20 
opposite party. It is proposed to made it obligatory by amendment of proposed Order. It is 
proposed to make it obligatory for the judges to record the reasons in writing where the 
court grants adjournment and to award the actual cost to the opposite party. Further limit 
up to three adjournments has also been fixed in a case. 
5.3 However, the Committee felt that the cost for granting adjournmen~ should not be 
awarded to any of the parties. Instead that should either he deposited in the Government 
Treasury or should go to Legal Aid Services Head of Account. 
5.4 Subject to this, the clause was adopted. 
Clauses 27 & 28 
5.5 These clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 29 
5.6 Order XXVI enables the court to issue commiSSIOn only in cases where witness 
resides outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court. It is proposed to amend Order 
XXVI by inserting a new rule 4A so as to enable the court to issue commission in any case 
where the interest of justice so demands. 
5.7 The Committee wanted to know whether the objective behind the amendment could 
be achieved by amending the existing provisions of Order XXVI instead of inserting a new 
rule as proposed. The representatives of the Ministry explained the rationale behind the 
amendment. The Committee was not convinced with the explanations. It directed the 
Ministry to examine the matter. 
5.8 Subject to this, the clause was adopted. 
Clause 30 
5.9· Clause 30 was adopted without any change. 
Clause 31 
5.10 Clause 31 seeks to insert a new Order XXXIXA. Under the existing provisions of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 no application for interim injunction can be moved unless 
the suit is filed first in the court having competent jurisdiction. In matters relating to 
property disputes particularly it may help a person if such a person can make an application 
to the court. of competent jurisdiction for appointment of a Commission to ascertain the 
factual status of the property so that at the time of filing of the regular suit the report of the 
Commissioner is available relating to the factual status of the property. 
5.11 The Committee wanted to know the rationale behind the proposed amendment. 
The representatives of the Ministry explained the position. The Committee was not satisfied 
with the explanations. It felt that the proposed amendment was likely to be misused and 
could create further complications resujting into harassment of the people. 
5.12 The Committee felt that the proposed new Order XXXIXA may be dropped and 
the status quo maintained. 
Clauses 32 to 35 
5.13 These clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 36 
5.14 The proposed amendment is consequential to the insertion of new order XXXIXA 
in the First Schedule proposed to be inserted vide ·clause 31 of the .Bill. The proposed 
amendment prescribes fee in tllese cases where . a person applies for inspection before 
institution of the suit. 

21 
5.15 In view of the Committee's decision on Clause 31, it recommended that this clause 
may also be dropped. 
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title 
5.16 The Committee adopted Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title with some 
changes which were of consequential or drafting nature, namely "1997" and "Forty-eighth" 
to be substituted by "1998" and "forty-ninth", respectively. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again at 10.30 A.M. on Tuesday, 
15th December, 1998. 

-·· 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 15th December, 1998, in Room 
No. 67, First Floor, Parliament.House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee-:-chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
4. Shri Prafull Goradia 
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
6. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOK SABHA 
7. • Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Pushapadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
9. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
10. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
11. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
12. Shri Motilal Vora 
13. Shri. Sudhir Giri 
14. Shri Samar Choudhury 
15. Shri Mohan Singh 
'16. Shri Chada Sttresh Reddy 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Forty-ninth Report on the Code of 
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997. The Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted 
the Report without any change. 
3. The Committee decided to presentiJay the Report in the Rajya Sabha'Lok Sabha on 
Thursday, the 17th December, 1998. The Committee, accordingly, authorised its Chairman 
and in his absence Sh~i Hansraj Bhardwaj to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha; and 
Shri Motilal Vora and in his absence Shri Satya Pal Jain to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 A.M. to meet · again at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 
the 5th January, 1999. 
22 