Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEERAJYA SABHAON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.215
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on th December , )12 2018(Laid on the T able of Lok Sabha on )12 2018th December ,Working Conditions in Non-Border Guarding Central ArmedPolice Forces (Central Industrial Security Force, CentralReserve Police Force and National Security Guard)TWO HUNDRED FIFTEENTH REPORT
December , 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED FIFTEENTH REPORT
Working Conditions in Non-Border Guarding Central Armed
Police Forces (Central Industrial Security Force, Central
Reserve Police Force and National Security Guard)
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 12th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 422


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (vi) -(viii)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-54
Chapter I : Introduction ................. ........................................................................... 1-2
Chapter II : Central Industrial Security Force ........................................................... 3-15
Chapter III : Central Reserve Police Force ................................................................. 16-44
Chapter IV : National Security Guard ......................................................................... 45-54
5. O BSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE  — A T A G LANCE ....................... 55-66
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. 67-83

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri P. Chidambaram —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri  Pratap Keshari Deb
#3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Dr. V. Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
@6. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
%9. Vacant
10. Shri R.K. Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
12. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
20. Shri Kaushal Kishore
21. Shri Ashwini Kumar
22. Shri P. Nagarajan
*23. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
24. Shri Dilip Patel
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
26. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
27. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
28. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
(i)
# Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi nominated w.e.f.  2nd June 2018 consequent upon the vacancy arose on the expiration of term of
Shri K. Rahman Khan from the membership of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2018
@ Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia, Member, Rajya nominated w.e.f. 9th July, 2018 in place of Shri Derek O’Brien
% Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh, Member, Rajya Sabha resigned from the  Membership of DRSC on Home Affairs w.e.f. 2nd June,
2018
*Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f.  6th April, 2018 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of
Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda, MP, Lok Sabha  to Committee on Industry

(ii)
30. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
$31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
$ V acant consequent upon resignation of Shri B. Sriramulu from Lok Sabha Seat ( i.e. , Bellary Parliamentary Constituency of
Karnataka) w.e.f.  18th May, 2018.

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
3. Shri  Pratap Keshari Deb
4. Dr. V. Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
8. Shri R.K. Sinha
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan
12. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Anupam Kher
19. Shri Ashwini Kumar
20. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
21. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed
22. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
23. Shri Nagarajan P.
24. Shri Jagdambika Pal
25. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
26. Shri Dilip M. Patel
27. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil
29. Shri Ashok Gajapathi Raju Pusapati
30. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
31. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan

SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Fifteenth Report on ‘Working Conditions in Non-Border Guarding Central Armed Police Forces (Central
Industrial Security Force, Central Reserve Police Force and National Security Guard).
2. The Committee, in its meeting held on 24th October, 2017 decided to examine the subject ‘Working
conditions in Central Armed Police Forces’ and in its meetings held on 21st May and 26th June, 2018 heard
the views of the representatives of MHA and Directors General of various CAPFs, including CISF, CRPF
and NSG. The Committee decided to give two reports on the subject.  In the first Report (214th Report), the
Committee has covered the Working Conditions in Border Guarding Forces viz. Assam Rifles, SSB, ITBP
and BSF. The present 215th Report is regarding the Working Conditions in Non-Border Guarding Central
Armed Police Forces viz. CISF, CRPF, and NSG .
3. The Committee, while making its Observations/Recommendations, has mainly relied upon the following
documents:-
(i) Background Notes furnished by the Ministry for various meetings;
(ii) Presentations made by Home Secretary, DGs of respective CAPFs and other officials during
various meetings of the Committee;
(iii) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the questionnaires on the subject sent by
the Secretariat; and
(iv) Replies to the queries/comments/suggestions of the Members, raised during the Committee’s
meetings, as furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 25th October, 2018 and adopted the
same.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. For further convenience, abbreviations used in
the report have been compiled in a table under the Acronyms section.
P. Chidambaram
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
25th October, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary
Kartika 3, 1940 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Rajya Sabha.
(v)

          ACRONYMS
ARMR : Armour
ADG : Additional Director General
ASI : Assistant Sub-Inspector
AC : Assistant Commandant
BDDS : Bomb Detection & Disposal Squad
BISAG : Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Informatics
CAPF : Central Armed Police Force
CMP : Crisis Management Plan
CRPF : Central Reserve Police Force
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force
DC : Deputy Commandant
DCPO : Driver-cum-Pump Operator
DoPT : Department of Promotion and Training
DMRC : Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
DAE : Department of Atomic Energy
DoS : Department of Space
DSIIDC : Delhi State Industrial and Infrastructure Development Corporation
DARPG : Dept. of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances
DDA : Delhi Development Authority
DIG : Deputy Inspector General
DG : Director General
DoS : Department of Space
DTH : Direct-to-Home
FSTI : Fire Service Training Institute
GD : General Duty
GDMO : General Duty Medical Officers
GSA T : Geo Stationary Satellite
GO : Gazetted Officer
H R A : House Rent Allowance
(vi)

(vii)
HC : Head Constable
HT : Hindi Translator
IG : Inspector General
IEDs : Improvised Explosive Device
LWE/IS : Left Wing Extremism/Internal Security
MOSB : Medical Officers Selection Board
MT : Motor Transport
M H A : Ministry of Home Affairs
MoF : Ministry of Finance
MOSB : Medical Officers Selection Board
MACP : Modified Assured Career Progression
NSG : National Security Guard
NGOs : Non Gazetted Officers
NOK : Next of Kin
ORs : Other Ranks
PBI : Post Blast Investigation
PSUs : Public Sector Units
PTR : Painter
RAF : Rapid Action Force
QRT : Quick Response Team
RTC : Road Transport Corporation
RAF : Rapid Action Force
RO : Radio Operator
RSP : Render Safe Procedure
SAG : Special Action Group
SDG : Special Director General
SRG : Special Ranger Group
SSC : Staff Selection Commission
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure
SOs : Subordinate Officers

(viii)
SI : Sub Inspector
SOTC : Special Operations Training Centre
TLR : Tailor
VRS : V oluntary Retirement Scheme

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 BACKGROUND
1.1.1 Article 355 of the Constitution of India assigns the Central Government the responsibility of protecting
every part of India from external aggression and internal disturbances.
1.1.2 Under items 1 to 2A of List I (Union List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the defence of
India and every part thereof, including preparation for defence and all such acts as may be conducive in
times of war to its prosecution and after its termination to effective demobilization; naval, military and air
forces; any other armed forces of Union and deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force
subject to the control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State in aid of the civil power;
powers, jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the members of such forces while on such deployment are
vested in the Central Government.  To fulfill its constitutional responsibilities, the Central Government has
raised seven Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) namely, the Assam Rifles (AR), Sashastra Seema Bal
(SSB), Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP), Border Security Force (BSF), Central Industrial Security Force
(CISF), Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) and National Security Guard (NSG).  The first four are
Border Guarding Forces (BFGs) and the remaining three are Non-Border Guarding Central Armed Police
Forces used for internal security.  Similarly, under item 1 of List II (State List), States are responsible for
maintaining public order (but not including the use of any naval, military or air force or any other armed
force of the Union or of any other force subject to the control of the Union or of any contingent or unit
thereof in aid of the civil power).  Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) are deployed to aid the State
Governments and UTs in maintaining public order on their request. The deployment of these forces depends
upon the overall security situation and the availability of the forces.  These forces have been playing a key
role in the overall management of the internal security situation in the country.
1.1.3 At present, the strength of CAPFs are as under:-
Force Sanctioned Strength
Assam Rifles 66,412
Sashastra Seema Bal 97,014
Indo-Tibetan Border Police 89,433
Border Security Force 2,63,931
Central Industrial Security Force 1,52,049
Central Reserve Police Force 3,24,093
National Security Guard 10,844
1.2 Working conditions in CAPFs
1.2.1 CAPFs are currently facing challenges regarding working conditions of its personnel like prolonged
working hours, stagnation, attrition, inadequate infrastructure, procurement of latest modern arms, ammunition

2
and equipment, grievance redressal mechanism, inadequate accommodation facilities, medical facilities,
personnel management, lack of co-ordination with the State police and training and capacity building. The
facilities that are available to CAPF personnel for their professional and personal well-being are insufficient,
and are thus affecting the morale of these Forces adversely.  This report is regarding working conditions in
three Non-Border Guarding Central Armed Police Forces viz. CISF, CRPF and NSG.
1.3 Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
1.3.1 The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) has a sanctioned strength of 1,52,049 personnel spread
all over the country. It is a multi-skilled security agency and a need-based force, mandated to provide
security to major critical infrastructure installations of the country in diverse areas. Unlike other CAPFs, its
deployment is on unit pattern and not on battalion pattern. It is the only CAPF with a specialized Fire Wing.
1.4 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
1.4.1 The Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) is the premier central police force of the Union of India for
internal security. The overall sanctioned strength of CRPF is 3,24,093 personnel and 246 battalions. It is
primarily deployed for maintaining internal security of the country. The main thrust areas of its deployment
are left wing extremism affected areas, Jammu & Kashmir, and North-eastern region.
1.5 National Security Guard (NSG)
1.5.1 The National Security Guard has a sanctioned strength of 10,844 personnel. It is a 100 percent
deputation force, and is specially equipped and trained to deal with anti-terrorist activities. It has been given
the specific role to handle all facets of terrorism in any part of country as a federal contingency force. NSG
has developed specialized skills for countering hijacking on land, sea and air; bomb disposal (search, detection
and neutralization of IEDs); PBI (Post Blast Investigation) and hostage rescue mission.

CHAPTER-II
CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE (CISF)
2.1 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
2.1.1 The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) was established in 1969 to provide integrated security
cover to the Public Sector Undertakings. In the beginning, CISF was inducted in guarding only two
undertakings (Rashtriya Chemical & Fertilizer Ltd, Mumbai on 1st November, 1969 and Bokaro Steel Ltd.,
Bokaro on 2nd November, 1969). Currently, the Force is providing security cover to many industrial
undertakings, private installations, airports, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, and fire protection cover to 101
Industrial Undertakings and every heritage monument. With a sanctioned strength of 1,52,049 personnel
spread all over the country, the pan-India deployment of the Force covers diversified areas like Atomic
Energy and Space Installations, Sea-Ports, Steel Plants, Coal Fields, Hydro-Electric and Thermal Power
Plants, Defence Production Units, Fertilizer and Chemical Industries, Note Printing Press/Mints etc.
2.1.2 Although an Armed Force of the Union, CISF is a cost reimbursement force. The recurring/non-
recurring expenditure are reimbursed by client organizations. All physical security infrastructures are also
provided by the client organizations. It is a need based force and its deployment is dependent on the requirement
of PSUs. It is the only Central Armed Police Force (CAPF) having specialized trained and dedicated Fire
Wing for fire prevention and fire protection. Unlike other CAPFs, the CISF is deployed on unit pattern and
not on battalion pattern.
2.2 Organization structure
3

4
2.3 Command and Control
2.3.1 The Force functions directly under the command of DG , CISF. Due to its presence all over the
country and better administrative control the deployment of CISF in units has been kept under jurisdiction
and control of seven Sectors, namely, Airport Sector, East Sector, North Sector, North East Sector, South
Sector, West Sector and Training Sector. Airport Sector is headed by ADG-rank officer and rest of the
Sectors are headed by IG-rank officers. Further, within Sectors, Zones & Gp Headquarters have been
created for smooth administrative functioning.
2.4 Promotional avenues
Rank Feeder            Length of service
  1      2                        3
DG Being filled up through deputation quota from IPS officers.
SDG Post not sanctioned
ADG Being filled up through deputation quota from IPS officers.
IG DIG 24 yrs Group ‘A’ service/total 27 yrs
combined regular service in Group ‘A ’ and
‘B’ Gazetted service including 02 yrs
regular service as DIG.
DIG SR. COMDT 20 yrs Group ‘A’ service or total 23 yrs
combined regular service in Group ‘A ’ and
Group ‘B’ Gazetted service including 02
yrs regular service as Sr. Comdt
SR. COMDT COMDT 15 yrs Group ‘A ’ service including 02 yrs
service as Commandant.
COMDT DY . COMDT 11 yrs Group ‘A’ service including 02 yrs
service in the rank of Dy. Comdt.
DEPUTY COMDT ASSTT COMDT 06 yrs Group ‘A’ service as Asstt Comdt.
ASSTT COMDT INSPECTOR 05 yrs service as Inspector/Exe
INSP/Executive (Exe) SI/Exe 11  Yrs. (2006)
SI/Exe ASI/Exe 06  Yrs. (2011)
ASI/Exe HC/GD 15  Yrs. (2001)
HC/ General Duty(GD) Const. 22  Yrs. (1994)
HC/Driver (Dvr) Const/Dvr 05  Yrs. (2011)
Insp/Ministerial(Min) SI/Min 14  Yrs. (2002)
SI/Min ASI/Clk 16  Yrs. (2000)
ASI/Clerk (Clk) HC/Clk 05  Yrs. (2012)

5
Insp/Stenographer (Steno) SI/Steno 22  Yrs. (1994)
SI/Steno ASI/Steno 06 Yrs. (2011)
Insp/Fire SI/Fire 15  Yrs. (2001)
SI/Fire ASI/Fire 06  Yrs. (2010)
ASI/Fire HC/Fire 21  Yrs. (1995)
HC/Fire Ct/Fire 20  Yrs. (1996)
HC/Driver-Cum-Pump- Ct./DCPO 05 Yrs. (2011)
Operator(DCPO)
2.4.1 On being asked by the Committee regarding the existence of stagnation at various levels and very few
promotional avenues for lower rung officials in the Force, the Ministry informed the Committee that the
CISF is a need based Force organized on unit pattern and not on battalion pattern since the strength of
personnel deployed/ inducted is purely based on the requirement of the PSUs. With the comprehensive cadre
review to address the issues pertaining to lack of promotional avenues and structural imbalances in terms of
inverse ratio in certain ranks would be taken care of.
2.4.2 The Ministry further informed the Committee that in the cadre review, the following additional posts
have been created:
Rank No. of posts
   1 2
ADG 02
IG 07
DIG 08
Commandant 08
Commandant (Fire) 01
Dy. Comdt (Fire) 05
Inspector/Exe 429
Inspector/Min. 41
Inspector/Steno 13
SI/MT  (New Post) 86
ASI/MT(New Post) 257
ASI/Exe 5307
ASI/Steno 39
    1     2         3

6
HC/Clerk 500
HC/Tradesman(New Post) 1358
Constable/Dvr 538
Inspector/Fire 17
ASI/Fire 167
Constable/Fire 288
Constable/DCPO 388
2.4.3 The Committee has been given to understand that with the cadre review, the promotional avenues in
lower ranks are likely to improve as per the table given below:
Rank Eligibility Period Presently, time After Cadre Review
taken (Years) (Years)
Const. to HC (GD) 5 22 16
HC (GD) to ASI (Exe) 5 16 10
ASI (Exe) to SI (Exe) 6 6 6
SI (Exe) to Insp (Exe) 5 10 8
2.4.4 The Committee takes note of the severe stagnation at several ranks of Group B & C such as
Constable/Fire, Head Constable/Fire, SI/Steno, ASI/Clerk, Constable/GD and feels that requisite
measures need to be taken to address the issue of stagnation at these ranks. The Committee
observes that a constable gets promoted to the post of Head-Constable (GD) in 22 years in contrast
to the eligibility period of 5 years. Similarly, a Head-Constable (GD) gets promoted to the post of
ASI (Exe) in 16 years in contrast to the eligibility period of 5 years. The Committee is anguished to
note such severe stagnation in the lower ranks of CISF. The Committee feels that lack of promotional
avenues is a huge demoralising factor for the CISF personnel. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the cadre review of Group B & C ranks must be expedited and it must be ensured
that the CISF personnel, especially at the lower ranks, are able to get their first promotion within
ten years of recruitment.
2.5 Deployment and transfer policy
At present deployment status of CISF is as under :-
Total Strength of CISF - 1,52,049
Total Number of units - 339
Total Number of Fire units - 101
Total formations : - 66  (Including Res. Bns. RTCs etc).
     1 2

7
Present deployment status of CISF
2.5.1 The Ministry, in the background note on the subject, informed the Committee that CISF is deployed
in 339 Units including deployment in 49 Units located in LWE affected areas in 9 States, 27 Units in NE
States and 7 Units in J&K, 59 Airports and other hypersensitive units like DMRC, DAE (Department of
Atomic Energy), DoS (Department of Space) etc. The Operational effectiveness of the Force is being
achieved through:
z Specialized training suited to meet the requirement of the Units.
z Preparation and implementation of SOPs (Standing Operating Procedures) and CMP (Common
Minimum Programme).
z Regular conduct of mock drills involving all stakeholders
z Regular review of security schemes
z Security audits of Units on yearly basis
z Pre induction training imparted before deployment in  LWE area units
z Specialized trained personnel for VIP security
2.5.2 The Committee sought to know the reasons for maximum number of grievances being received
regarding transfers and posting to the northern region. The Ministry replied that major part of the Force
comprises of Constables and Head Constables. Head Constable is promotional post for Constables except in
Ministerial Cadre. The Constables are recruited in proportion of the population of the particular State.
Accordingly, the vacancies are calculated and filled up State-wise, from among the candidates who are
domiciled within the concerned state.  Since, the population of northern States is comparatively high and the
number of CISF units located in this region are limited, it is difficult to give home sector postings to the
CISF personnel in this region in every case. Moreover, in order to maintain an all India character of the
Force, as per the transfer policy every sector should have only 60 per cent non-gazetted personnel from


8
inside the sector.  Furthermore, the sectors comprise of a number of States, and hence even if a home
sector is allotted to any personnel, he may not get his home State. Some of the States are very large in size
and even if the personnel are posted in their home State, they are not satisfied unless posted to the desired
place.  Majority of the personnel from northern region want posting in major cities like Delhi, Chandigarh,
etc. where better educational, medical and other facilities are available.  Considering, the large number of
CISF personnel from this region, it is not possible to meet their requirement/requests every time in each
case. The Committee was apprised of the new transfer policy for NGOs that has been formulated during
2017 having the following provisions:
(i) The size of the sectors within northern region has been reduced so that if one is allotted home
sector he/she gets posting close to his native place.
(ii) The proportion of personnel from inside the sector has been increased from 50 per cent to 60
per cent all over India so that more personnel are able to get posting in their home sector.
(iii) Another feature has been introduced in the policy which enables non-gazetted officers to opt
for non-home sector of their choice, in case they are not able to get their home sector, due to
lack of vacancies in their home sector.
(iv) Earlier, the minimum non-home sector tenure for CISF personnel belonging to northern region
was 17 years and for other sectors it was 13 years.  This anomaly has been removed in the
new transfer policy and minimum non-home sector tenure for all the sectors has been uniformly
fixed at 13 years. This policy has been implemented w.e.f. 1st November, 2017.
2.5.3 When the Committee raised a query whether the present recruitment policy could be tweaked to
provide more representation from the States where CISF is deployed in greater strength instead of the
population criteria, the Ministry replied that the policy of recruitment for filling up the vacancies on the
basis of population of the States is intended to have proportionate representation of each State in the
Force.  CISF is a need based Force and it is inducted in any PSU/Gov ernment or private installation on
requisition basis with stipulation that the said installation will bear the cost of deployment of CISF.
Deployment of CISF is considered based on the priority sectors and threat perception of the establishment
concerned. Augmentation/ dedication of the strength is also done taking into consideration the security
needs.
2.5.4 The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry to resolve the issue of transfers
and postings in the CISF. As the current policy of recruitment in CISF is based on proportionate
representation of each State, there is more recruitment from the densely populated States of
the northern region. However, the Committee notes that the number of CISF units located in
the northern region is limited and thus this policy does not allow the personnel to have sufficient
opportunities to live with their families which results in a large number of requests for transfers
and posting to the northern region. The Committee feels that this policy of recruitment needs
some modification by incorporating a need-based component in the recruitment policy. The
Committee, in this connection, recommends that the Ministry may review CISF s recruitment
policy, which is at present primarily based on population of the States, to include demand-
specific recruitment component. The Committee is of the view that this will, to some extent,
resolve the problem of geographical imbalance and allow the personnel to be posted in their
home States.

9
2.6 Housing and Accommodation
2.6.1 The Ministry informed the Committee in its background note on the subject that about 84 per cent of
the Force is deployed at PSUs/Airports. In PSUs/Airports, family accommodation is provided by the concerned
management. The housing satisfaction in PSUs is quite satisfactory but there is substantial deficiency of
family accommodation in CISF establishments.
2.6.2 W ith regards to Non- PSUs formations (Sector/Zonal/Group Hqrs, Training Institutions and Reserve
Battalions), which constitute about 16 per cent of the force, accommodation is provided by the Government.
Authorization of houses in Non- PSUs:
Rank Training Centres Reserve Battalions Sector/ Zone/ Group Hqrs.
GOs 75% 70% (AC 40%) 60%
SOs 50% 25% 50%
ORs 50% 25% 25%
2.6.3 The Ministry, in its reply to a question, informed the Committee that at present housing satisfaction
level in the Force is 12.58 per cent. CISF is in process for construction/acquisition of 2,663 flats, which will
increase the percentage of housing satisfaction upto 20.95 per cent. In addition to above, 1719 flats are
under consideration in CISF.
2.6.4 The Committee was further informed by the DG , CISF that while providing security cover in the
PSU Sector, it is the obligation of the PSUs to provide accommodation to the personnel and at present 55
per cent barrack and 45 per cent family accommodation on average has been provided by these sectors.
Unless and until, these conditions of providing housing accommodation are satisfied by the PSU sector,
no deployment of the Force is undertaken.  However, with regard to present satisfaction level in the non-
PSU sector, which is MHA funded and largely for the reserve battalion, the Special Security Group in the
DMRC (Delhi Metro Rail Corporation) and other places, the housing satisfaction level is 12.5 per cent.
Once the ongoing works are completed it is expected that the housing satisfaction level will reach to
20.95 per cent. In terms of housing satisfaction, in number of units, the DG , CISF furnished following
details:
Sanctioned Strength 31812
Authorized housing 1 1814
Available housing 4003
Present deficiency 7811
Sanctioned/Under Construction 2663
Net deficiency 5148
2.6.5 The Committee was also informed that a unique exercise had been undertaken by the CISF a few
years back in which it had bought ready-made flats from DDA (Delhi Development Authority) and DSIIDC
(Delhi State Industrial and Infrastructure Development Corporation) totaling to 2,090 units for its personnel

10
in Delhi and Ghaziabad.  Replying to a query regarding when the personnel are posted in other States like
Punjab and Andhra Pradesh, how accommodation for the Force personnel is managed and whether deputation
allowances are given to these personnel, the DG, CISF, explained to the Committee that when the Force
personnel are involved in providing security cover to PSUs then the officers from the Force are accommodated
within the campus of the PSU, however, 55 per cent of the jawans are accommodated in barracks and rest
of them are stationed outside the premises for which they are allowed to have HRA.  The PSUs make
payment through the concept of Reverse Booking that is deposited in Consolidated Fund of India which is
called “Cost of Deployment” as this is the only force where the user has to pay. The grant of HRA was
revised and the issue of allowing the forces to retain the Government accommodation in Delhi or other
family stations have been taken up with the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.
2.6.6 It was further informed to the Committee that there is an increased demand from the private sector
for getting security cover from CISF; however, the Force is now not providing the entire physical security
to the entire premises but are deployed there on Quick Reaction Team (QRT) pattern so that the access
control, frisking, etc. is done by the private companies or security personnel and CISF is deployed only for
contingency situation.
2.6.7 The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level in CISF at 12.5 per cent is among
the lowest in the CAPFs. The Committee takes note of the fact that there is a deficiency of 7,811
quarters and only 2,663 quarters are under construction for CISF accommodation. The Committee
feels that even after completion of construction of these 2663 quarters, the Ministry would not be
able to provide a good housing satisfaction level for CISF. The Committee strongly recommends
that the construction of these 2,663 quarters should be expedited and completed within the stipulated
time. The Committee also recommends that the proposal of 1,719 flats that are under consideration
in CISF must be considered at the earliest. The Committee further recommends that the Government
should chalk out an ‘Action Plan’ to achieve the objective of constructing the remaining 5,148
quarters within the stipulated timeframe.
2.7 Medical facilities
2.7.1 The Ministry informed the Committee in reply to a questionnaire sent by the Committee that CISF
personnel deployed in PSUs/Private Sector establishments and non-MHA funded units are provided medical
facilities by the concerned client organizations. Open recruitment of Medical Officers including Specialists
are being conducted for CAPFs every year through MOSB (Medical Officers Selection Board) by Nodal
Agencies to fill up the vacancy of Medical Officers in CAPFs but sufficient Medical Officers/Specialists
could not be catered for to fill up the vacancies even after making all efforts. Therefore, the vacant posts of
medical officers/specialists in CISF are still existing.
2.7.2 However, to overcome the deficiency of regular GDMOs/Specialist Medical Officers, CISF is appointing
Contractual Medical Officers (GDMOs/Specialists) by conducting Walk-in-Interview at all CISF Composite
Hospitals every year after obtaining necessary approval from MHA/ADG(Med), CAPFs. The existing vacancies
of regular GDMOs/Specialists will be filled once sufficient medical officers selected through MOSB and
allocated to CISF. The vacancies of Specialist Medical Officers and GDMOs are not being filled up mostly
due to the following reasons:
(a) Hard service conditions in CAPFs especially in CISF due to posting in far flung areas/remote
areas of the country.

11
(b) Overall deficiency of doctors in the country in comparison to requirement in Govt. organizations.
(c) Better Pay & Allowances/Perks in private hospitals in comparison to CAPFs.
2.7.3 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry regarding the reasons for vacancies
in the medical staff of CISF. The fact that CISF personnel are posted in far flung areas/remote
areas of the country is all the more reason for ensuring sufficient availability of medical staff at all
the CISF units. The Committee is of the considered view that better pay and allowances/perks and
higher hardship allowance would incentivize the doctors to serve in the CISF. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry must take immediate measures to enhance the pay and
allowances for the doctors to be appointed as regular medical officers to fill up these vacancies at
the earliest.
2.8 Modernisation of the Force
2.8.1 On being asked by the Committee as to the measures being taken for the modernization of the Force
in order to ensure better security architecture, the Ministry replied that the Government has provided funds to
CISF under Modernization Plan-I and II for procurement of modern gadgets. Under Modernization Plan – I,
CISF had procured weaponry items, special items for Fire Service Training Institute (FSTI), training
equipment, Communication and IT equipment at the cost of ` 106.58 crore.  Under Modernization Plan – II,
a sum of Rs 39.48 crore (including committed liabilities) has been spent for procuring Arms & Ammunition,
Machinery & Equipment, Motor Vehicles, Clothing/Tenting and Information & Communication Technology
items.
2.8.2 In Modernisation Plan-III, for strengthening the security and operational efficiency of the Regional
Training Centres/Reserve Battalions/Units, budget outlay of Rs 104.35 crore have been approved for CISF
for procurement of Gadgets/items such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Advance Weaponry, Ground Penetrating
Radars, IT equipment, Medical equipment, Fire & Disaster Management equipment, Armoured/Bullet Proof
vehicles, communication equipment.
2.8.3 In addition to above for upgrading technical skills of its officers/personnel, CISF personnel are allowed
to attend seminars, workshops, exhibitions being conducted by various Government and Private Organizations.
The security audit and technical surveys are also conducted at the units for ascertaining and projecting
requirement of modern gadgetry to enhance the overall security apparatus.
2.8.4 The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry for the modernization of
CISF.  However, since the CISF is responsible for the security of country s airports and major
installations, including those in nuclear and aero space domain, the Committee recommends that
the Ministry must ensure that the Force has modern state-of-the-art arms, ammunition, night
vision devices, patrolling equipment, drones, vehicles and other infrastructural upgrades.
2.8.5 The DG , CISF apprised the Committee in a meeting held on 26thJune, 2018 that there are some
airports in which the CISF does not have their own dedicated Bomb Detection & Disposal Squad (BDDS)
systems.
2.8.6 The Committee is of the considered view that the Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS)
is crucial for airport security. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the 59 airports guarded
by the CISF in the country must have operational BDDS teams of CISF and the Ministry must

12
ensure that these teams are provided all the essential bomb diffusing equipment such as explosive
vapour detectors and remote-operated vehicles.
2.8.7 On being asked by the Committee whether a programme in line with BSF s  BISAG (Bhaskaracharya
Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Informatics) programme, where the DG, BSF is able to address all
the troops of BSF at once would be introduced in the CISF, the Ministry replied that BISAG is a satellite
based communication in which one way video and two way audio facilities are made available. BISAG
telecasts the programs from its studio at BISAG , Gandhinagar by using GSAT 8 and 4CR for transmission
through KU band transponder. It can be made use by the CISF also.
2.8.8 The Committee appreciates that the BISAG is a very useful and cost effective programme
used by BSF for the purpose of monitoring and redressing grievances at the highest level. The
Committee takes note of the submission of DG , CISF that BISAG can also be used by CISF. The
Committee feels that this programme can be used by CISF for two-way communication with the
various units and personnel deployed in several important installations across the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that further modalities may be worked out and necessary
infrastructure may be arranged in consultation with various stakeholders for adoption of BISAG
programme by CISF.
2.8.9 The Committee was informed that at present total numbers of dogs present with the Force is 470 and
that the number of dog handlers is 623. It was further informed to the Committee that the dog squads in the
airports is provided by the airport operators only and the dog squad available with the Force, which has a
canine centre in Ranchi, are deployed mainly in government buildings sectors,  DMRC, etc.
2.8.10  The details of dog squad deployed in various CISF units are as under:-
Sl. No. A vailability
Dogs Handler
1. PSUs/Unit 225 268
2. Airports 230 340
3. Res. Bns. 15 15
TOTAL 470 623
2.8.11  These dogs are an additional layer to the existing security system of CISF. Various breeds of dogs are
inducted in the dog squad of CISF according to their  certain inherent qualities. The cocker spaniel breed is
inducted as it is known to be very efficient at sniffing out suspicious items. At the same time, they are very
friendly with the public. Hence, this breed of dogs serves the purpose at crowded places such as airports
and metro stations. Cocker spaniels are smart, quiet, and friendly. They are inducted mainly for the purpose
of maintaining vigil. On the other hand, German shepherds tend to be ferocious, aggressive and agile. They
are mostly used for manning areas, especially in Naxal areas. Labradors are comparatively docile and are
used to sniff out arms, explosives and narcotics.
2.8.12  In a Committee meeting held on 21stMay, 2018, the importance of Belgian Malino breed of dogs,
known for its remarkable memory, intelligence and ferocious nature, was discussed. Belgian Malino breed

13
of dogs is already available with the NSG . In the said meeting of the Committee, it was also discussed that
NSG may also explore the possibility of inducting the Mudhol Hound breed of Karnataka.
2.8.13 The Committee feels that the dogs, along with the proper and regular training for their
specific roles, need to be groomed regularly to prevent them from contracting seasonal skin diseases
such as external parasites, ticks and lice. In addition to this, the dog handlers also require special
training in order to get acquainted with the dogs and their training and rearing needs.
2.8.14  The Committee observes that the canines deployed along with the Force play a very crucial
role. The dog squad, therefore, forms an essential part of the Force. The Committee is of the
considered view that proper rearing of the dog squads and adequate training of the handlers appointed
in the Force is very important for effective and efficient use of the canine. The Committee, in this
connection, recommends that sufficient number of dog squads including the Mudhol Hound breed
of Karnataka and the Belgian Malinois breed may be considered by the CISF to meet its requirement
of providing security cover to various buildings and vital installations.
2.9 Attrition
2.9.1 The Ministry, in its background note, apprised the Committee that the attrition rate in CISF is quite
small. In the last five years, 2,973 Force personnel have resigned from the Force, 2,941 personnel opted for
voluntary retirement and another 107 personnel have pre-maturely retired. Personal grounds or better placement
opportunities are the main reasons for opting to leave the Force.
2.9.2 The Ministry furnished the following data regarding details of attrition in GOs and NGOs for the past
three years during evidence before the Committee:
Gazetted Officers
Y ear Total Strength V o luntary Retirement Resignation Total
2016 1280 04 03 07
2017 1273 15 02 17
2018 1274 04 04 08
Non-Gazetted Officials
Y ear Total Strength V o luntary Retirement Resignation Total
2016 1,24,538 583 266 849
2017 1,24,097 788 378 1166
2018 1,42,861 117 113 230
2.9.3 The Committee sought to know the measures taken to address the issue of highly educated personnel
being more prone to getting trained in the CISF and then leaving the Force for better opportunities in the
private sector. The Ministry informed the Committee that the CISF personnel who apply for V oluntary
Retirement or resign from service are mandatorily briefed and counselled by their superior officers. The
cases of VRS/Resignation are processed only when personnel are not willing to continue in service even

14
after counselling. The CISF has recently undertaken cadre review of Group-A, B & C personnel which
would improve their promotional avenues especially in Group B & C ranks. Furthermore, the new transfer
policy has been formulated to take care of the grievances of CISF personnel with regard to their transfer and
postings.
2.9.4 The Committee takes note of the fact that the jawans leaving the Force for better opportunities
in the private sector is a major reason for attrition in the CISF. The Committee feels that once a
jawan gets training in the Force, he/she becomes an asset to the Force, therefore, they should be
given enough incentives so that they are motivated to remain in the Force. The Committee
understands that other factors like high level of stress and strain could also be causes of attrition.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that measures should be taken to improve the working
conditions significantly to motivate the personnel to stay, even when they are offered better
opportunities elsewhere. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should conduct
exit interviews or survey among the personnel opting for voluntary retirement and resignation to
assess the factors leading to attrition and undertake appropriate measures to address the concerns
of the personnel so that attrition in the Force can be curbed.
2.10 Grievance Redressal Mechanism
2.10.1 The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that Grievance and
Feedback Management System for grievance redressal of CAPFs personnel was launched on 11.05.17 by
the Hon ble Union Home Minister. It is centrally maintained by BSF. Whenever a Force personnel installs
Mobile App on his Mobile, a registration request is generated and sent to the Nodal officer. The Nodal officer
may either accept or reject the request after verification of the details of the personnel. Grievances received
through Mobile App are downloaded by Welfare Branch and forwarded to concerned Units/Branches. After
examining the reply received from Units/Branches, any of the appropriate remarks viz. grievance redressed
favourably, grievance considered but not acceded to or grievance action pending is updated on the portal by
Welfare Branch.
2.10.2  The Ministry further informed the Committee that a Public Grievance Portal is maintained by Dept.
of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances (DARPG). Grievances downloaded by Welfare Branch are
forwarded to concerned Units/Branches. The gist of reply so received is uploaded on Portal by Welfare
Branch.  Grievances received in the PG portal are being monitored by CISF till its redressal.
2.10.3  The Ministry, in reply to a question, informed the Committee that for speedy and systematic redressal
of grievances of personnel an online Centralized Grievance Redressal Portal (e-Grievance) was launched in
CISF on 1stSeptember, 2016. Personnel can submit grievances through CISF Website (Employee Corner)
or Mobile App (mPower). The distinct number of users of CISF Mobile Application (mPower) are 1,21,239
(95 per cent) out of the total strength as on date. The details of grievances received on e-grievance portal as
on 6thJuly, 2018 are as under:
Total grievances registered Total Grievance redressed Grievances under process
10376 10129 247
2.10.4 The  Ministry furnished the details of grievances, under the mentioned heads, received in the last 3
years as under:

15
Category              1.09.16 to 1.12.16                     2017 2018 till (06.07.18)
Received Settled Received Settled Received Settled Under
Process
Transfer 471 471 2754 2754 1996 1827 169
Food Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
Promotion Nil Nil 85 85 23 21 02
Working Nil Nil 380 380 186 170 16
Conditions
(Duty, Housing,
Medical, etc)
TOTAL 471 471 3219 3219 2205 2018 187
2.10.5  The Ministry further informed the Committee that the e-grievance portal is monitored by Unit/Group/
Zone/Sector and at Frontier Headquarters level on daily basis. The general grievances related to Unit
administration, Service are redressed within 10 days by the Unit. The grievances related to Transfer/Posting
and Policy matter are mostly redressed within an average of 45 days.   Further divulging the details of the
modalities under the e-grievance redressal mechanism, the Committee was informed that the  user can
choose appropriate category out of 17 categories, i.e., personal issue, domestic problem, career related,
posting, duty related, harassment, leave, medical issue etc. Upon posting the grievance, a confirmation
message is sent to User mobile number and the concerned Unit Commander. The online application is
monitored centrally at CISF Headquarters by the Welfare Directorate and DIG/Welfare has been nominated
as the Nodal officer. The pendency of grievances is reviewed on weekly basis and system generated e-mail
is sent to the concerned level of pendency.
2.10.6  The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry to facilitate the CISF personnel to
raise their grievances through various media of grievance redressal available for them.  The
Committee desires that the Grievance Redressal Mechanism of CISF must be efficient in resolving
grievances of the personnel. It must be robust and should reflect a system of speedy and fair
adjudication of grievances without delay.

CHAPTER-III
CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE (CRPF)
3.1 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
3.1.1 The Central Reserve Police Force came into existence as the Crown Representative’s Police on 27th
July, 1939. It was named as Central Reserve Police Force on enactment of the CRPF Act on 28thDecember,
1949. Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) is 246 Battalions strong force having a sanctioned strength of
3,24,093. The CRPF has 208 Executive Battalions, 6 Mahila Battalions, 15 RAF Battalions, 10 CoBRA
Battalions, 5 Signal Battalions and 1 Special Duty Group and 1 Parliament Duty Group.
3.1.2 The CRPF is the largest Central Armed Police Force of the country. The Force is presently handling
a wide range of duties covering law and order, counter insurgency, anti-militancy and anti-naxal operations.
The Force plays a key role in assisting the State Governments and UT Administrations in maintaining public
order and countering subversive activities of naxalites, militant groups and insurgents. The CRPF is performing
law & order duties, counter-insurgency operations in J&K and North East and Anti-Maoist operations in
Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected states and other parts of the country. Besides, CRPF is also providing
security to some of the vital installations and buildings including the shrine of Mata Vaishno Devi in Katra,
Ram Janam Bhoomi/Babri Masjid in Ayodhya, Kashi Vishwanath Temple/Gyanvapi Mosque in Varanasi,
Krishna Janam Bhoomi and Shahi Idgah Masjid in Mathura and the Parliament House. Apart from the above,
CRPF / RAF coys have also been deployed across the country for maintaining the law and order situation
from time to time on short notice as well as on long term basis. The CRPF has also been entrusted with VIP
Security. In 1992, 10 Battalions of CRPF were reorganized and converted into 10 Battalions of 4 coys each
of Rapid Action Force (RAF). The personnel in RAF are trained and equipped to be an effective strike Force
in communal riots and similar situations. A specialized Force “CoBRA- Commando Battalion for Resolute
Action, has been raised to fight Maoists and Insurgents in Jungles. Also known as Jungle Warriors, CoBRA
members are selected from amongst the CRPF personnel. One contingent (Male) of CRPF is deployed in
Liberia under United Nations Mission since February-2016.
3.2 Organization Structure
3.2.1 At present, the force headquarters is at Delhi headed by Director General (DG) assisted by four
operational zones, headed by Special Director General (SDG).
1. Jammu and Kashmir zone
2. Central Zone
3. North East Zone
4. South Zone
3.2.2 Besides the above, there are Adm Sectors (21), Ops Sectors (02) headed by Inspector General, Adm
Ranges (39), Ops Ranges (17) and Group Centers (43) headed by Dy Inspector General, and Units/Bn (242)
headed by Commandants. The organizational structure of the force is geared to support and facilitate operations
in effective manner with each level having its operational and administrative mandate.
3.3 Command and control
3.3.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note on the subject, furnished the organizational
hierarchy of CRPF as follows:
16

17
3.4 Recruitment and Vacancies
3.4.1 W ith a sanctioned strength of 3,24,093, CRPF is the lar gest Central Armed Police Force in the
country. Such large cadre strength invariably creates several issues pertaining to recruitment and management
of personnel.
3.4.2 The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, furnished the details pertaining to the recruitment
of personnel of various ranks in CRPF as follows:
Sl. Rank Percentage /Quota of Direct Rectt
1    2                        3
1. AC/GD By Direct Rectt through UPSC-50%
By Promotion- 33%
Through Limited Departmental Competitive
Exam (LDCE)-17%
2. Medical Officer By direct recruitment
3. Inspector(HT) By Direct Rectt-80%
By Deputation/ Absorption-20%
4. SI/GD By Direct Rectt through SSC-33%
By Promotion-50%
Through LDCE-17%
5. ASI/Steno By Direct Rectt-85%
Through LDCE-15%
6. HC/GD By P romotion-85%
Through LDCE-10%
By Direct Appointment by Sports Quota- 5%
7. HC/MIN By Direct Rectt-85%  Through LDCE-15%
8. CT/ TECH By Direct Rectt-100%
(Driver & MMV/Fitter)
CT/Tradesmen


18
(Cobbler,  Carpenter, Tailor,
Bugler, Gardener, Painter,  Cook,
Water Carrier, Pipe Band, Brass band,
Barber/ Hair Dresser, Washer man/
women & Safai Karmachari.
9. Pioneer Staff By Direct Rectt-100%
SI/ overseer (civil), ASI/
Draughtsman, CT (Pioneer), CT
(Electric, Mason, Carpenter,
Painter, Plumber (Engg)
10. Signal Staff By promotion-90%
Sub-Inspector/RO & Crypto By Direct Rectt-10%
11. Sub-Inspector (T echnical) By promotion-90%
By Direct Rectt-10%
12. Assistant Sub-Inspector (Technical) By remustering -20%
By Direct Rectt-80%
13. Assistant Sub-Inspector (Draughtsman) By Direct Rectt-100%
14. Inspector (Dietician), Paramedical Staff By Direct Rectt-100%
Sub-Inspector (Staff Nurse)
15. Sub-Inspector (Radiographer) By Direct Rectt-95%
By promotion failing which by deputation or
absorption-5%
16. Assistant Sub-Inspector By Direct Rectt-100%
(Pharmacist, OT Technician,
Laboratory Technician, EG
Technician, Dental Technician)
17. Assistant  Sub-Inspector 80% by direct recruitment
(Laboratory Technician) 5% by promotion
18. Head Constable By Direct Rectt-100%
(Jr.X-ray Assistant, Laboratory Assistant)
19. Head Constable By Direct Rectt-100%
(Electrician, Air Conditioning
Plant Technician, Steward )
20. Constable (Ward Boy/Girl) 50% by remustering  50% by direct recruitment
21. Constable (Masalchi, Cook, S/K, W/M)  By Direct Rectt-100%
22. HC/GD, CT/GD (sports)  5% by direct rectt in Sports quota
1                2           3

19
3.4.3 In the background note on the subject, the Ministry informed the Committee that out of 37 posts
earmarked for IPS Officers, 18 posts have been diverted to Cadre Officers for a period of one year, i.e.,
upto 31.03.2018.  As of date, out of 19 posts, only 02 IPS DIGs are posted in CRPF, resulting in the
deficiency of 17 posts.  This deficiency is due to non-availability of IPS officers in DIG rank on the offer list
for induction.
3.4.4 The Ministry, in the background note, also informed the Committee that against the sanctioned posts
of  5 Deputy Financial Advisors, 4 posts are vacant.
3.4.5 The Committee is perplexed to find that 17 out of 19 posts, i.e., approximately 90 per cent of
the posts at DIG level are lying vacant in CRPF. This is a serious lacuna in the Force. A robust and
experienced higher level leadership is crucial for efficient working of an organization. The Committee
fails to understand the rationale behind reserving 37 posts for IPS officers under deputation quota
in CRPF when IPS officers are not opting for these posts. These posts are lying vacant or have to be
diverted temporarily to the Cadre Officers of CRPF owing to the paucity of IPS officers opting for
them. This leads to not only huge percentage of vacancies but also lowering the morale of cadre
officers of CRPF. The Committee therefore recommends that appropriate measures be taken by
the Ministry to fill these vacant DIG posts in CRPF. The Committee also feels that not more than
25 per cent posts should be reserved for deputation Officers in the Force.  If IPS officers are not
available, the posts should be filled through temporary promotions of eligible offic ers of the
Force.
3.4.6 The Committee is dismayed to observe that out of total 5 posts of Deputy Financial Advisor,
4 posts are lying vacant. The Committee fails to understand how such a large Force could function
efficiently with vacancies in such an important post. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
immediate measures be taken by the Ministry to fill these 4 vacancies of Deputy Financial Advisor
in CRPF .
3.4.7 The Ministry apprised the Committee in a meeting held on 26th June, 2018 that the sequence of the
exams conducted for various posts in the Force is being considered to be altered so that the recruitment can
be done much faster. Presently it takes approximately two years to complete the recruitment process but
with this new process, the recruitment could be completed within a year.
3.4.8 The Ministry also apprised the Committee that the conduct of recruitment on annual basis by the
Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and its completion in the  given time frame is also critical in addressing
the above issue and in regularizing the training cycle. The indent for 54,953 vacancies for Constable (GD)
has been placed for recruitment year 2018.
3.4.9 The Committee is concerned about the huge number of vacant posts at around 54,953 in
Constable (GD) cadre. The Committee feels that this issue could be resolved if vacancies for a
recruitment process are calculated well in advance, taking into account the anticipated vacancies
for the next two years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may conduct
recruitments taking into account the anticipated vacancies for the next two years instead of the
current procedure of reporting the vacancies that exist before the notification of the recruitment
process, so that such a large number of posts do not lie vacant at any given point of time.
3.4.10  The Committee further observes that the SSC conducts recruitment exams for a large number
of posts throughout the year for various government services. The recruitment process of CRPF

20
takes approximately two years to be completed. The Committee believes that this time period can
be reduced to around one year by streamlining the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry may request the recruitment agencies to undertake necessary
measures to reduce the timeframe within which various tiers of recruitment examinations are
conducted.
3.5 Raising Battalion 241 for fighting Naxal Menace
3.5.1 In reply to a question regarding the raising of the battalion 241 of the Force, the Ministry informed the
Committee that this was done with the objectives of fighting the Naxal menace in their den and providing
employment to the Schedule Tribes of the area thereby preventing them from being lured into joining naxal
outfits. The proposal for the  formation of Bastariya Battalion was approved by the MHA vide their Order
No. I-45023/4/2015-Pers-II dated 15-07-2016.The recruitment to the Bastariya Battalion was done as per
the directions/ special relaxations given by the Ministry vide its ibid order.
3.5.2 One hundred per cent candidates were recruited from Scheduled Tribes. Thirty three per cent additional
reservation quota was adhered to for female candidates in the recruitment to the battalion 241. The following
relaxations in physical standards were provided:-
(a) Height- Relaxation by 07 cms vis-a-vis the existing norms
(b) Chest- (for men) -74.5 cms (minimum expansion 05 cms) vis-à-vis existing norms
(c) Weight- 10 per cent less in proportion to the height standard vis-à-vis existing norms.
3.5.3 The Committee appreciates the effort of the Ministry to recruit locals from the Naxalite
affected areas which would prove beneficial for the Force to connect with the locals. The Committee
also appreciates the effort of the Ministry to include women in the formation of the Bastariya
battalion. The Committee feels that by this effort of the Government the problems related to local
language, cultural gap and knowledge of terrain would be minimised. The Committee recommends
that special focus be given on every aspect of training of these recruits, both male and female, such
that their induction into the CRPF is smooth. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry
should make provisions for ensuring safety of the families of the Bastariya battalion personnel.
3.6 Promotional Avenues
3.6.1 The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that all ranks in the
Force are suffering serious stagnation. The Ministry furnished the details of promotional avenues as
under:-
Ranks Prescribed Actual time
Residency as per taken for
RRs( in years) promotion
1                                 2          3       4
Group- “A” Executive
From TO
IG Addl. DG 3 Y ears as IG & 30 37 to 38 Years
Years in Group-A

21
DIG IG 2 Years as DIG & 30 to 33 Years
24 Years in Group-A
Commandant DIG 3 Years as CO & 25 to 30 Years
20 Years in Group-A
Second-in Command Commandant 5 years as 2-I/C & 19 to 23 Years
15 Years in Group-A
Dy. Commandant Second-in-Command 5 years as AC & 11 15 to 18 Years
Years in Group-A
Asstt. Commandant Dy. Commandant 05 Years as AC 07 to 09 Years
Insp/GD Asstt Commandant 03 as Insp 09 to 10 Years
(Directly Appointed SI)
Group- “B” & “C” Executive/ Technical / Tradesman/ Signal
SI(GD) Inspector (GD) Directly Appointed 06-07 Years (DASI)
SI: 05 Yrs. 30-31 Years
Local promotee: (Local Promotee)
02Yrs as Insp
ASI (GD) SI (GD) 06 Yrs service in the 25-27 Years
grade and total-16 years
service from CT to ASI.
HC/GD ASI/GD 05 years 08-10 Years
CT(GD/BUG/MALI/PTR) HC/GD 05 years 16 Years
SI/ARMR INSP/ARMR 05 years 07 Years
HC/ARMR SI/ARMR 10 years 20 Years
CT/ARMR HC/ARMR 05 years 06-07 Years
CT/FTR HC/FTR 05 years 08-09 Years
HC/FTR SI/MM 10 years 13 Years
CT/DVR HC/DVR 05 years 14 years
HC/DVR SI/MT 10 years 19 to 20 years
SI (MT/MM) INSP/MT 05 years 7 years
CT/ Brass Band HC/Brass Band 05 years 23 years
HC/Brass Band SI/ Brass Band 10 years 15 - 16 years
SI/ Brass Band INSP/ Brass Band 05 years 4 - 5 years
1                                 2          3       4

22
CT/ Pipe Band HC/ Pipe Band 05 years 17 years
HC/Pipe Band SI/ Pipe Band 10 years 13 years
CT/Tailor HC/TLR 05 years 22 years
HC/Tailor SI/TLR 10 years 14 years
CT/Cobbler HC/Cobbler 05 years 24 years.
CT/Carpenter HC/ CPTR 05 years 20 years
SI/Radio Operator INSP/RO 05 years 7-Year
SI/CRY INSP/CRY 05 years 6-Year
SI/TECH INSP/TECH 05 years 8-Year
SI/DM INSP/DM 05 years 6-Year
SI/RF INSP/RF 05 years 5-Year
ASI/RO SI/RO 06 years 7-Year
ASI/CRY SI/CRY 06 years 6-Year
ASI/TECH SI/TECH 06 years 11-Year
ASI/DM SI/DM 06 years 20-Year
ASI/RF SI/RF 06 years 8-Year
HC/RO ASI/RO 05 years 15-Year
HC/CRY ASI/CRY 05 years 8-Year
HC/RF ASI/RF 05 years 7-Year
Mahila personnel ( Executive)
CT(GD/BUG/ HC/GD 5 years 19 years
MALI/PTR)
HC/GD ASI/GD 5 years service 05 years
ASI/GD SI/GD 6 yrs service in the 04 years
grade and total 16
years service from
CT to ASI.
SI/GD SM/ INSP (GD) 05 years 9 - 10 years
CT/TLR HC/TLR 05 years 15 years
Group-”A”,”B” & “C” Ministerial/Stenographers
1 2      3      4
HC (M) ASI (M) 05 years 05 Years
ASI (M) SI (M) 06 years 06 Years
 1 2      3      4

23
SI (M) INSP (M) 05 years 13 Years
Insp (M) Asstt Comdt (M) 05 years 08 Years
Asstt Comdt. (Min) Dy. Comdt (Min) 05 years      -
ASI(Steno) SI (Steno) 06 years 06 Years
SI (Steno) Insp (Steno) 05 years 05 Years
Insp (Steno) Asstt Comdt (PS) 04 years 08 Years
Asstt Comdt (PS) Dy Comdt (PPS) 05 years       -
3.6.2 The Committee, in a questionnaire sent to the Ministry, sought to know the reasons for huge difference
in the prescribed residency period and the actual time taken for promotion in various ranks such as Constable
(GD/Bugler/Mali/Painter), Head Constable/DVR, Constable/brass band, Constable/pipe band, Constable/TLR,
Constable/cobbler, Constable/Carpenter, ASI/DM, Head Constable (Radio Operator), Mahila Constable(GD/
Bugler/Mali/Painter), Mahila Sub-Inspector/GD and Mahila Sub-Inspector (M). The Ministry submitted that
posts are sanctioned in CRPF on the basis of functional requirement, due to which higher ranks are
comparatively less than that in the feeder grade and lower posts get lesser chances of promotion. Moreover,
the basic structure of CRPF is Battalion structure which is pyramidical and offers restrictive scope for
promotion.  The Recruitment Rules are framed with a view that only the minimum prescribed vacancies are
filled on time. To mitigate this problem, CRPF has submitted cadre review proposals for Group B&C of all
cadres to MHA for consideration.  Cadre review proposals of Group B & C are under consideration in
consultation with IFD/DoE (MoF). Efforts are also made to ensure that minimum three promotions are
availed in the career as per DoPT guidelines. Minimum Assured Career Progression (MACP) in terms of pay
grades is given at the end of every 10, 20 and 30 years of service.
3.6.3 The Committee notes that uniformed forces are highly structured organizations with well
defined roles and responsibilities. Therefore, it may not be possible to remove stagnation only by
creating additional posts. However, the Committee feels that not being given adequate career
progression opportunities acts as a highly de-motivating factor for the personnel. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government may consider the proposal to grant four financial up-
gradations under the Modified Assured Career Progression (MACP) scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24
and 32 years of service instead of the existing scheme that provides only three financial up-gradations
at intervals of 10, 20 and 30 years of service at par with other civilian employees. The Committee is
of the considered view that the CRPF personnel, who are facing excessive stagnation in their career
growth, must be provided certain special incentives to keep their morale high.
3.7 Mahila Battalion
3.7.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that there are 6 Mahila battalions in the Force. Besides this, 96
Mahila personnel are also deployed in each of 15 RAF Units. To enhance the percentage of women employees
in the Force, CRPF has converted 2 Male Executive Battalions into Mahila Battalions. One Platoon in every
RAF battalion has been designated as Mahila Platoon and is exclusively manned by Mahila personnel. Further,
242 Posts of Mahilas have also been sanctioned in the newly formed Bastariya Battalion for LWE area.
    1 2      3      4

24
3.7.2 Presently there are 06 Mahila Battalions operational in CRPF all of which are deployed in the combat
role. The women personnel are deployed in the troubled areas of LWE, J&K and North East besides being
deployed for law and order duties in the other parts of the country.  In addition, RAF units having women
component are also deployed regularly for law and order exigencies.
3.7.3 The Committee notes that the strength of women in CRPF is only 7,617. The Committee
referred to written reply by the Minister of State for Home Affairs, Shri Kiren Rijiju to question No.
5863 in the Lok Sabha on 3rd April, 2018 that the Government, vide order dated 05.01.2016 decided
to reserve 33 per cent posts at Constable level for being filled up by women in CRPF & CISF. The
Committee therefore recommends that the Government should take initiatives to induct more
women in the Force. The Committee further recommends that suitable measures must be taken to
ensure their privacy, hygiene and sanitation conditions.
3.8 Training
3.8.1  The Ministry informed the Committee that all Officers, Sub-Ordinate Officers and Other Ranks are
put through under basic training of approximately 1 year before operational deployment.
3.8.2  Prior to release of promotion of every Officer, SOs and Other Ranks, they have to successfully
complete pre-promotional, promotional courses meant for the particular rank.
Specialized Training
Sl. No. Name of Course Duration Institution
1          2      3      4
1. Emerging Trends in Space 6 days ISA
Technology for Real Time
Operations for ACs to IGs of
CRPF
2. Gender Sensitisation Course for 6 days ISA
ACs and DCs of CRPF
3. LWE Operational Appreciation 6 days ISA
course for officers of CRPF
(ACs to Comdts).
4. Geographical Information System 6 days ISA
(GIS) course for ACs to Comdts
of CRPF
5. ToT on Human Rights for 6 days ISA
Officers of the rank of ACs to
Comdts. of CRPF
6. Commando course 08 weeks CTC
7. CIA T course for GOs/SOs/Ors 06 weeks CIA T
8. Course on “IED Awareness and 03 weeks CIA T
Ops Planning” for Trainers of
Training Institutions

25
9. ToT on Mob Dispersal course CAPFs 08 weeks RAPO Meerut
10. RAF Conversion trg (Gos to CTs) 04 weeks RAPO Meerut
11. GPS Course 01 weeks CIT BLR
12. MASTER YOGA TRAINER 03 months ToTDMPR
13. Pre-induction training for CoBRA 03 months CIJWT Belgam
14. Pre-induction training for LWE 07 weeks —
15. Pre-induction training for J&K 07 weeks —
3.8.3 In addition to Left-Wing Extremism areas, the CRPF personnel are deployed in North-Eastern region,
J&K region and for the security of VIPs. In reply to the query whether they are given appropriate and
adequate training for these additional tasks, the Ministry stated that CRPF personnel are trained in all combat
skills during their basic training at the time of their joining. Training assistance for specialized courses is
obtained from Army, NSG and Telangana Police (Greyhounds).  Further to ensure the knowledge of an area,
theatre specific training based on ever-changing tactics being adopted by adversaries is imparted to the
personnel before their induction in that specific theatre. During pre-induction training, awareness about the
modus operandi/strategy adopted by adversaries is ingrained in the troops. Besides, rotation training of one
CRPF coy per battalion is supposed to be a regular feature for sharpening the skills of the jawans.  However,
rotation training does often  get hampered due to the regular requirement of training companies in various
unforeseen law and order assignments across the country.  For VIP security also, specialized training is
provided to the jawans.
3.8.4 In reply to a question raised by the Committee regarding the continuous deployment of the Force
throughout the year, the Ministry stated that time and again the issue regarding deployment of training
companies has been raised at various platforms. But still almost 98 per cent of training companies remain
deployed on various short term Law & Order assignments across the country. This continuous deployment
of training companies affects the overall ops efficiency of the Force, besides denying troops the much
wanted training and rest and recuperation.
3.8.5 The Committee is of the considered view that training is an indispensable part of a police
force to maintain the efficiency. Adequate and proper training is a must for continuous development
of the personnel, career wise as well as for boosting their morale. Any sort of compromise on the
training front would prove to be detrimental for the Force in the long run. The Force personnel
cannot be deployed for law and order assignments while they are on training as this would hamper
their learning as a Force personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
takes the requisite measures to make sure that the companies  that are under training must not be
deployed for any other duties and must be engaged full-time in training only during that period.
3.9 Basic amenities - Food and drinking water
3.9.1 Regarding food, the Ministry informed the Committee that a jawan gets ` 98 per day as the ration
allowance. There is a committee, consisting of persons below officers  rank that procures everything from
the local market.  The menu is decided by the Headquarters in terms of diet, calorific value and the theatre
1                     2      3        4

26
in which they work.  In regard to safe drinking water, the Committee was informed that efforts are being
made to install RO plants to every camp of CRPF.
3.9.2 Responding to a query during evidence, the Ministry stated that in places like Bastar in Chhattisgarh,
usually there is a local vegetable market. Generally, a haat operates there twice a week. Since haat is not
always reliable, the Force has its own system in which some contractors supply vegetables to the personnel.
Of course, the naxals try to stop them but in certain places, they manage to get vegetables with the help of
contractors.
3.9.3 The Committee feels that it is essential that the jawans are provided with good quality food.
But the Committee is disappointed to note that the CRPF personnel posted in Chhattisgarh, who
are serving under extremely hard conditions with enhanced threat to life, have to go through
difficulties in even getting their daily meal requirements fulfilled. They have to depend on local
haats and contractors for supply of raw material for their food. The Committee recommends that a
full proof mechanism should be developed for ensuring regular supply of nutritious food, including
dishes/raw materials of different cuisines to all CRPF camps particularly those which have no access
or difficult access to local market like Bastar in Chhattisgarh.  The Ministry may explore the
feasibility of using refrigerator vans to supply food articles periodically and the less accessible
places of deployment like Bastar.
3.9.4 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should form a Food
Inspection Committee comprising dieticians, experienced food inspectors, and officials of the Ministry,
tasked with the duty of performing surprise checks of food quality and hygiene, especially at the
remote and inaccessible locations.
3.10 Attrition
3.10.1 The Ministry informed the Committee through its background note on the subject that officers and
jawans are proceeding on voluntary retirement and resignation due to their personal/domestic problems or
for better job opportunities outside. Major reasons for such attritions are personal problems, family
disputes, domestic commitments, better job opportunities outside, less harsh working conditions outside,
deployment of force in far-flung areas, hard and harsh service condition, continuous deployment away
from  home, home sickness, nuclear family etc. Details of attrition during the last seven years are as
under:
Reason 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Grand Total
      1 2 3 4 5678 9
Dismissal From 672 570 516 361 208 182 103 2612
Service
Invalidation 55 33 34 41 49 57 34 303
Resignation 940 793 740 562 593 453 523 4604
From Service
Superannuation 857 744 734 674 934 1181 1157 6281
From Service

27
Termination 3 119 246 281 264 135 118 1166
V oluntary 2757 5160 3757 2195 780 3346 2689 20684
Retirement
GRAND TOTAL 7295 9431 8040 6128 4843 7370 6641 35650
3.10.2  The Ministry also informed the Committee in the meeting held on 26thJune, 2018, that there was a
rise in the voluntary retirement cases in the year 2016 because of the Seventh Central Pay Commission.
3.10.3 In response to a question regarding the measures being taken to address the issue of high rate of
attrition in the Force, the Ministry informed that to address the issue, new promotional avenues have been
opened, viz. creation of ASI Rank, AC (M) to DC(M). All the follower staffs have been upgraded to the rank of
GD Constables which is a motivational measure for the work force. Implementation of most of the 7th Pay
commission recommendations relating to pay and perks has been completed to ensure high morale and motivation
of the force personnel. V arious welfare measures like scholarships for wards, seat quotas for CRPF in various
educational institutions, MoUs with top hospitals for cashless medical facilities are steps taken in that direction.
The CRPF Wives Welfare Association also undertakes several welfare measures for the families and wards of
jawans. Attempts are being made to improve the working conditions and living conditions of the force personnel
by building family accommodation and schools in their camps for the families and their wards.
3.10.4  The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Ministry to curb the attrition rate
in the CRPF. However, the Committee notes that attrition rate is high in all the CAPFs owing to the
implementation of Seventh Central Pay Commission due to which there were considerably large
number of voluntary retirement cases in the year 2017. However, the Committee also observes that
there is no visible decrease in the number of resignations since the year 2014 as well. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should conduct a survey among the personnel to assess
the factors leading to such large number of VRS and resignations and undertake appropriate measures
to address the concerns of the personnel so that this trend can be curbed.
3.11 Housing and accommodation
3.11.1 The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that the CRPF has
constructed houses at its static locations, i.e., group centres, training institutions and battalions raised on
unattached pattern like CoBRA, RAF, Mahila battalion etc. Overall 25 per cent housing satisfaction has been
authorized in CRPF.
3.11.2 The target of 25 per cent satisfaction level has been fixed, which comes to 88,168 against the
sanctioned strength of 3,24,093 Force, however 11.83 per cent satisfaction has been achieved till date. The
details in this regard are as follows:
Authorised - 88,168 Nos.
Constructed - 37,801 Nos.
Under Construction - 12,014 Nos.
Deficiencies - 38,353 Nos.
      1 2 3 4 5678 9

28
3.11.3  The Ministry informed the Committee in a reply to question that the housing satisfaction in the Force
will improve to 15.77 per cent after completion of 12,014 quarters which are under construction at various
locations.
3.11.4  In reply to a question regarding the measures proposed to be taken to ensure that a jawan gets the
opportunity to stay with his family when posted in a peace area, the Ministry stated that Family quarters are
constructed at Static locations of CRPF as per authorisation where the Jawans get an opportunity to keep
their families. The condition will further improve after the construction of 10,331 quarters under EPC mode
at various locations which is likely to be completed by the end of this year. Efforts are also being made for
additional allotment of housing for improving satisfaction level.
3.11.5  The Committee is dismayed to observe that the housing satisfaction level in the CRPF is just
11.83 per cent which is the lowest amongst the CAPFs. Even after completion of 12,014 quarters
that are under construction, the housing satisfaction level will rise only to 15.77 per cent which
unfortunately would continue to remain the lowest in all the CAPFs. The Committee feels that such
a poor level of housing satisfaction level could be one of the major reasons for high attrition rate in
the Force. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction of the 12,014 houses that
are under construction must be expedited and completed as per schedule without time and cost
overrun. The Committee further recommends that the Government should chalk out an ‘Action
Plan’ to achieve the objective of constructing the remaining 38,353 quarters within the stipulated
timeframe.
3.12 Medical facilities
3.12.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry in its background note on the subject that the Force
personnel suffer casualties, not only fighting the anti-social elements, but also while operating in hostile
terrain and inhospitable working conditions, which generate extreme stress and strain on their physical and
mental health.  Details of death in the last eight years as furnished by the Ministry are as under:-
Sl. No.  Cause of Death 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
1  Heart Attack 92 96 86 98 119 105 89 113
2  Cerebral Malaria 26 23 14 02 08 10 06 05
3  Cancer 37 53 36 50 34 33 46 45
4  Snake bite 01 00 00 01 00 01 02 01
5  Killed in action 143 29 43 30 52 09 42 52
3.12.2  In reply to a question on the reasons for high number of deaths in the Force due to heart attack, the
Ministry stated that the CRPF personnel are deployed in very tough terrain, remote localities and extreme
weather conditions. There are camps which are Heli maintained and commuting from those camps for
routine activities like leave, medical facilities, courses and other administrative works is a high risk affair. In
addition, CRPF personnel move from one ops theatre to another without getting static/peace postings most
of the time. Continuous deployment in stressful situations and hard areas with irregular eating/sleep cycles
and prolonged separation from families leading to domestic stress, are some of the causative factors responsible
for heart attacks.

29
3.12.3  The Committee takes note of the fact that the CRPF personnel are posted in areas where
there is a continuous threat to life and that may lead to stress among the personnel. However, high
numbers of cases of heart attacks indicate that the medical facilities provided to the personnel are
neither adequate nor up to the mark. The Committee feels that the reasons such as continuous
deployment in stressful situations and hard areas and irregular eating/sleeping cycles could be
brought under control through efficient personnel management. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that annual medical check ups of all the personnel be conducted regularly, especially
of those who are deployed in hard area postings and preventive measures like yoga/regular counseling
etc. may be proactively implemented to keep their health issues in check. Preventive health care
must be introduced as part of the health check up of personnel. The Committee further recommends
that the personnel going through the stress of extremely prolonged separation from their families
should be granted leave liberally to the extent they are eligible in a year.
3.12.4  During evidence before the Committee, the Ministry furnished the details of medical facilities provided
to the CRPF personnel as follows:-
100 bedded Composite Hospitals - 04
50 bedded hospitals - 17
20 bedded hospitals - 19
10 bedded hospitals - 42
3.12.5 Each Unit has Medical Imaging (MI) Rooms to provide medical facilities to the Force personnel,
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with Super Specialty Hospitals with cashless treatment facility, 39 Field
Surgical units to provide immediate medical assistance, trauma emergency care during operations. Motor
Cycle Ambulances, heli rescue/air ambulances for evacuation are some medical facilities provided to the
CRPF personnel.
3.12.6  The Committee takes note of the medical facilities available for the personnel. However, the
Committee feels that utilisation of these facilities and their effectiveness in time of need must be
tested for their effectiveness as these may not be sufficient for such a large Force. Medical facilities
should be a priority for the Force personnel given the remote and interior locations of their camps.
The Committee recommends that a team of qualified doctors and paramedics should be available at
all battalion headquarters and, wherever feasible, at all camps. Facilities for blood tests, X-rays,
routine medicines, malaria detection kit, snake bite kit, regular medical checkups and ambulances
must be made available at all CRPF camps.
3.12.7 During the meeting of the Committee on working conditions in CRPF, the Ministry apprised the
Committee that the best quality artificial limbs are provided in CRPF through their own contributory Risk
Fund because CGHS entitlements provided to the jawans are not up to the mark. The prosthetics that the
amputees are provided with, under the CGHS scheme, are not the best available. They are not provided with
the “Jaipur foot” under their CGHS entitlements.  The amount of money, that is allowed, is about 30 to 40
per cent of what is required for a really good prosthetic limb. CGHS rates are generally one notch below and
that is the rate applicable to everyone in the Government.  So, the CRPF pays the difference from their own
welfare risk funds.

30
3.12.8  When the Committee enquired why the CGHS entitlements, given to the jawans are not up to the
mark and why the jawans are given only 30-40 per cent of the money required for a good quality prosthetic
limb under the CGHS scheme, the Ministry replied that as per the guidelines of MoH&FW, the cost of
prosthetic (artificial limb) provided to Force personnel ranges from `52,000/- to `73,000/-. But the best
quality prosthetic limbs available in the market cost somewhere between ` 3 to 4 lakh or more. All the
amputees are being provided the best quality prosthetic limbs available in the market and the extra cost of
prosthetics is met out of the Risk fund of the Force. On the request of CRPF, MHA had approached
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for enhancing the existing limit of reimbursable amount of
High-end Prosthetics/artificial appliance cost for CAPF personnel.
3.12.9  The Committee is anguished to know that the CRPF personnel who sustained injuries in line
of their duties and lost their limbs are being provided only 30-40 per cent of the total cost of the best
quality prosthetic limbs available in the market under the CGHS Scheme. The Committee also
notes that the CRPF makes payment from their Risk Fund in order to make provisions for the best
quality prosthetic limbs for its personnel. The Force might use this fund for some other important
objectives like providing financial benefits to the families of the members of the Force who die
while in service. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the CGHS norms regarding artificial
limbs need to be revised with respect to all the CAPFs. High-end prosthetic limbs must be provided
to the amputees belonging to all the CAPFs and the full cost should be borne by the government.
3.13 Working hours
3.13.1 The Ministry informed the Committee in its background note on the subject that on an average,
CRPF personnel have to work for 12-14 hours a day without any compensation for working beyond the
standard limit of 8 hours. More than 80 per cent of CRPF personnel cannot avail holidays and Sundays.
3.13.2  CRPF personnel are deployed for prolonged durations in remote/inaccessible/inhospitable areas (LWE,
NE region and J&K- 90 per cent). Total peace area/posting/locations are about 10 per cent only. As a result,
men are transferred from one hard area to another.
3.13.3  In reply to a question of the Committee as to what measures are being taken by the Ministry to
resolve this issue of prolonged working hours of the CRPF personnel, the Ministry stated  that the nature of
duty is such that the standard working limit of 8 hours cannot be strictly implemented. The long duration
operations in troubled areas against insurgents/militants/terrorist/Anti National Elements (ANEs) sometimes
last for 04-05 days, but jawans are as far as possible adequately compensated through rotational rest and
recuperation.  The nature of duty while dealing with violent law and order situations many a times warrant
the presence of troops on the spot, irrespective of the duration of duty. However, to compensate for the
hardship of long duty hours, holidays and Sundays,  60 days Earned Leave and 15 days Casual Leave are
given to CRPF personnel every year. Further internal arrangements like one day off per week to ensure rest
and recuperation to personnel are made subject to operational constraints. Field commanders have been
directed to send personnel on leave as demanded by personnel liberally without affecting operational efficiency.
Risk and Hardship Allowance is also given to jawans as per the RH Matrix.
3.13.4  The Committee is dismayed to note that the CRPF personnel work for 12-14 hours a day and
more than 80 per cent of CRPF personnel cannot avail of holidays and Sundays.  The Committee
understands that the job of an armed force personnel is such that he/she has to be alert 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week and 365 days a year. However, working 12 to 14 hours daily with no scope for

31
holidays and Sundays would bring in the psychological and physical consequences on the personnel
and would affect their work. It is important to acknowledge that the working hours regulation
under Indian Labour Law stipulates a maximum of 48 hours per week. While of course, the armed
forces are exempted from this directive, it does indicate that their working hours are neither healthy
nor sustainable in the long term. The Committee, therefore, recommends that some mechanism
should be worked out by the Ministry to provide the much needed rest and optimal duty hours for
the personnel.
3.13.5  The Committee notes that there is a constant increase in demand of CRPF deployment by
the States.  The States are over dependent on CRPF for maintaining all kinds of major as well as
minor law and order situations. The Committee also notes that no CRPF battalion is presently
designated for the purpose of providing rest and recuperation. Moreover, almost 98 per cent of
training companies  remain deployed on various short term Law & Order assignments across the
country. This continuous deployment of training companies  affects the overall operational efficiency
of the Force, besides denying troops the much wanted training and rest & recuperation. The
Committee is concerned to observe this over-deployment of CRPF which is curtailing their training,
rest and recuperation. The Committee is of the considered view that one-sixth of a battalion, should
be, at any given time, mandatorily under training or rest or in peace stations. The Committee
recommends that the State Governments may work out their own systems and make arrangements
for appropriate training of their respective State Police Forces such that their over reliance on
CRPF for every law and order situation may be reduced.
3.14 Living conditions
3.14.1 During evidence before the Committee, the Ministry apprised the Committee that battalion camping
sites/companies locations provided by States are sometimes inadequate, unhygienic, insecure & poorly
maintained. Often State Governments fail to provide basic infrastructure. Funds may be given directly to
CRPF to build its own infrastructure.
3.14.2 Due to the absence of adequate/suitable accommodation the jawans are compelled to live in sub-
human conditions which affects their dignity, morale and motivation besides affecting the command and
control. The Committee raised a query regarding the measures taken by the Ministry to co-ordinate with the
State governments that are responsible to provide suitable accommodation to the CRPF personnel, to which
the Ministry replied that there is a prescribed minimum scale of infrastructure for establishing Battalion/
Company Head Quarter which forms the pre-requisite condition for any new deployment in a state. Before
actual deployment, the scale of infrastructure is requested to be ensured by the concerned State as per
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on deployment of CAPFs in states issued by the Ministry. However, in
case of any deficiency, the same is attended to by the local CRPF Supervisory formations and brought to the
notice of State Govt. The local field formations of CRPF including senior officers keep liaising with the
State Government to make up for the deficiency.
3.14.3 In reply to  a question raised by the Committee regarding measures taken by the Ministry to give
funds for infrastructure development directly to CRPF instead of the State Government, the Ministry stated
that MHA has recently started allotment of funds directly to CRPF for making up deficiencies in critical
infrastructure through “Assistance to Central Agencies for LWE Management” and also in J&K.
Reimbursement to the State for providing infrastructure to the CAPFs is made through SRE. MHA has

32
allotted funds to CRPF under SRE scheme for development of infrastructure in Sukma/Chhattisgarh and
J&K as per the following details:
(a) For FY- 2015-16
(i) 14 Crores for establishing 04 Bn HQs in Chhattisgarh.
(ii) 05 Crores for upgrading infrastructure of existing Bns in Chhattisgarh.
(b)   For FY -2017-18
(i) 40.46 Crores for improvement of infrastructure in J&K.
(ii) 15.36  Crores for improvement of Infrastructure in Sukma (CG)
3.14.4 Due to SRE allotment there has been a marked improvement in the infrastructure in the areas mentioned
above. However, there is requirement of more funds under SRE for further improvement of infrastructure
in CRPF camps in the above mentioned areas as well as in other theatres, i.e., North-East region, other LWE
affected states to build camps by CRPF in the states wherever deployed and to reduce dependence on
States.
3.14.5 At the Force level, facilities like good mess facilities, providing cots, generators, fans, coolers,
recreational facilities, safe drinking water are provided up to the company level for enhancing their living
conditions.
3.14.6 The Committee is anguished to note that the Force personnel are compelled to live in sub-
human conditions which affects their dignity, morale and motivation. There is an acute shortage of
decent living conditions for the CRPF personnel as the State Governments fail to provide basic
infrastructure to them. The Committee recommends that an outside agency should be hired to
conduct surveys every six months among the CRPF personnel deployed in the States regarding
their living conditions. If the State Governments are found to be lacking in providing adequate
infrastructure and other facilities in accordance with the provisions of the SOP framed by the MHA,
the Ministry must bring it to the notice of the respective State Government and first issue an
advisory and if the same is not acted upon within the stipulated time frame, the Ministry should
consider withdrawing the deployed troops for violation of SOP conditions.
3.15 Stress management
3.15.1 On the issue of stress among CRPF personnel, the Ministry, during evidence before the Committee,
stated that 86 per cent deployment in hard areas, prolonged deployment in remote/inaccessible/inhospitable
areas with tangible every day threats, extreme stress and strain on  physical and mental health due to
continuous hard area deployments, men are transferred from one non family area to another with little
opportunity for staying with family which leads to domestic stress, law & order challenges in hostile
environment.
3.15.2  The Ministry further apprised the Committee that the following measures are being taken for stress
management among the Force personnel:
z Ensuring that jawans avail leave regularly.
z De-briefing/interview after availing the leave.

33
z Buddy System.
z Counseling sessions.
z Yoga & meditation.
z Celebrating the festivals with full enthusiasm
z Playing games together
z Timely drawl of pay, perks and allowances.
z Financial assistance.
z Adequate Medical care and cashless treatment facility even to family members.
z Rewards, Medals, Commendations and appreciations for exemplary work and gallant action.
z Effective grievance redressal.
3.15.3 Regarding suicides and fratricides committed by the personnel, the Ministry furnished the following
data:
Sl. No.  Cause of Death 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 T otal
1. Fratricide 15 06 08 00 03 01 Nil 04 37
2. Suicide 31 45 44 40 39 35 29 38 301
Preventive measures
z Buddy pairs at organisational level i.e. Sections, Platoons and Company formations.
z Close personal contact by buddy, Section Commander, Platoon Commander and the Coy
Commander.
z Pick-up early warnings of underlying problems.
z Effective grievance redressal.
z Positive work culture.
z Promotion of sports & recreational activities.
z Yoga/Meditation.
3.15.4 The Committee notes the high levels of stress to which the CRPF personnel are subjected
because of continuous deployment in high intensity conflict areas, where they are compelled to live
in  pathetic living conditions. This is forcing personnel of the country’s largest CAPF to suffer from
mental and emotional stress. The Committee feels that the happiness and wellness quotient of the
Force personnel is under heavy stress and strain. The Committee recommends that some mechanism
like weekly video conferencing with their families etc. may be considered by the Ministry.
Furthermore, recreational facilities such as indoor and outdoor games, DTH connections, etc. may
also be provided at the camps.

34
3.15.5 In reply to a query regarding why the counseling sessions for stress management were being conducted
by the officers and not by medical professionals, the Ministry stated that since officers are closely associated
with jawans in the field areas, they know their jawans very well and understand their problems. In day to
day interactions, it is the duty of the officers to resolve the problems of their jawans.  Jawans also look up
to their senior officers for grievance redressal. It is a difficult proposition to ensure out-reach of medical
professionals and psychiatrists in camps in remote and disturbed areas of the country. Hence, certain GD
personnel are being trained by specialists and doctors to work as counselors in the field.  However, there
seems to be an urgent requirement for recruiting psychologists in the force for better counseling.
3.15.6  The Committee notes the point that counseling sessions of stressed CRPF personnel instead
of being conducted by professionals and psychiatrists are done by senior officers. The Committee
fails to understand how a jawan, who is stressed due to his living conditions in the Force, could
confide in his superior with his problems some of which might possibly be related to his superiors
themselves. The Committee feels that this could be a major factor contributing to the high attrition
rate in the Force. The Committee, therefore, recommends that professional counselors and
psychiatrists should be recruited in CRPF and regular counseling sessions of jawans must be conducted
by these professionals only.
3.16 Operational issues- Deployment
3.16.1 The Ministry informed the Committee in the background note on the subject that CRPF is the lead
force of the Government of India in fighting against the CPI Maoists in the 10 affected states. Besides LWE,
CRPF is also deployed in Jammu and Kashmir (61 Battalions) and North East (36 Battalions).
Area BNs %
L WE 90 38%
J&K 61 26%
NE 36 15%
RAF 15 07%
Rest of India 33 14%
TOTAL 235 100%
3.16.2 In reply to a question regarding the measures being taken by the Government to ensure adequate
security to the CRPF personnel in the hostile environment that they operate in, the Ministry informed the
Committee that to mitigate the high number of casualties, force personnel are provided with better protective
gears and modern equipment and gadgets, better training, use of technology, Bullet Proof (BP) Vests, BP and
Mine Protected Vehicles, adherence to SOP s, case studies and effective command and supervision of
higher formations.  Sanction of 150 mini UA Vs and 300 micro UAVs issued to CRPF for LWE areas. CRPF
is also trying to provide better trauma care facilities. For this purpose 51 Field Surgical Units with personnel
trained from AIIMs-Trauma Centre in Delhi have been deployed with the operational battalions to provide
trauma care to the personnel on the spot in operational areas.  They are also responsible for evacuation of
injured troops without loss of time to nearby hospitals/air evacuation bases. Apart from this, 05 Field
hospitals with adequate facilities of casualty management and sufficient medical and paramedical staff, have

35
been provided. After managing the injured troops, they are evacuated by Helicopters/Air Ambulances for
specialized treatment as and when needed.
3.16.3 In reply to a question regarding deputation and peace posting opportunities available to CRPF jawans,
the Ministry furnished the following information:
Total strength provided opportunity for deputation- 7,290
Percentage of manpower provided on deputation- 2.27 per cent
Total strength provided opportunity for posting to peace stations- 65,069
Percentage of strength provided posting to peace stations- 20.07 per cent
3.16.4 The Ministry notes the fact that only 2.27 per cent of the Force personnel are given the
opportunity to go on deputation. The Committee feels that the CRPF personnel, with vast and rich
experience and expertise in internal security operations, should be sent on deputation to the state
police, especially in dealing with grave issues of militancy and extremism. There is a need to
institutionalize such deputations at different levels, including higher formations. This will ensure
that the core competence of the CRPF is utilised in the best manner and best public interest.
Furthermore, the CRPF personnel have vast experience in different arenas of operation, but most
of them are not exposed to professional managerial training because nearly all in service trainings
are technical. Deputation will give them the opportunity to grow and develop in other areas as well
and acquire leadership and management skills.
3.17 Operational issues - Modernization
3.17.1  List of items proposed in Modernization Plan-III as furnished by the Ministry is detailed below:
Arms &Ammunitions Equipment
Sl. No.                      Name of Item
1 2
1. Advance multi grenade launcher with optical sight.
2. Advance machine gun (7.62mm).
3. Recoilless Assault Rifles (7.62x39mm).
4. Replacement of 9mm Pistol with any other Pistol.
5. Multi-purpose Reflex Sights for AK series rifles.
Clothing &Tentage
1. Rucksack (30 ltr. Capacity).
2. Light Weight Sleeping Bag.
3. RAF Jacket.

36
4. Foam Mattress.
5. Durable Combat Rucksack (40 Ltrs) CRPF Pattern.
Special Equipment
1. Day Night HHLRF.
2. Vehicle RFID System.
3. Hesco Re-deployable Security Fencing (a set of 400 feet of 7 feet height and
200 feet of 4 feet height).
4. Body worn Camera (Plain with on board recording).
5. Thermal Weapon Sight.
6. Gun Shot Detection System.
7. Hand Held Tactical Ballistic Blanket cum shield.
8. Hand Held Penetrating Radar (GPR) dual Sensor.
9. Body worn Camera with NLOS Video transmission (set of 05 cameras and
their transmitter-receiver systems and display unit).
10. Mini ROV heavy lift.
11. Thermal IR patch (set of 4 patches for each soldier).
12. Thermal IR beacon.
13. Perimeter Security with UGS and surveillance Camera.
14. Long Range Reconnaissance and Observation System (LORROS).
15. Through Wall Vision Radar System.
16. Gyrocopter.
Communication Equipment
1. Man Portable Automatic Direction Finder.
2. Digital RF Power Meter.
3. IC/S oftware based temperature controlled soldering/de-soldering
station.
1                              2

37
Information Technology Equipment
Sl. No.                      Name of Item
1                              2
1. Security solution for DC & DR consisting of IPS/NGFW/Gateway A V/SIEM/
Log collector in High Availability mode.
2. Laying of campus LAN (Passive components and labour) with WiFi access
points as on requirement basis.
3. NAS with a capacity of Min 6 Tb.
4. 24 gigabit port Layer 2 Switches with 10 G port as uplink port with PoE.
5. Providing/Up gradation of WAN bandwidth to each location. (appx 400 static
offices and 1800 ex coys).
6. Integrated Enterprise application for back office automation.
7. Integrated GIS System Satellite Imagery.
Machinery & Equipment
1. Combat Arm-Shield (Multi function).
2. Full Body Protector/Riot Control Suit Level-2 Stab Protection with Flex Knee
Pad and Armor-Pro Tactical Elbow Pad.
3. Light weight ballistic protective eyewear against grenade blast.
4. Super Cop Belt with basic pouches for accessories.
Medical Equipment
1. Phacoemulsification Unit.
2. Eye operating Microscope.
Training Equipment
1. Indoor Shooting Ranges.
2. Artificial Climbing Wall.
3. Target systems (Electronic Po-up Target, Electronic Turning Target System,
Electronic Moving target system).
4. Advance Small Arms Training Simulator.

38
Specialized Vehicles
Sl. No.                      Name of Item
1. Mine Protected Vehicle (MPVs)
2. Medium Category of Bullet Proof Vehicles (MBPVs)
3. Mine resistant, Armored, amphibious All Terrain Vehicle/ Multi Wheeled
Armored Carrier
3.17.2  The Committee feels that usage of drones is a very important component to help the CRPF
personnel during surveillance and reconnaissance in day and night operations in the dense forests
of naxal affected areas as well as in Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee, in this connection,
wishes to draw the attention of the Ministry towards the recommendation made in para 5.17.3 of its
214th report on ‘Working conditions in border guarding forces’ and reiterate the said recommendation
that an early decision should be taken by the Government on increasing the usage of drones for
surveillance and reconnaissance by the CRPF.
3.18 Technological Applications
3.18.1 SELO application of CRPF caters to PIS (Personnel information system), Finance, Operations,
Inventory, Payroll and Mail and Messaging Services for entire CRPF. The Finance module (which caters to
budget distribution, sanction orders and expenditure monitoring) has now been synced with the ambitious
PFMS project of the Government of India.
3.18.2 CRPF has recently updated itself on UMANG platform wherein an individual can see his PIS
(Personnel Information System), Pay & GPF (General Provident Fund) details. He can also reach out to this
Head of Office for any issue.
3.18.3  CRPF Grievance app has been launched. Individuals / Next of Kin (NOKs) can register their grievance
which get escalated to next higher level automatically after a prescribed period. An automatic SMS intimation
is received by the Grievance logger at every stage. This app has also improved the tracking/monitoring of
grievances at various levels.
3.18.4  An E- office application has been installed in Directorate General and communication sector of CRPF
for DAK, Note sheet, and mail/messaging. This has significantly reduced the use of paper and has improved
the tracking of files, e-Note sheets & messages. This has also improved the efficiency of CRPF by eliminating
the postal/ manual delays.
3.18.5  The Committee observes that the CRPF does not have a dedicated research and development
wing of its own. The Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) is expected to be the
R&D agency for the modernization of the police forces in the country. The BPR&D undertakes
R&D on major and common issues. There are many micro issues that are unique to the CRPF,
because of the peculiarities of the areas of deployment of the Force and its large size. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of establishing a dedicated
R&D unit for CRPF to deal with the peculiar issues of the Force, such as, IEDs, bullet proofing of
vehicles etc.
3.18.6  When enquired by the Committee whether a programme, similar to BSF s BISAG (Bhaskaracharya

39
Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Informatics) programme, where the DG, BSF is able to address all
the troops at once, be introduced in the CRPF too so that the DG , CRPF can also address a large part of the
CRPF, if not the whole Force, at once, the Ministry replied that the CRPF is exploring the possibility for
implementation of BISAG programme shortly in order to ensure address of all the troops by the DG, CRPF
at one time on the pattern of BSF.
3.18.7 The Committee feels that being deployed in difficult areas for prolonged duration, away from
their families, the CRPF could also use the BISAG programme. The Committee is hopeful that this
programme will prove to be effective in boosting the morale of the entire Force. The CRPF jawans
would feel motivated and inspired if they are directly addressed by their leaders on a regular basis.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the CRPF may explore the possibility to implement
the BISAG programme on the pattern of BSF within the next six months.
3.19 Infrastructural issues - Road connectivity
3.19.1 The Ministry informed the Committee during evidence before the Committee that 77 CRPF camps
are connected by non-metalled roads while 470 are connected by metalled roads. This issue is actively taken
up with the state governments and there is a need to accelerate road construction.
3.19.2 The Ministry also apprised the Committee that Chhattisgarh and South Odisha are lagging behind in
terms of road infrastructure, particularly metalled roads, whereas there is improvement in the States of
Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal.
3.19.3 The Committee notes that roads are of great importance to the CRPF. Connectivity of all
CRPF camps is crucial for the Force as it will speed up the movement of the Force personnel and
development works in the regions of deployment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry must take up the construction of these non-metalled roads on priority basis to ensure that
all CRPF camps are connected by metalled roads. The Ministry must work in tandem with the State
Governments and ensure to fast track the construction of metalled roads, especially in Chhattisgarh
and South Odisha.
3.20 Infrastructural issues - Mobile connectivity
3.20.1 The Committee was informed during evidence of the Ministry that out of 547 camps, 493 have
mobile connectivity and 54 do not. Camps that are not covered with mobile facilities/land lines have
been provided with DSPT lines/SAT Phones. Efforts are being made by Ministry to improve mobile
connectivity.
3.20.2 The Committee notes that the problem of poor mobile connectivity persists in areas of
deployment of CRPF personnel. The Committee recommends that the Government should make
efforts to strengthen mobile and internet connectivity, if not by the State owned service providers,
then by providing for the presence of private mobile service providers in such difficult areas so that
regular mobile and internet services can be availed by each and every jawan on their own mobile
phone devices.
3.21 Protection against Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) in Naxalite areas
3.21.1 The Ministry furnished the following details regarding the measures taken to tackle the danger of
IEDs in Naxalite areas:-

40
(a) 62 Bomb Detection and Disposal Squads (BDDs) have been trained and deployed in the naxalite
areas.  34 more squads have been put under training for induction. The manpower deployed in
these squads have been imparted counter-IED training at IIM (Institute of IED Management),
Pune for countering the threat of IEDs.
(b) 545 Dogs (trained in sniffing/tracking/infantry patrol) have been trained and deployed in Naxalite
areas to tackle the menace of IEDs. Another 115 dogs are under training and being inducted
shortly in the Naxalite areas.
(c) MHA has issued an SOP for precautions against IED attacks by Left Wing Extremists. Troops
deployed in Naxalites areas are also imparted regular sensitization training on IEDs and its
counter measures.
(d) Case Studies and lessons learnt from the major IED incidents/ recoveries are being shared with
all field formations for sensitization/briefing upto the last man.
(e) Men are also being sensitized about Counter-IED measures during pre-induction training before
their actual deployment in the naxal infested areas in the form of short capsule courses by
faculty/officers of the Institute of IED Management /experts/qualified trainers on the subject.
(f) Regular refresher training of the IED course qualified personnel is being conducted for updating
their skills and knowledge.
(g) Latest trends and modus operandi of the Maoists are studied/ analyzed and integrated with
training and ops tactics, techniques and procedures for effective counter measures against
IEDs.
(h) Counter IED equipment are being procured and made available to the men on the ground.
Latest counter IED equipment/technologies are being tested and explored for effectively
countering the threat of IEDs.
(i) IED advisors have been appointed in LWE affected states to sensitize field formations and
provide required technical support.
(j) Drones, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and sniffer dogs are also used for detecting IEDs.
3.21.2 The Committee observes that the threat of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) is one of the
greatest challenges in the LWE area. The Committee feels that security of the CRPF personnel
against IEDs should be a top priority for the Government. The Committee is aware that IEDs have
consumed lives of several personnel and there is a need to employ advanced techniques and technology
that allow remote detection and eradication of buried IEDs. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should make an effort towards development of technology to counter the threats posed by
IEDs in the LWE affected area. The Committee further recommends that adequate and regular
training should be provided to the CRPF personnel to enable them to face the challenges and threat
of IEDs. Moreover, the CRPF personnel must be trained in use of technology (including drones) to
increase surveillance around patrols.
3.22 Grievance Redressal
3.22.1 The Ministry furnished the details of grievances received during the period from  12/11/2017 to 7/8/
2018 as follows:-

41
APPENDIX-A
As on date  Category-wise Pending Grievances on GMS
(Grievance Management System)
Sl. No. Category Pending
Grievances
1       2 3
1. ACP/MACP arrears 11
2. Allotment of land for making Saheed Smarak of martyrs 1
3. Allotment of quarter 1
4. Allowances 21
5. Appeal/complaint against DE/PE 4
6. Appeal/complaint against major punishment 5
7. Appeal/complaint against minor punishment 8
8. Arrears 13
9. Audit observation, embezzlement and miss utilization of funds 6
10. C E A 3
11. CoBRA / Risk allowance 20
12. Compassionate appointment to the rank of HC(Min) and 3
CT(GD-Peon-Dftry-SK-tradesmen etc.)
13. Complaint against non sanctioning of leave 1
14. Complaint lodge by neighbourhood 1
15. Difference amount like Gratuity, Commutation, leave encashment etc. 5
16. Dowry 3
17. Excess recovery of income tax 1
18. Extension/retention of quarter 5
19. GPF 6
20. Grant of ACP/MACP 14
21. Harassment/Torture by Senior Officers 2
22. HRA/CILQ/FAA etc. 13
23. Increments/pay fixation 12
24. Issue of Smart card for CPC- CSD facilities 1

42
25. Land/property dispute matters and  quarrel with neighbours 1
26. Leave encashment of 10 days leave 15
27. Long term advances 2
28. LTC claim 10
29. Maintenance of family 13
30. Medical Claim 7
31. Mentally/Physically Torture and harassment, thrashing, manhandling etc. 12
32. Mess related complaints 1
33. Non authorization - sanction of fixed medical allowance 12
34. Non authorization of service pension, children- widowed 4
divorced- unmarried daughter etc.
35. Non authorization of service pension, dependent pension to parents 1
36. Non authorization of service pension, Disability- Invalidation pension 6
37. Non authorization of service pension, dual pension 2
38. Non authorization of service pension, EOFP- LPA under relevant rule 1
39. Non authorization of service pension, family pension 18
40. Non implementation of court orders 2
41. Non receipt of Discharge - Service certificate 1
42. Non receipt of fixed medical allowance 8
43. Non receipt of Pension Book and issue of duplicate pension book 2
44. Non receipt of pension under ACP-MACP scheme and its arrears 19
45. Non receipt of Pensioners Identity card 1
46. Non receipt of pensionery benefits like DCRG, Commutation 8
value of pension etc.
47. Non receipt of PPO-SSA letter 1
48. Non receipt of terminal dues like Leave encashment, 7
CGEGIS, Risk fund etc.
49. OPS and Administrative related complaints 4
50. Pay and Allowances 25
51. Plural marriage 6
1       2 3

43
52. Promotion related grievances 13
53. Providing of PMF- CGHS facility 2
54. Ration Money claim/arrear 3
55. Re-fixation of pay-pension in compliance of court orders 1
56. Refund of excess recovery from Pay and Allows. 7
57. Re-instatement into service by who awarded punishment 2
like dismissed from service, removal from service,
compulsory retirement etc
58. Re-instatement into service by who took discharge- 1
resignation from service at their own request
59. Revision of pension as per 6th CPC 5
60. Revision of pension as per 7th CPC 52
61. Rewards/Honorarium 3
62. Stoppage of fixed medical allowance and providing of 5
PMF-CGHS facility
63. TA/DA 10
64. TPT allowance and arrears 10
65. Transfer on domestic problems ground 35
66. Transfer on medical/compassionate ground 13
67. Miscellaneous complaints 179
GRAND T OTAL 690
Total Grievances received 4531
Total Grievances resolved 3841
Pending 690
3.22.2  The Ministry, in a meeting held on 26thJune, 2018, apprised the Committee that most of the grievances
that are received in CRPF are related to transfers and pension. The Committee, in a questionnaire sent to the
Ministry, sought to know the measures that are being taken to resolve the pension related grievances in the
Force. The Ministry submitted that efforts are being made to settle all the pension cases timely. To avoid
delay and for the speedy disposal of pension cases, an online „Bhavishya portal  has been developed. To
avoid delay in authorization of PPO, Pension proposals are processed online through the „Bhavishya  portal
four months before the date of superannuation of retirees. This portal has not only reduced the time taking
manual work and time lost in transit but has also resulted in speedy delivery and effective monitoring of
pension cases. It is being ensured that DDOs submit the pension cases to PAO on time through the Bhavishya
1       2 3

44
portal and this is monitored at the Force level. Regular meetings are also held with PAO for effective co-
ordination and timely disposal of pending cases.
3.22.3 On the issue of provisional pension orders not being issued timely to all the retirees, the Ministry, in
reply to a question, stated that Provisional pension cases are comparatively less in number. In most such
cases, Provisional pension orders are issued to all retirees timely. In some of the cases, delays occur in
issuance of provisional pension order due to pending disciplinary action/Court proceedings against the
retirees.
3.22.4 The Committee notes that a majority of grievances reported in CRPF are related to pension.
The Committee recommends that the issue of pensioners must be given due attention by the
authorities. These grievances must be redressed speedily and timely. The Ministry should reach a
situation where no personnel retires without a PPO (Pension Payment Order) and any case of
retirement without at least a provisional PPO must be reported to the Force HQ.  The case must be
resolved by the Force HQ within 30 days of receipt of the reference.  The Committee also recommends
that the CRPF must maintain a fair and transparent transfer policy by allowing transfer requests to
be made only through online mode.

CHAPTER-IV
NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD (NSG)
4.1 Historical Background
4.1.1 The National Security Guard (NSG) is a Special Task Force under the Ministry of Home Affairs. It
was established to counter the surge of militancy in the country. It is a highly trained force which deals with
exceptional situations. It was formed right after the assassination of former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi
and Operation Blue Star. A Bill for its creation was introduced in Parliament in August, 1986; after its
consideration and passage in both Houses of Parliament, the Bill received the assent of the President of India
on 22nd September, 1986 and the NSG was formally raised as an Armed Force of the Union of India.
4.1.2 The NSG was raised to combat terrorist activities and to guarantee that the states do not face any
internal disturbances. With two complementary elements in the form of the Special Action Group (SAG)
comprising army personnel and the Special Ranger Group (SRG) comprising personnel drawn from other
CAPFs/State Police Forces, the NSG has personnel with diverse operational experiences and requisite
wherewithal to  deal with all kinds of terrorist challenges.
4.2 Role and Responsibility
4.2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note on the working conditions in NSG, informed
the Committee that the primary tasks performed by NSG are:
(i) Engaging and neutralizing suspected/ specific terrorist threat in any given area, building, vital
installations, etc.
(ii) Handling hijack situations involving piracy in the air and on land. Simultaneously, thwart such
threat by continuous monitoring in air and on land by employment of Sky Marshals on selected
sensitive flights.
(iii) Handling kidnap situation where hostages are held by terrorists.
(iv) Providing intimate security to designated VIPs on the move.
4.2.3 Apart from the above-mentioned primary responsibilities, NSG is also mandated to perform the following
secondary tasks:
(i) Immediate Back up Security (IBUS) Operations.
(ii) Render Safe Procedure (RSP), Anti Sabotage (AS) Check & Post Blast Operation & Analysis
(PBOA).
(iii) Maintain National Bomb Data Centre and be a repository for all Bomb blast data by undertaking
post blast investigation operations.
(iv) Training of State Police Commandos in anti terrorist operations and conduct bomb disposal,
VIP security and VIP driving courses.
(v) Assist State Government for conduct of National and International events which are sensitive
in nature i.e. visit of foreign dignitaries, Independence Day and Republic Day Celebrations,
International events, etc.
45

46
(vi) Reconnaissance of Sensitive Places/Installation and Airports.
(vii) Providing Quick Reaction Team (QRT) at Vijay Chowk and IGI Airport.
(viii) Synergy and Capacity Building.
4.3 Organizational Structure
4.3.1 The Headquarters of NSG is situated at Mehram Nagar, Palam in New Delhi. Full Command and
Control is exercised by Director General, NSG under the supervision of the Ministry of Home Affairs. He is
assisted by four Inspectors General:
z IG (Headquarter)
z IG (Operations)
z IG (Training Center)
z IG (Provisioning)
4.3.2 The four Inspectors General, in turn, are assisted by Deputy Inspectors General. It has two Special
Action Groups (SAG), three Special Rangers Group (SRG) and five Regional Hubs (RH). A Training Center
and National Bomb Data Centre (NBDC) is also located in Manesar, Gurgaon. The organizational structure
of NSG is shown as below:
4.4 Personnel Issues
4.4.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note, informed the Committee that NSG is a force
dependent on deputation for all its personnel. As such, it has no cadre of its own and there is no direct
recruitment in the NSG . It draws manpower from Army, CAPFs and other police and security organisations.
The commandos are inducted through a three months high standard Commando Conversion C ourse
(CCC).


47
4.4.2 The service matters of NSG personnel including promotion, etc. are taken care of by the respective
parent organisations. Pay and allowances of personnel are paid with reference to pay and allowances
drawn in their respective parent Department as reflected in the Last Pay Certificate (LPC). In addition,
NSG Allowance at 40 per cent of basic pay is admissible to all NSG personnel, regardless of source of
recruitment.
4.4.3 During the meeting held on the subject, the issue of NSG being a 100 percent deputationist force was
highlighted by DG, NSG , who opined that very limited organizational memory was left in the Force as a
result of short tenures of deputation. He also informed the Committee that even the Army Officers themselves
felt that the tenures were quite short for them and should have deputation tenure comparable to the tenure of
the CAPF personnel, who come on deputation for five years. He was asked whether the personnel would
have requisite fitness to thrive for five years in NSG and if the Army Headquarters would allow such long
deputation tenure for its Officers, particularly in view of continued shortage of Officers in the Army. He
agreed that this was a challenge; but the actual scenario would only be seen when longer deputation tenure
is allowed.
4.4.4 The Ministry, in its background note, submitted that a problem that affects NSG is that of a ‘High
Turnover Rate’. The present deputation tenure in NSG with respect of Army and CAPFs personnel is about
three years and five years, respectively. Manpower from Army constitutes 53 per cent of NSG. The period
of deputation is computed from date of completion of Commando Conversion Course (CCC). The period of
deputation for officers from Army is two years and for Commandos from Army is three years. However,
after considering further assimilation training, leave and other commitments, an individual is effectively in
the force only for 50 per cent of his tenure in case of officers and 60 per cent in case of commandos. This
imposes a constant stress on manpower commitment and the training imparted to an individual remains
unutilized optimally for raising the professional efficiency of the organisation.
4.4.5 The Committee sought to know from the Ministry the measures being contemplated to address this
issue and whether there was any proposal to increase deputation tenures for Officers and Commandos to
deal with this issue. The Ministry, in its reply, submitted that in terms of policy guidelines issued by DoPT
vide OM dated 17/02/2016, the case is under study at HQ NSG to explore the feasibility for extending the
tenure in respect of CAPF personnel from five years to seven years.
4.4.6 The Committee notes the high turnover rate in the NSG and the lack of a permanent cadre of
its own. The Committee also notes the extremely short periods of deputation of just two years for
the Officers and three years for the Commandos, who come from the Army. The Committee observes
that the effective tenure for an individual officer/commando is even lower due to training, leave
and other commitments. The Committee also notes that the submission of DG , NSG that the Army
Officers feel that the deputation tenure should be longer of upto five years. However, the Committee
is not sure whether the personnel coming from Indian Army would be able to maintain the demanding
physical fitness required in NSG for longer tenures of  up to five years and whether the Army would
be willing to spare its Officers for such long duration. The Committee feels that this issue needs to
be thoroughly discussed among the relevant stakeholders before a decision is taken by the Ministry
of Home Affairs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should attach top priority

48
to this issue and form a working group comprising both past and present NSG personnel to examine
the pros and cons of a longer tenure of deputation and accordingly suggest changes in the NSG’s
deputation policy.
4.4.7 The Committee also takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that a
proposal to increase the tenure of deputation of personnel of CAPFs to NSG from the present
duration of five to seven years is under consideration of NSG. The Committee feels that this proposal
needs to be considered expeditiously. The Committee recommends that it may be decided on priority
by the Ministry.
4.4.8 The Committee also sought to know whether direct recruitment can be done for filling up certain
proportion of the posts in NSG to provide a permanent cadre for NSG. The Ministry replied that direct
recruitment of personnel in NSG is not considered appropriate as NSG , being a special force, needs young
and experienced personnel in all categories. However, after studying pros and cons, a concept note was sent
to MHA on 31st January 2018 for designating a certain portion of strength (10 per cent posts) as ‘Permanent
Cadre’.  The note has been received back with certain observations and the proposal is being reframed in
NSG .
4.4.9 The Committee desires that the issue may be studied thoroughly and suitable decision taken
in the matter.
4.5 Deployment for routine duties
4.5.1 The unique identity and stature attained by NSG has of late led to increasing requisition requests from
all corners. More concerning and most serious is the tendency of state/UT Police to requisition NSG for
every incident/threat without them even exercising their resources first. Frequent deployment for routine
and mundane duties imposes a very high attrition cost on the force and severely impacts its training and
operational preparedness.
4.5.2 The Committee takes a serious note of the high attrition cost on the NSG due to frequent
deployment for routine and mundane duties, which are adversely impacting the training and
operational preparedness of the NSG personnel. The Committee is of the view that NSG is a special
task force and should be deployed strictly in accordance with its mandate and for no other purpose.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make the process for requisition
of NSG teams more stringent and the decision to deploy NSG teams should be taken at the highest
level. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should issue advisory to
the State Governments to exhaust all other alternatives before submitting a requisition for
deployment of NSG teams.
4.6 Housing and Accommodation
4.6.1 The Ministry, in its background note, informed the Committee that against the overall sanctioned
strength of 10844 the authorized accommodation is 3614 against which only 2923 quarters are available in
NSG. There is a deficiency of 691 quarters and overall satisfaction level is 80.89 percent. The Ministry also
furnished the data pertaining to the housing satisfaction level in NSG, vis-a-vis the authorized accommodation,
as follows:

49
MARRIED ACCOMMODATION IN NSG
Sl. No. Category Rank Type Authorized Sanctioned strength (SS) &Authorised Satisfaction Satisfaction
of Qtr. housing Accommodation (AA) Level w.r.t. Level
ratio          T otal Presently Gross A A w. r.t. SS
SS A A Available Deficiency
Housing
1. GOs DG VII 90% 1 1 1 0 100% 100%
IG/DIG VI 90% 13 13 4 -9 31.75% 31.75%
GC/2IC V 90% 51 48 78 30 16 2.50% 152.94%
SC IV-spl 90% 125 116 26 -90 22.41% 20.80%
TC (Trg. IV 75% 31 24
centre) 199 -40 83.26% 55.74%
TC (other) 65% 326 215
Total 547 417 308 -109 73.86 56.30%
2. NGOs ACs III 60% 1760 1059 796 -263 75.17% 45.22%
3. ORs Rangers II 25% 8537 2138 1819 -319 85.08% 21.30%
Grand Total 10844 3614 2923 -691 80.89% 26.95%
4.6.2 During the meeting held to discuss the working conditions in NSG, it was pointed out that the authorized accommodation ratio fo r the Other
Ranks was extremely low and needs to be optimally increased. Subsequently, the Committee enquired about the measures that are b eing taken to
improve the accommodation satisfaction level among the personnel, especially among Other Ranks (ORs) and Non-Gazette Officers ( NGOs). The
Ministry submitted that a proposal is under consideration at Ministry of Home Affairs for enhancing the authorization of family accommodation for NSG
personnel as under:

50
Sl. No. Rank Percentage of Proposed percentage of
accommodation accommodation for
authorized by MHA authorization
1. Officers of the Rank of Sq. 90 % 100%
Commander and above
2. (a) Team Commander - 75% 80%
Training  Centre
(b) Team Commander – 65% 80%
Other Units
3. Asstt. Commanders 60% 80%
4. Rangers / Tradesmen 25% 80%
4.6.3 The Committee fails to understand the reason for the extremely low authorized accommodation
level of just 25 per cent for the personnel in Other Ranks. The Committee takes note of the fact
that the Ministry is considering the proposal to enhance the authorization accommodation level.
However, the Committee feels that by merely increasing the authorized accommodation level, the
satisfaction level will not increase, especially when there is no plan under consideration for the
construction of houses. The Committee recommends that the authorization levels must urgently be
increased as per the proposal under consideration and an action plan may be prepared for achieving
the housing satisfaction as per the new authorized accommodation levels.
4.7 Training Issues
4.7.1 The Committee sought to know from the Ministry about the measures that can be taken to improve
the training system in NSG. The Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that the following measures can be
taken to strengthen the training apparatus in NSG:
(i) Enhanced Joint Training and courses with Special Forces of friendly foreign countries like US,
UK, Israel and France etc. to build up synergy, cooperation and interoperability.
(ii) Specialist training of NSG qualified Divers with Naval MARCOS.
(iii) Enhanced availability of C-130 & C-17 military transport aircraft; with a 24 hours layover, for
conduct of outstation Counter Terrorism (CT) exercises by NSG Task Force. At present the
same is being conducted by use of commercial airlines which enables carriage of specialist
equipment.
(iv) Smooth Grant of Clearance and nomination of NSG delegations to visit a foreign country for
Training/Exercise/Courses.
(v) Construction of Special Operations Training Centre (SOTC), an integrated state of the art
training facility, in Manesar.
(vi) Creation of a Sniper Range for training.
4.7.2 The Committee notes the training apparatus in NSG and feels that there are several
improvements that can be brought to enhance the operational capabilities of the Force. The

51
Committee is of the view that NSG needs to adopt the best global practices by conducting regular
joint-training and mock-drills with its counterparts from countries that have superior capabilities
and vast experience in dealing with counter-terrorist operations. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, in consultation with the Ministry of External
Affairs, should evolve a mechanism for conducting joint training programmes and mock drills
with the Special Forces of friendly foreign countries to enhance the capabilities of NSG. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry should identify certain foreign training programmes
that can help improve the capabilities of NSG personnel and regularly nominate them for such
programmes.
4.7.3 The Committee also takes note of the other measures such as specialised trainings, availability
of military transport aircraft, and construction of Special Operations Training Centre and a Sniper
Range that are essential for strengthening the training system and infrastructure in NSG . The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should urgently undertake all these measures in a time-
bound manner to enhance the operational efficiency of NSG.  The training and capacity building of
the NSG must be dynamically augmented to remain in tune with the terror threats and other
subversive activities that imperil the country’s security.
4.8 Dedicated Air Wing
4.8.1 The Ministry, in its background note, submitted that the lack of an aviation wing in NSG is one of the
most glaring shortcomings for a force mandated as the federal contingency force of the nation. The lack of
dedicated air assets severely impact training of commandos and this shortcoming has already affected swift
mobilization of force on earlier occasions. In the absence of dedicated air wing assets, the response time and
training are adversely affected.
4.8.2 The background note of the Ministry also stated that NSG had procured two MI-17 Helicopters in
1988-89. The same were handed over to Aviation Research Centre (ARC) for maintenance and to provide air
support to NSG. One MI-17 Helicopter met with an accident on 22nd February, 2002 during an operational
sortie from Dum Duma Air Field and got damaged extensively. The condemnation proceeding for the said
helicopter is under process.
4.8.3 The second helicopter was transferred to BSF Air Wing vide MHA order which is unserviceable due
to want to spare parts. Apropos, it is recommended that the two unserviceable MI-17 helicopters on its
inventory be replaced urgently with two MI-17 V5 helicopters. These helicopters can be maintained and
operated by BSF Air Wing, thereby assuring dedicated effort for NSG needs.
4.8.4 The Committee is anguished to note that the premier counter-terrorist and contingency force
of India does not have a dedicated air wing of its own and is dependent on aviation assets of other
Forces for its operational and training requirements. The Committee agrees that this deficiency
severely affects the response time of NSG , which is supposed to provide swift counter-strike response
in contingency situations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should make urgent and sincere efforts to commission a dedicated Air Wing of NSG and provide
requisite types and number of air assets to strengthen the aviation capability of the Force. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry, as an interim measure, may provide dedicated
aircraft and technical support to NSG through an arrangement with the BSF Air Wing or the Air
Force.

52
4.8.5 During the meeting held on the subject, DG, NSG informed the Committee that NSG had the power
to requisition any aircraft. He was then asked whether he had ever commandeered an aircraft in real-time
circumstances. He replied that NSG usually intimates the requisition of aircraft for training purposes in
advance and has not had the chance to commandeer it in real time. He then informed the Committee that the
power to requisition aircraft was further enhanced by the Ministry of Home Affairs and now NSG signs an
annual contract to commandeer an aircraft to take them for real-life training for counter-hijack operations.
The payment for such contract is made by MHA. He was then asked whether the order of granting the
power of commandeering aircraft is renewed every year. To this he replied in affirmative and further
informed that this commandeering of aircraft is sometimes limited to only certain class of aircraft and NSG
was making efforts to get higher capacity aircraft for transport of entire teams.
4.8.6 The Committee observes that NSG has yet not tested its power to commandeer any aircraft
in real-time circumstances and feels that, unless this power is used, the Force would remain
unaware of the response time and logistical challenges that it may face in operational situations.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the NSG should be advised to plan a real-time scenario
for testing its power to commandeer any aircraft in real-time circumstances for the sake of
enhancing operational preparedness and pre-empt any surprises that it may face during actual
operations.
4.8.7 The Committee also takes note of the submission of DG , NSG that power to commandeer an
aircraft is sometimes limited to only certain classes of aircraft. The Committee feels that NSG must
be empowered to requisition any type and capacity of aircraft for both operational and training
purposes under any circumstances. The Committee is of the view that NSG is a force that is sparingly
used only in situations of extreme threat and heavily relies on regular training to achieve operational
preparedness. The Committee, therefore, recommends that no restrictions should be placed on the
power of NSG to requisition aircraft.
4.9 Welfare Measures
4.9.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee about
the existing welfare measures for the NSG personnel.
(i) Financial Assistance to Next of Kin
Following financial benefits are given to next of kin of deceased and seriously injured
NSG personnel:-
i) On death during operation against terrorists - ` 10 lakh.
ii) 100% disabled in action against terrorist - ` 5 lakh.
iii) On serious injury during action against terrorists - ` 2 lakh.
iv) On death on duty/illness - ` 5 lakh.
(ii) Introduction of Educational Scholarships for ACs & Rangers
Under this scheme, scholarships are granted out of NSG Central Welfare Fund as per the
following details:-

53
10th & 12th Board Examinations
Passed Board Exam Percentage of marks obtained Scholarship Amount
10th 85% to 90% ` 10,000/-
More than 90% `15,000/-
12th 85% to 90% ` 15,000/-
More than 90% ` 20,000/-
NSG Martyrs Memorial Scholarship Scheme for Girl Child
This  Scholarship Scheme is only for best/top three girls child who have secured more than 80% marks in
12th Board exam:-
Passed Board Exam Best three girl child Scholarship Amount
12th First Position 24,000/-
Second Position 18,000/-
Third Position 12,000/-
Special scholarship for girl child up to the standard of 12th class for ACs & Rangers only once during the
tenure in NSG for particular event
Sl. No. Name of Events One time Scholarship amount
Scholarship For Participation In Sports Activities
1. International Level 1,00,000/-
2. National Level 50,000/-
3. State Level 25,000/-
For Participation In Dance, Music, Quiz, Beauty Contest, Science/Maths Olympiad
1. International Level 1,00,000/-
2. National Level 50,000/-
3. State Level 25,000/-
4. Qualifying Entrance test of 25,000/-
IIT/AIIMS/AFMC/UPSC (SCRA)
(iii) Scheme of Cycle to families of Rangers and Tradesmen:
In order to boost the morale of the lowest functionary in NSG , the scheme of providing one
cycle to the families of Rangers and Tradesmen having children in the age group of 10 to 15
years as a means of sports and recreation has been introduced.
(iv) Scheme for Perambulator for newly born girl child of Rangers:
Under this scheme reimbursement of cost of Perambulator with maximum ceiling of ` 2,500/-

54
is given to the Rangers /Tradesmen serving in NSG and having girl child up to the age of two
years.
(v) Prerna Rehabilitation Centre:
A Facilitation Centre for Children with special needs named ‘PRERNA ’ was established at
NSG Campus, Manesar on16th Oct, 2014 with the aim of providing various therapies to the
children with Special Needs so as to enhance their mental & physical skills. Various counseling
sessions are also being conducted from time to time to acquaint the parents with an understanding
for special needs of their children and improving their skills. The Centre has been equipped
with modern equipment and specialists including occupational, speech and physiotherapists
have been engaged on honorarium basis. At present 42 children including children from
neighboring villages of Manesar are undergoing treatments.
4.9.2 The Committee takes note of the various welfare measures that are being taken for the NSG
personnel. The Committee is of the view that financial assistance being given to the Next of Kin of
deceased and seriously injured NSG personnel is quite low and insufficient. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should review the amounts of the financial assistance
and enhance it adequately. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should also identify
more welfare measures that can be taken, as per the need of the personnel and their families, and
implement those measures earnestly.

OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
PROMOTIONAL A VENUES
The Committee takes note of the severe stagnation at several ranks of Group B & C such as
Constable/Fire, Head Constable/Fire, SI/Steno, ASI/Clerk, Constable/GD and feels that requisite
measures need to be taken to address the issue of stagnation at these ranks. The Committee
observes that a constable gets promoted to the post of Head-Constable (GD) in 22 years in contrast
to the eligibility period of 5 years. Similarly, a Head-Constable (GD) gets promoted to the post of
ASI (Exe) in 16 years in contrast to the eligibility period of 5 years. The Committee is anguished to
note such severe stagnation in the lower ranks of CISF. The Committee feels that lack of promotional
avenues is a huge demoralising factor for the CISF personnel. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the cadre review of Group B & C ranks must be expedited and it must be ensured
that the CISF personnel, especially at the lower ranks, are able to get their first promotion within
ten years of recruitment. (Para 2.4.4)
DEPLOYMENT AND TRANSFER POLICY
The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry to resolve the issue of transfers and
postings in the CISF. As the current policy of recruitment in CISF is based on proportionate
representation of each state, there is more recruitment from the densely populated States of the
northern region. However, the Committee notes that the number of CISF units located in the
northern region is limited and thus this policy does not allow the personnel to have sufficient
opportunities to live with their families which results in a large number of requests for transfers
and posting to the northern region. The Committee feels that this policy of recruitment needs some
modification by incorporating a need-based component in the recruitment policy. The Committee,
in this connection, recommends that the Ministry may review CISF s recruitment policy, which is at
present primarily based on population of the states, to include demand-specific recruitment component.
The Committee is of the view that this will, to some extent, resolve the problem of geographical
imbalance and allow the personnel to be posted in their home states. (Para 2.5.4)
HOUSING AND ACCOMMODATION
The Committee observes that the housing satisfaction level in CISF at 12.5 per cent is among
the lowest in the CAPFs. The Committee takes note of the fact that there is a deficiency of 7,811
quarters and only 2,663 quarters are under construction for CISF accommodation. The Committee
feels that even after completion of construction of these 2663 quarters, the Ministry would not be
able to provide a good housing satisfaction level for CISF. The Committee strongly recommends
that the construction of these 2,663 quarters should be expedited and completed within the stipulated
time. The Committee also recommends that the proposal of 1,719 flats that are under consideration
in CISF must be considered at the earliest. The Committee further recommends that the Government
should chalk out an ‘Action Plan’ to achieve the objective of constructing the remaining 5,148
quarters within the stipulated timeframe. (Para 2.6.7)
MEDICAL FACILITIES
The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry regarding the reasons for vacancies
in the medical staff of CISF. The fact that CISF personnel are posted in far flung areas/remote
55

56
areas of the country is all the more reason for ensuring sufficient availability of medical staff at all
the CISF units. The Committee is of the considered view that better pay and allowances/perks and
higher hardship allowance would incentivize the doctors to serve in the CISF. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry must take immediate measures to enhance the pay and
allowances for the doctors to be appointed as regular medical officers to fill up these vacancies at
the earliest. (Para 2.7.3)
MODERNIZATION OF THE FORCE
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry for the modernization of
CISF.  However, since the CISF is responsible for the security of country s airports and major
installations, including those in nuclear and aero space domain, the Committee recommends
that the Ministry must ensure that the Force has modern state-of-the-art arms, ammunition,
night vision devices, patrolling equipment, drones, vehicles and other infrastructural
upgrades. (Para 2.8.4)
The Committee is of the considered view that the Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS)
is crucial for airport security. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the 59 airports guarded
by the CISF in the country must have operational BDDS teams of CISF and the Ministry must
ensure that these teams are provided all the essential bomb diffusing equipment such as explosive
vapour detectors and remote-operated vehicles. (Para 2.8.6)
The Committee appreciates that the BISAG is a very useful and cost effective programme
used by BSF for the purpose of monitoring and redressing grievances at the highest level. The
Committee takes note of the submission of DG , CISF that BISAG can also be used by CISF. The
Committee feels that this programme can be used by CISF for two-way communication with the
various units and personnel deployed in several important installations across the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that further modalities may be worked out and necessary
infrastructure may be arranged in consultation with various stakeholders for adoption of BISAG
programme by CISF. (Para 2.8.8)
The Comm ittee feels that the dogs, along with the proper and regular training for their
specific roles, need to be groomed regularly to prevent them from contracting seasonal skin
diseases such as external parasites, ticks and lice. In addition to this, the dog handlers also
require special training in order to get acquainted with the dogs and their training and rearing
needs. (Para 2.8.13)
The Committee observes that the canines deployed along with the Force play a very crucial
role. The dog squad, therefore, forms an essential part of the Force. The Committee is of the
considered view that proper rearing of the dog squads and adequate training of the handlers appointed
in the Force is very important for effective and efficient use of the canine. The Committee, in this
connection, recommends that sufficient number of dog squads including the Mudhol Hound breed
of Karnataka and the Belgian Malinois breed may be considered by the CISF to meet its requirement
of providing security cover to various buildings and vital installations. (Para 2.8.14)
Attrition
The Committee takes note of the fact that the jawans leaving the Force for better opportunities

57
in the private sector is a major reason for attrition in the CISF. The Committee feels that once a
jawan gets training in the Force, he/she becomes an asset to the Force, therefore, they should be
given enough incentives so that they are motivated to remain in the Force. The Committee
understands that other factors like high level of stress and strain could also be causes of attrition.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that measures should be taken to improve the working
conditions significantly to motivate the personnel to stay, even when they are offered better
opportunities elsewhere. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should conduct
exit interviews or survey among the personnel opting for voluntary retirement and resignation to
assess the factors leading to attrition and undertake appropriate measures to address the concerns
of the personnel so that attrition in the Force can be curbed. (Para 2.9.4)
GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry to facilitate the CISF personnel to
raise their grievances through various media of grievance redressal available for them.  The
Committee desires that the Grievance Redressal Mechanism of CISF must be efficient in resolving
grievances of the personnel. It must be robust and should reflect a system of speedy and fair
adjudication of grievances without delay. (Para 2.10.6)
RECRUITMENT AND VACANCIES
The Committee is perplexed to find that 17 out of 19 posts, i.e., approximately 90 per cent of
the posts at DIG level are lying vacant in CRPF. This is a serious lacuna in the Force. A robust and
experienced higher level leadership is crucial for efficient working of an organization. The Committee
fails to understand the rationale behind reserving 37 posts for IPS officers under deputation quota
in CRPF when IPS officers are not opting for these posts. These posts are lying vacant or have to be
diverted temporarily to the Cadre Officers of CRPF owing to the paucity of IPS officers opting for
them. This leads to not only huge percentage of vacancies but also lowering the morale of cadre
officers of CRPF. The Committee therefore recommends that appropriate measures be taken by
the Ministry to fill these vacant DIG posts in CRPF. The Committee also feels that not more than 25
per cent po sts should be reserved for deputation Officers in the Force.  If IPS officers are not
available, the posts should be filled through temporary promotions of eligible o fficers of the
Force. (Para 3.4.5)
The Committee is dismayed to observe that out of total 5 posts of Deputy Financial Advisor,
4 posts are lying vacant. The Committee fails to understand how such a large Force could function
efficiently with vacancies in such an important post. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
immediate measures be taken by the Ministry to fill these 4 vacancies of Deputy Financial Advisor
in CRPF . (Para 3.4.6)
The Committee is concerned about the huge number of vacant posts at around 54,953 in
Constable (GD) cadre. The Committee feels that this issue could be resolved if vacancies for a
recruitment process are calculated well in advance, taking into account the anticipated vacancies
for the next two years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may
conduct recruitments taking into account the anticipated vacancies for the next two years instead
of the current procedure of reporting the vacancies that exist before the notification of the
recruitment process, so that such a large number of posts do not lie vacant at any given point of
time. (Para 3.4.9)

58
The Committee further observes that the SSC conducts recruitment exams for a large number
of posts throughout the year for various Government services. The recruitment process of CRPF
takes approximately two years to be completed. The Committee believes that this time period can
be reduced to around one year by streamlining the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry may request the recruitment agencies to undertake necessary
measures to reduce the timeframe within which various tiers of recruitment examinations are
conducted. (Para 3.4.10)
RAISING BATTALION 241 FOR FIGHTING NAXAL MENACE
The Committee appreciates the effort of the Ministry to recruit locals from the Naxalite
affected areas which would prove beneficial for the Force to connect with the locals. The Committee
also appreciates the effort of the Ministry to include women in the formation of the Bastariya
battalion. The Committee feels that by this effort of the Government the problems related to
local language, cultural gap and knowledge of terrain would be minimised. The Committee
recommends that special focus be given on every aspect of training of these recruits, both male
and female, such that their induction into the CRPF is smooth. The Committee further recommends
that the Ministry should make provisions for ensuring safety of the families of the Bastariya battalion
personnel. (Para 3.5.3)
PROMOTIONAL AVENUES
The Committee notes that uniformed forces are highly structured organizations with well
defined roles and responsibilities. Therefore, it may not be possible to remove stagnation only by
creating additional posts. However, the Committee feels that not being given adequate career
progression opportunities acts as a highly de-motivating factor for the personnel. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government may consider the proposal to grant four financial up-
gradations under the Modified Assured Career Progression (MACP) scheme at intervals of 8, 16, 24
and 32 years of service instead of the existing scheme that provides only three financial up-gradations
at intervals of 10, 20 and 30 years of service at par with other civilian employees. The Committee is
of the considered view that the CRPF personnel, who are facing excessive stagnation in their career
growth, must be provided certain special incentives to keep their morale high. (Para 3.6.3)
MAHILA BATTALION
The Committee notes that the strength of women in CRPF is only 7,617. The Committee
referred to written reply by the Minister of State for Home Affairs, Shri Kiren Rijiju to question No.
5863 in the Lok Sabha on 3rd April, 2018 that the Government, vide order dated 05.01.2016 decided
to reserve 33 per cent posts at Constable level for being filled up by women in CRPF and CISF. The
Committee therefore recommends that the Government should take initiatives to induct more
women in the Force. The Committee further recommends that suitable measures must be taken to
ensure their privacy, hygiene and sanitation conditions. (Para 3.7.3)
TRAINING
The Committee is of the considered view that training is an indispensable part of a police
force to maintain the efficiency. Adequate and proper training is a must for continuous development
of the personnel, career wise as well as for boosting their morale. Any sort of compromise on the

59
training front would prove to be detrimental for the Force in the long run. The Force personnel
cannot be deployed for law and order assignments while they are on training as this would
hamper their learning as a Force personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry takes the requisite measures to make sure that the companies  that are under training
must not be deployed for any other duties and must be engaged full-time in training only during
that period. (Para 3.8.5)
BASIC AMENITIES - FOOD AND DRINKING WATER
The Committee feels that it is essential that the jawans are provided with good quality food.
But the Committee is disappointed to note that the CRPF personnel posted in Chhattisgarh, who
are serving under extremely hard conditions with enhanced threat to life, have to go through
difficulties in even getting their daily meal requirements fulfilled. They have to depend on local
haats and contractors for supply of raw material for their food. The Committee recommends that a
full proof mechanism should be developed for ensuring regular supply of nutritious food, including
dishes/raw materials of different cuisines to all CRPF camps particularly those which have no access
or difficult access to local market like Bastar in Chhattisgarh.  The Ministry may explore the
feasibility of using refrigerator vans to supply food articles periodically and the less accessible
places of deployment like Bastar. (Para 3.9.3)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should form a Food
Inspection Committee comprising dieticians, experienced food inspectors, and officials of the Ministry,
tasked with the duty of performing surprise checks of food quality and hygiene, especially at the
remote and inaccessible locations. (Para 3.9.4)
ATTRITION
The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Ministry to curb the attrition rate in
the CRPF. However, the Committee notes that attrition rate is high in all the CAPFs owing to the
implementation of Seventh Central Pay Commission due to which there were considerably large
number of voluntary retirement cases in the year 2017. However, the Committee also observes that
there is no visible decrease in the number of resignations since the year 2014 as well. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should conduct a survey among the personnel to assess
the factors leading to such large number of VRS and resignations and undertake appropriate measures
to address the concerns of the personnel so that this trend can be curbed. (Para 3.10.4)
HOUSING AND ACCOMMODATION
The Committee is dismayed to observe that the housing satisfaction level in the CRPF is just
11.83 per cent which is the lowest amongst the CAPFs. Even after completion of 12,014 quarters
that are under construction, the housing satisfaction level will rise only to 15.77 per cent which
unfortunately would continue to remain the lowest in all the CAPFs. The Committee feels that such
a poor level of housing satisfaction level could be one of the major reasons for high attrition rate in
the Force. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction of the 12,014 houses that
are under construction must be expedited and completed as per schedule without time and cost
overrun. The Committee further recommends that the Government should chalk out an ‘Action
Plan’ to achieve the objective of constructing the remaining 38,353 quarters within the stipulated
timeframe. (Para 3.11.5)

60
MEDICAL FACILITIES
The Committee takes note of the fact that the CRPF personnel are posted in areas where
there is a continuous threat to life and that may lead to stress among the personnel. However, high
numbers of cases of heart attacks indicate that the medical facilities provided to the personnel are
neither adequate nor up to the mark. The Committee feels that the reasons such as continuous
deployment in stressful situations and hard areas and irregular eating/sleeping cycles could be
brought under control through efficient personnel management. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that annual medical check ups of all the personnel be conducted regularly, especially
of those who are deployed in hard area postings and preventive measures like yoga/regular counseling
etc. may be proactively implemented to keep their health issues in check. Preventive health care
must be introduced as part of the health check up of personnel. The Committee further recommends
that the personnel going through the stress of extremely prolonged separation from their families
should be granted leave liberally to the extent they are eligible in a year. (Para 3.12.3)
The Committee takes note of the medical facilities available for the personnel. However, the
Committee feels that utilisation of these facilities and their effectiveness in time of need must be
tested for their effectiveness as these may not be sufficient for such a large Force. Medical facilities
should be a priority for the Force personnel given the remote and interior locations of their camps.
The Committee recommends that a team of qualified doctors and paramedics should be available at
all battalion headquarters and, wherever feasible, at all camps. Facilities for blood tests, X-rays,
routine medicines, malaria detection kit, snake bite kit, regular medical checkups and ambulances
must be made available at all CRPF camps. (Para 3.12.6)
The Committee is anguished to know that the CRPF personnel who sustained injuries in line
of their duties and lost their limbs are being provided only 30-40 per cent of the total cost of the best
quality prosthetic limbs available in the market under the CGHS Scheme. The Committee also
notes that the CRPF makes payment from their Risk Fund in order to make provisions for the
best quality prosthetic limbs for its personnel. The Force might use this fund for some other
important objectives like providing financial benefits to the families of the members of the Force
who die while in service. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the CGHS norms regarding
artificial limbs need to be revised with respect to all the CAPFs. High-end prosthetic limbs must
be provided to the amputees belonging to all the CAPFs and the full cost should be borne by the
Government. (Para 3.12.9)
WORKING HOURS
The Committee is dismayed to note that the CRPF personnel work for 12-14 hours a day and
more than 80 per cent of CRPF personnel cannot avail of holidays and Sundays.  The Committee
understands that the job of an armed force personnel is such that he/she has to be alert 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week and 365 days a year. However, working 12 to 14 hours daily with no scope for
holidays and Sundays would bring in the psychological and physical consequences on the personnel
and would affect their work. It is important to acknowledge that the working hours regulation
under Indian Labour Law stipulates a maximum of 48 hours per week. While of course, the armed
forces are exempted from this directive, it does indicate that their working hours are neither healthy
nor sustainable in the long term. The Committee, therefore, recommends that some mechanism

61
should be worked out by the Ministry to provide the much needed rest and optimal duty hours for
the personnel. (Para 3.13.4)
The Committee notes that there is a constant increase in demand of CRPF deployment by the
States.  The States are over dependent on CRPF for maintaining all kinds of major as well as minor
law and order situations. The Committee also notes that no CRPF battalion is presently designated
for the purpose of providing rest and recuperation. Moreover, almost 98 per cent of training companies
remain deployed on various short term Law & Order assignments across the country. This continuous
deployment of training companies  affects the overall operational efficiency of the Force, besides
denying troops the much wanted training and rest & recuperation. The Committee is concerned to
observe this over-deployment of CRPF which is curtailing their training, rest and recuperation. The
Committee is of the considered view that one-sixth of a battalion, should be, at any given time,
mandatorily under training or rest or in peace stations. The Committee recommends that the State
Governments may work out their own systems and make arrangements for appropriate training of
their respective State Police Forces such that their over reliance on CRPF for every law and order
situation may be reduced. (Para 3.13.5)
LIVING CONDITIONS
The Committee is anguished to note that the Force personnel are compelled to live in sub-
human conditions which affects their dignity, morale and motivation. There is an acute shortage of
decent living conditions for the CRPF personnel as the State Governments fail to provide basic
infrastructure to them. The Committee recommends that an outside agency should be hired to
conduct surveys every six months among the CRPF personnel deployed in the States regarding
their living conditions. If the State Governments are found to be lacking in providing adequate
infrastructure and other facilities in accordance with the provisions of the SOP framed by the MHA,
the Ministry must bring it to the notice of the respective State Government and first issue an
advisory and if the same is not acted upon within the stipulated time frame, the Ministry should
consider withdrawing the deployed troops for violation of SOP conditions. (Para 3.14.6)
STRESS MANAGEMENT
The Committee notes the high levels of stress to which the CRPF personnel are subjected
because of continuous deployment in high intensity conflict areas, where they are compelled to live
in  pathetic living conditions. This is forcing personnel of the country’s largest CAPF to suffer from
mental and emotional stress. The Committee feels that the happiness and wellness quotient of the
Force personnel is under heavy stress and strain. The Committee recommends that some mechanism
like weekly video conferencing with their families etc. may be considered by the Ministry.
Furthermore, recreational facilities such as indoor and outdoor games, DTH connections, etc. may
also be provided at the camps. (Para 3.15.4)
The Committee notes the point that counseling sessions of stressed CRPF personnel instead
of being conducted by professionals and psychiatrists are done by senior officers. The Committee
fails to understand how a jawan, who is stressed due to his living conditions in the Force, could
confide in his superior with his problems some of which might possibly be related to his superiors
themselves. The Committee feels that this could be a major factor contributing to the high attrition
rate in the Force. The Committee, therefore, recommends that professional counselors and

62
psychiatrists should be recruited in CRPF and regular counseling sessions of jawans must be conducted
by these professionals only. (Para 3.15.6)
OPERATIONAL ISSUES - DEPLOYMENT
The Ministry notes the fact that only 2.27 per cent of the Force personnel are given the
opportunity to go on deputation. The Committee feels that the CRPF personnel, with vast and rich
experience and expertise in internal security operations, should be sent on deputation to the state
police, especially in dealing with grave issues of militancy and extremism. There is a need to
institutionalize such deputations at different levels, including higher formations. This will ensure
that the core competence of the CRPF is utilised in the best manner and best public interest.
Furthermore, the CRPF personnel have vast experience in different arenas of operation, but most
of them are not exposed to professional managerial training because nearly all in service trainings
are technical. Deputation will give them the opportunity to grow and develop in other areas as well
and acquire leadership and management skills. (Para 3.16.4)
OPERATIONAL ISSUES - MODERNIZATION
The Committee feels that usage of drones is a very important component to help the CRPF
personnel during surveillance and reconnaissance in day and night operations in the dense forests
of naxal affected areas as well as in Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee, in this connection,
wishes to draw the attention of the Ministry towards the recommendation made in para 5.17.3 of its
214th report on ‘Working conditions in border guarding forces’ and reiterate the said recommendation
that an early decision should be taken by the Government on increasing the usage of drones for
surveillance and reconnaissance by the CRPF. (Para 3.17.2)
TECHNOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
The Committee observes that the CRPF does not have a dedicated research and development
wing of its own. The Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) is expected to be the
R&D agency for the modernization of the police forces in the country. The BPR&D undertakes
R&D on major and common issues. There are many micro issues that are unique to the CRPF,
because of the peculiarities of the areas of deployment of the Force and its large size. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of establishing a dedicated
R&D unit for CRPF to deal with the peculiar issues of the Force, such as, IEDs, bullet proofing of
vehicles etc. (Para 3.18.5)
The Committee feels that being deployed in difficult areas for prolonged duration, away from
their families, the CRPF could also use the BISAG programme. The Committee is hopeful that this
programme will prove to be effective in boosting the morale of the entire Force. The CRPF jawans
would feel motivated and inspired if they are directly addressed by their leaders on a regular basis.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the CRPF may explore the possibility to implement
the BISAG programme on the pattern of BSF within the next six months. (Para 3.18.7)
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES - ROAD CONNECTIVITY
The Committee notes that roads are of great importance to the CRPF. Connectivity of all
CRPF camps is crucial for the Force as it will speed up the movement of the Force personnel and
development works in the regions of deployment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the

63
Ministry must take up the construction of these non-metalled roads on priority basis to ensure that
all CRPF camps are connected by metalled roads. The Ministry must work in tandem with the State
Governments and ensure to fast track the construction of metalled roads, especially in Chhattisgarh
and South Odisha. (Para 3.19.3)
INFRASTRUCTURAL ISSUES - MOBILE CONNECTIVITY
The Committee notes that the problem of poor mobile connectivity persists in areas of
deployment of CRPF personnel. The Committee recommends that the Government should make
efforts to strengthen mobile and internet connectivity, if not by the State owned service providers,
then by providing for the presence of private mobile service providers in such difficult areas so that
regular mobile and internet services can be availed by each and every jawan on their own mobile
phone devices. (Para 3.20.2)
PROTECTION AGAINST IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (IEDS) IN NAXALITE AREAS
The Committee observes that the threat of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) is one of the
greatest challenges in the LWE area. The Committee feels that security of the CRPF personnel
against IEDs should be a top priority for the Government. The Committee is aware that IEDs have
consumed lives of several personnel and there is a need to employ advanced techniques and technology
that allow remote detection and eradication of buried IEDs. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should make an effort towards development of technology to counter the threats posed by
IEDs in the LWE affected area. The Committee further recommends that adequate and regular
training should be provided to the CRPF personnel to enable them to face the challenges and threat
of IEDs. Moreover, the CRPF personnel must be trained in use of technology (including drones) to
increase surveillance around patrols. (Para 3.21.2)
GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL
The Committee notes that a majority of grievances reported in CRPF are related to pension.
The Committee recommends that the issue of pensioners must be given due attention by the
authorities. These grievances must be redressed speedily and timely. The Ministry should reach a
situation where no personnel retires without a PPO (Pension Payment Order) and any case of
retirement without at least a provisional PPO must be reported to the Force HQ.  The case must be
resolved by the Force HQ within 30 days of receipt of the reference.  The Committee also recommends
that the CRPF must maintain a fair and transparent transfer policy by allowing transfer requests to
be made only through online mode. (Para 3.22.4)
PERSONNEL ISSUES
The Committee notes the high turnover rate in the NSG and the lack of a permanent cadre of
its own. The Committee also notes the extremely short periods of deputation of just two years for
the Officers and three years for the Commandos, who come from the Army. The Committee observes
that the effective tenure for an individual officer/commando is even lower due to training, leave
and other commitments. The Committee also notes that the submission of DG , NSG that the Army
Officers feel that the deputation tenure should be longer of upto five years. However, the Committee
is not sure whether the personnel coming from Indian Army would be able to maintain the demanding
physical fitness required in NSG for longer tenures of  up to five years and whether the Army would

64
be willing to spare its Officers for such long duration. The Committee feels that this issue needs to
be thoroughly discussed among the relevant stakeholders before a decision is taken by the Ministry
of Home Affairs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should attach top priority
to this issue and form a working group comprising both past and present NSG personnel to examine
the pros and cons of a longer tenure of deputation and accordingly suggest changes in the NSG s
deputation policy. (Para 4.4.6)
The Committee also takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that a
proposal to increase the tenure of deputation of personnel of CAPFs to NSG from the present
duration of five to seven years is under consideration of NSG. The Committee feels that this proposal
needs to be considered expeditiously. The Committee recommends that it may be decided on priority
by the Ministry. (Para 4.4.7)
The Committee desires that the issue may be studied thoroughly and suitable decision taken
in the matter. (Para 4.4.9)
DEPLOYMENT FOR ROUTINE DUTIES
The Committee takes a serious note of the high attrition cost on the NSG due to frequent
deployment for routine and mundane duties, which are adversely impacting the training and
operational preparedness of the NSG personnel. The Committee is of the view that NSG is a special
task force and should be deployed strictly in accordance with its mandate and for no other purpose.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make the process for requisition
of NSG teams more stringent and the decision to deploy NSG teams should be taken at the highest
level. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should issue advisory to
the State Governments to exhaust all other alternatives before submitting a requisition for
deployment of NSG teams. (Para 4.5.2)
HOUSING AND ACCOMMODATION
The Committee fails to understand the reason for the extremely low authorized accommodation
level of just 25 per cent for the personnel in Other Ranks. The Committee takes note of the fact
that the Ministry is considering the proposal to enhance the authorization accommodation level.
However, the Committee feels that by merely increasing the authorized accommodation level, the
satisfaction level will not increase, especially when there is no plan under consideration for the
construction of houses. The Committee recommends that the authorization levels must urgently be
increased as per the proposal under consideration and an action plan may be prepared for achieving
the housing satisfaction as per the new authorized accommodation levels. (Para 4.6.3)
TRAINING ISSUES
The Committee notes the training apparatus in NSG and feels that there are several
improvements that can be brought to enhance the operatio nal capabilities of the Force.  The
Committee is of the view that NSG needs to adopt the best global practices by conducting regular
joint-training and mock-drills with its counterparts from countries that have superior capabilities
and vast experience in dealing with counter-terrorist operations. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs, in consultation with the Ministry of External
Affairs, should evolve a mechanism for conducting joint training programmes and mock drills

65
with the Special Forces of friendly foreign countries to enhance the capabilities of NSG. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry should identify certain foreign training programmes
that can help improve the capabilities of NSG personnel and regularly nominate them for such
programmes. (Para 4.7.2)
The Committee also takes note of the other measures such as specialised trainings, availability
of military transport aircraft, and construction of Special Operations Training Centre and a Sniper
Range that are essential for strengthening the training system and infrastructure in NSG . The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should urgently undertake all these measures in a time-
bound manner to enhance the operational efficiency of NSG.  The training and capacity building of
the NSG must be dynamically augmented to remain in tune with the terror threats and other
subversive activities that imperil the country’s security. (Para 4.7.3)
DEDICATED AIR WING
The Committee is anguished to note that the premier counter-terrorist and contingency force
of India does not have a dedicated air wing of its own and is dependent on aviation assets of other
Forces for its operational and training requirements. The Committee agrees that this deficiency
severely affects the response time of NSG , which is supposed to provide swift counter-strike response
in contingency situations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should make urgent and sincere efforts to commission a dedicated Air Wing of NSG and provide
requisite types and number of air assets to strengthen the aviation capability of the Force. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry, as an interim measure, may provide dedicated
aircraft and technical support to NSG through an arrangement with the BSF Air Wing or the Air
Force. (Para 4.8.4)
The Committee observes that NSG has yet not tested its power to commandeer any aircraft
in real-time circumstances and feels that, unless this power is used, the Force would remain
unaware of the response time and logistical challenges that it may face in operational situations.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the NSG should be advised to plan a real-time scenario
for testing its power to commandeer any aircraft in real-time circumstances for the sake of
enhancing operational preparedness and pre-empt any surprises that it may face d uring actual
operations. (Para 4.8.6)
The Committee also takes note of the submission of DG , NSG that power to commandeer an
aircraft is sometimes limited to only certain classes of aircraft. The Committee feels that NSG must
be empowered to requisition any type and capacity of aircraft for both operational and training
purposes under any circumstances. The Committee is of the view that NSG is a force that is sparingly
used only in situations of extreme threat and heavily relies on regular training to achieve operational
preparedness. The Committee, therefore, recommends that no restrictions should be placed on the
power of NSG to requisition aircraft. (Para 4.8.7)
WELFARE MEASURES
The Committee takes note of the various welfare measures that are being taken for the NSG
personnel. The Committee is of the view that financial assistance being given to the Next of Kin of
deceased and seriously injured NSG personnel is quite low and insufficient. The Committee

66
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should review the amounts of the financial assistance
and enhance it adequately. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should also identify
more welfare measures that can be taken, as per the need of the personnel and their families, and
implement those measures earnestly. (Para 4.9.2)

MINUTES

69
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 24th October, 2017 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Dr. V . Maitreyan
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
5. Shri Derek O’ Brien
6. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
8. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
9. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
10. Shri Ramen Deka
11. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
12. Shri Kaushal Kishore
13. Shri P. Nagarajan
14. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
15. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
16. Shri Bishnupada Ray
17. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. P . K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Home Secretary
2. Shri Praveen Vasistha, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Arvinda Kumar, Additional Director, Intelligence Bureau
4. Shri Mukesh Mangal, Director
5. Shri Shailendra Vikram Singh, Deputy General Manager/Director
6. Shri Janardan Singh, Deputy Director, Intelligence Bureau

70
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice
1. Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Rajveer Singh Verma, Joint Secretary
Representatives of UIDAl
1. Shri Satyanarayana, Chairman
2. Dr. A.B.P. Pandey, Chief Executive Officer
3. Capt. Davesh Singh, Assistant Director General
Representatives of NIC
1. Shrimati Neeta V erma, Director General
2. Shri Rajesh Gera, Deputy Director-General
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the re-nominated Members and the four new Members, i.e.
Shri Pratap Keshari Deb; Shri K. Bhabananda Singh; Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh, Members of Rajya
Sabha, and Dr. Sanjeev Balyan, Member of Lok Sabha, to the first meeting of the reconstituted Committee.
The Chairman explained the mandate of the Committee as laid down under Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure
and invited suggestions from Members regarding subjects for examinations by the Committee. The Committee,
after a brief discussion, decided to take up for examination and report thereon the following subjects:
1. National Security and Privacy Concerns relating to Aadhaar (to continue from previous
Committee)
2. Internal Security:
(i) Security Situation in the North Eastern States of India;
(ii) T errorism in the Country; and
(iii) Naxalism
3. Social and Communal Harmony; Atrocities on Weaker Sections (Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes, Women etc.)
4. Modernisation of Police Forces; Road Map for Implementation of Police Reforms
5. Administration and development of UTs:
(i) Andaman and Nicobar Islands
(ii) Puducherry
6. Disaster Management
7. Central Armed Police Forces/Organisations
8. Development of North Eastern Region
3. * * *
4. * * *
4.1 * * *
*** Relates to other matter.

71
4.2 * * *
4.3 * * *
4.4 * * *
4.5 * * *
4.6 * * *
4.7 * * *
5. * * *
5.1 * * *
5.2 * * *
5.3 * * *
5.4 * * *
6. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 6.51 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

72
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 22st May, 2018 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
5. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri S. Selvakumarachinayan
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Shri Ramen Deka
9. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
10. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
11. Shri Kaushal Kishore
12. Shri P. Nagarajan
13. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
14. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
3. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
1. Shri B.R. Sharma, Special Secretary (BM)
2. Shri Rabindra Panwar, Special Secretary/FA
3. Shri Mukesh Mittal, Joint Secretary (IS. II)
4. Dr. R.K. Mitra, Advisor (P.I1)
5. Shri A.V . Dharma Reddy, Joint Secretary (BM-I)
6. Ms. S. Chaudhuri, Director
7. Shri Harish Chander, Director/Consultant
Representatives of National Security Guard (NSG)
1. Shri S. Lakhtakia, Director-General
2. Dr. Sanjeev Mishra, Financial Advisor

73
3. Shri P.S. Phalnikar, Inspector-General
4. Shri Abhishek Trivedi, Inspector-General
Representatives of Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
1. Shri R.K. Pachnanda, Director-General
2. Shri R.K. Mishra, Additional Director-General
3. Ms. Nishtha Upadhyay, Internal Financial Advisor
4. Shri D.S. Chawdhary, Inspector-General
5. Shri Anand Swaroop, Inspector-General
6. Shri S.S. Harta, Deputy Inspector-General
7. Shri Ajaypal Singh, Deputy Inspector-General
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and informed them about the
agenda of the meeting, i.e.,
(i) to hear the views of the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs on working conditions in
Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) and National Security Guard (NSG) under the subject
‘Central Armed Police Forces / Organisations’; and
(ii) * * *
2.1 The Chairman informed the Members that the Home Secretary had sought leave of absence and the
Special Secretary (Border Management), MHA would represent MHA in his place.
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, ITBP and NSG .
The Committee decided to first hear about the working conditions in ITBP . The Chairman requested the
Ministry to apprise the Committee about the following aspects:-
(i) measures taken by the Government to enable the ITBP personnel to withstand the extreme
geographical and harsh weather conditions;
(ii) issues pertaining to recruitment, promotional avenues, transfers, training, duty hours, leave
position, housing, stagnation and attrition rate and the measures being taken to address them;
(iii) the measures taken to provide basic facilities such as electricity, drinking water, transportation,
etc. in all the border outposts;
(iv) the status of construction of various infrastructure projects on the India-China border;
(v) the initiatives taken for the modernization of the Force; and
(vi) the impact of delegating financial powers to the CAPFs in the previous year.
4. The Special Secretary (BM), MHA apprised the Committee that the overall level of housing satisfaction
in the CAPFs is 37 per cent and on completion of the ongoing projects, the satisfaction level will go up to
52.32 per cent. He further apprised the Committee that cadre review for the ITBP is at an advanced stage of
examination in the MHA whereas for other CAPFs it has already been approved by the MHA. He also briefly
apprised the Committee regarding the recruitment of constables and head constables, revision of the Central
*** Relates to other matters.

74
ex-gratia compensation, approval of the demand of the Forces for the issue of operational casualty certificate
to CAPFs, grant of scholarships to the next of kin and the children of the personnel of CAPFs, implementation
of 7th Pay Commission recommendations in regard to risk and hardship allowances, launch of a mobile
application for grievance redressal of the jawans and the steps undertaken to connect the BOPs to the
nearest road head.
5. Thereafter, the Director-General, Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) made a brief power point
presentation regarding the working conditions in ITBP . The Chairman and the Members raised queries
regarding personnel who have been affected by certain health hazards, number of personnel present in each
BOP and the number of sanctioned and vacant posts regarding Medical Response personnel. The DG , ITBP
informed the Committee that on an average, one company is present at each BoP. The DG, ITBP assured the
Committee to send details with regard to these questions later.
5.1 The Chairman sought clarification regarding the ration money given to the ITBP personnel. The DG ,
ITBP informed that the personnel at the border have a mess facility and those in areas other than border are
given ration money. He further apprised the Committee about procurement of ready-to-eat meals for the
personnel. The Chairman then enquired about the number of days spent by the DG and IGs in the highest
border post to which the DG , ITBP replied that he as well as the other senior officers visit the highest border
posts regularly and spend a few days there.
5.2 The Chairman then enquired about the battalions that are not deployed on the India-Tibet border and
its effect on the training of the personnel. The DG, ITBP apprised the Committee that ITBP troops are
deployed on internal security duties, election duties, anti-naxal operations and VIP protection duties. Some
troops are deployed in Afghanistan also. The Chairman expressed his concern over the fact that approximately
half of the Force was not being used for what it was raised. The Chairman then enquired about the downtime
of generators and satellite phones used in the BoPs, availability of drinking water, sanctioned strength and
number of vacancies of medical personnel pertaining to all ranks in the Force. Responding to the queries,
DG , ITBP assured the Committee that boiled/filtered water is used for drinking. He also apprised the Committee
about the recent completion of a recruitment process of the medical personnel.
5.3 Members of the Committee sought some more clarifications on different issues like deployment of
ITBP troops, disparity in hard area allowance, pay, pension and food given to ITBP personnel and defence
personnel, proposal of ‘Special Pay’ to CAPFs, sanctioning of leaves, provision of guest houses for the
recuperation of jawans, presence of professional experts in traumatic stress and proposal of recruitment of
local boys in the Force. The DG, ITBP assured to send written replies of all these questions to the Committee
later. Some of the Members also expressed their concern over deployment of the Forces such as ITBP,
NSG, CRPF and CISF in duties other than the ones that they were raised for and suggested that a separate
security agency should be created to oversee VIP security all over the country.
5.4 Some of the Members raised queries regarding different criteria of death allowance given to personnel
who died on duty. The DG, ITBP stated that in such a case, a lump sum amount is given by the government
and some money is given from the welfare fund of ITBP. Thereafter, some of the Members raised queries
regarding rotation time of jawans posted at high altitudes, the policy of contingency leave in ITBP and
number of earned leaves and casual leaves given to the personnel. The DG, ITBP replied that the rotation
time for jawans has been reduced from 6 months to 3 months and there is no problem of sanctioning of
leaves resultantly. The satisfaction level with respect to leaves is quite good in ITBP. Replying to the queries

75
related to quality of food, he informed the Committee that the food provided to the personnel is tested and
certified by the army. Fresh vegetables are bought every month by a committee headed by a Gazetted
Officer. Thereafter some queries were raised regarding increase in the rate of attrition in case of NGOs and
delay in the joining of new recruits in ITBP due to a recruitment case pending in court. The DG, ITBP replied
that the sudden spike in attrition was because some of the personnel were waiting for the implementation of
the seventh CPC in order to get benefits of it before resigning. He assured to send the details of the pending
case in court later to the Committee. Thereafter, one of the Members enquired about use of snow scooters
for patrolling long distance by the personnel across BoPs. The DG, ITBP stated that 2-9 km of foot patrolling
is done across BoPs and use of snow scooters is at trial stage.
6. Thereafter, Director-General (DG), National Security Guard (NSG) made a brief presentation regarding
working condition of the Force. He briefly apprised the Committee about the mandate of NSG , its set up
across the country and the SWOT analysis of NSG. He briefly informed about the recruitment, pay and
allowances, motivational schemes, living conditions, married accommodation, welfare schemes and operational
avenues of NSG.
6.1 The Chairman enquired whether the NSG could requisite any aircraft in case of an emergency. The
DG , NSG replied that they could commandeer any aircraft by notifying in advance. The Chairman suggested
that the NSG should commandeer an aircraft in real time for training purposes also. The DG, NSG also
apprised the Committee that because NSG is a 100% deputation Force, the tenure for officers in NSG is
very short and this is a challenge for the Force. He further informed that the attrition rate of the Force is
40% because of the rigorous training of NSG. The DG, NSG further informed the Committee that NSG is
always ready to move at a short notice ranging from 30-120 minutes to respond to a terrorist situation.
6.2 Thereafter, the Members raised specific questions on various issues pertaining to the mandate of
NSG which inter alia include requirement of a regional hub in Central India, number of NSG personnel
deployed in VIP security, joint training of jawans with other countries, areas of responsibility of the regional
hubs, number of NSG personnel martyred in various operations, low satisfaction level of personnel belonging
to other ranks (ORs) with regard to married accommodation, process of audit of highly sensitive buildings.
Responding to the queries, the DG , NSG stated that a new regional hub will be established at Hyderabad;
approximately 600-650 NSG personnel were deployed for VIP security and for other queries he assured to
send written replies to the Committee later.
6.3 The Committee t hen discussed the importance of availability of Air Force support for all the regional
hubs. The DG , NSG informed the Committee that hubs like Gandhinagar and Kolkata do not have nearby
Air Force facility and the flying time of a chopper from the nearest Air Force asset was approximately 40
minutes. Regarding the capacity building of the States, the DG, NSG apprised the Committee that almost
all the States have Special Security Groups and NSG regularly trains them. The NSG also cross-teams
with the special Forces present in J&K and would be available in a combat formation to intervene in case
any counter terrorism situation arises. Some of the Members then enquired about the dog breed used in
the NSG and suggested to incorporate Mudhol Hound dog breed of North Karnataka. The DG , NSG
replied that currently they are using Belgian Malinois and would try the Mudhol Hound breed in the
future.
6.4 The representatives of MHA replied to most of the queries. With regard to queries not answered
orally, the Ministry was requested to send written replies. The witnesses then withdrew.

76
7. * * *
7.1 * * *
7.2 * * *
7.3 * * *
8. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

77
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 26th June, 2018 in Room No. G-074, Ground Floor,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
5. Shri Ramen Deka
6. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
7. Shri Kaushal Kishore
8. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
9. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
10. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
2. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
1. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Secretary
2. Shri B.R. Sharma, Special Secretary
3. Shri Rabindra Panwar, Special Secretary/FA
4. Shri P .K. Srivastava, Additional Secretary
5. Shri S.C.L. Das, Joint Secretary
6. Shri Praveen Vashista, Joint Secretary
7. Shri Vivek Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary
8. Dr. R.K. Mitra, Advisor/Joint Secretary
9. Ms. Sreyasi Chaudhuri, Director
10. Shri Harish Chander, Director/Consultant
11. Shri D.P . Tripathy, Director

78
Representatives of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
1. Shri R.R. Bhatnagar, Director-General
2. Shri Dhiraj Kumar, Director Inspector General
3. Shri M.S. Bhatia, Inspector-General
4. Shri Sunil Thorpe, Director Inspector General
5. Dr. Sanjeev Mishra, Financial Advisor
Representatives of Border Security Force (BSF)
1. Shri K.K. Sharma, Director-General
2. Shri Sandeep Salunke, Inspector-General
Representatives of Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
1. Shri Rajesh Ranjan, Director-General
2. Shri Alok Kumar Pateria, Additional Director-General
3. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Additional Director-General
4. Shri Anurag, Inspector-General
5. Ms. Ritu Arora, Inspector-General
6. Shri N. Venugopal, Inspector-General
7. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Inspector-General
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed
them about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Home
Affairs and other concerned agencies/CAPFs on the working conditions in Border Security Force (BSF),
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) and Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) under the subject ‘Central
Armed Police Forces/Organizations’.
2.1 The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary, Director Generals of Border Security Force (BSF),
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) and Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) and other senior officers
and requested them to make a presentation on the subject highlighting the issues pertaining to recruitment,
promotional avenues, training, duty hours, attrition rate, access of all the personnel to the basic facilities
such as electricity, hygienic and good food, clean drinking water, transportation, etc. The Chairman also
asked the officers to apprise the Committee about the grievance redressal system existing in the forces, its
effectiveness and initiatives taken for modernization of these forces.
3. The Home Secretary apprised the Committee about the constraints in improving the working conditions
including housing and other infrastructure and he further informed the Committee that the issue had been
discussed with the Ministry of Finance for additional funds. He also briefed the Committee about delegation
and enhancing of financial powers of the DGs and other officers to be able to utilize the funds for procurement
of various items under various heads viz. clothing, tentage, machinery, equipments. He also informed the
Committee that an engineering wing of the CAPFs had been designated as Public Works Organization with
the approval of the Ministry of Urban Development and the officers posted in these wings have been given
technical powers at par with their counterparts in the CPWD to speed up the implementation of infrastructure
related projects. On the issue of housing satisfaction level, the Home Secretary informed the Committee
that it was at 37 per cent and a large number of projects were under implementation. The H ome Secretary

79
also informed the Committee that the MHA was working in tandem with the forces to undertake and
complete the Cadre Review to sort out the cadre management issues. Filling up of vacancies had been
taken up on priority basis and selection in the year 2016-17 spilled over to 2017-18 for 57,264 constables
and head constables and have been completed and fresh requirement for 54,953 posts have been placed in
2018-19.
3.1 The Home Secretary also stated before the Committee that a number of measures have been taken to
improve the welfare aspects. The grant of HRA was revised and the issue of allowing the forces to retain the
Government accommodation in Delhi or other family stations have been taken up with the Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee was further informed that the ex-gratia component has been revised from
` 15 lakh to ` 30 lakh in case of death in action, from ` 10 lakh to ` 25 lakh in case of death on duty and
` 9 lakh to ` 20 lakh in case of 100 per cent disability. A long pending demand of CAPFs for issuance of
Operational Casualty Certificate at par with the defence personnel has been approved. The certificate is
beneficial for allocation of petrol pumps, gas stations and free passes for travelling by air and train. As
regards, grievance redressal, the Ho me Secretary informed the Committee that online portal and mobile
apps have been operationalised and jawans could interact with the senior officers and get their grievances
redres sed.
I. Presentation of the representatives of CRPF
4. The Director-General, CRPF gave a power point presentation and briefed the Committee about the
attrition in the Force and the risk and hardship allowance given to the CRPF personnel. He submitted that as
per the 7th Central Pay Commission, the risk and hardship matrix has been worked out by the MHA in
conjunction with all the CAPFs, categorizing them into different hardship grid for implementing the revised
allowances and the approval of the same from the Ministry of Finance is awaited. On being enquired by the
Chairman as to why it is pending for almost six months with Ministry of Finance. The representatives of the
Ministry replied that the allowances are being paid while the grid is being re-worked as to what group would
be covered in which cell of the hardship grid. The DG, CRPF further apprised the Committee about the
domestic stress caused to the jawans due to frequent transfers and for getting very little opportunity to stay
with their families. It was further informed that there was a proposal under consideration that identified 25
locations at peace stations where the jawans could have the opportunity to stay with their families while
performing their duty. The Chairman expressed his concern on over-deployment of the jawans and asserted
that one-sixth of a battalion should always be under training or at rest or deployed at peace stations.
4.1 The DG, CRPF further informed the Committee that the State governments often fail to provide basic
infrastructure to the Force and requested that the funds be given directly to the CRPF to be able to build their
own camps and battalion for their basic infrastructure at the camping sites. He further apprised the Committee
about existing gap between the authorised and the available accommodation but the new policy of sanctioning
of HRA to the personnel below officer rank came as a relief to the jawans.
4.2 The DG , CRPF further apprised the Committee that a jawan is given a ration allowance of ` 98 per
day in CRPF and good quality food are provided to the jawans and almost every camp has got an RO for
purifying drinking water. He further informed that 54 camps of CRPF did not have mobile connectivity.
Therefore, Digital Satellite Phone Terminals were provided at these camps at the subsidised rate of rupee
one per minute. The DG, CRPF then briefed about road connectivity in LWE affected areas and stated that
road connectivity is very important for the CRPF and the State of Chattisgarh lagged behind the most in
metalled roads. The DG , CRPF then informed the Committee that the injured personnel are provided with the

80
best quality artificial limbs from contributory risk fund of the force as the CGHS entitlements are not up to
the mark. The Ministry of Home Affairs had written to the Ministry of Health to revise the norms for the
battle casualties. The DG , CRPF then briefed the Committee about the ‘Bharat ke Veer’ portal for financial
assistance and the special scholarships are provided to wards of the CRPF personnel.
4.3 The OG , CRPF also apprised the Committee about the stress management practices followed in
CRPF such as counseling sessions, yoga, meditation etc. Online mobile app for grievance rerdressal and air
courier services are also provided to the personnel. The Committee was also apprised about the measures
taken for security of the personnel such as weapons, protective gears, bullet proofing of vehicles, modification
in training, proper supervision, UA Vs, dog squad, SRE fund, etc. The Committee was also informed about
provision of special trains with meal facilities, a special allowance for deployments in election duties, uniform
allowance and railway e-ticket facilities at camps.
4.4 The OG, CRPF further apprised the Committee about the promotional avenues of the CRPF personnel
that takes approximately 16 years for a constable to become a head constable, 8 to 10 years for a head
constable to become an ASI, 6 to 7 years for a directly recruited ASI to become an SI (GO) and approximately
30 years for a constable to become an SI. Direct recruitment are conducted at the posts of constable, sub-
inspector and assistant commandant. A Limited Departmental Examination is also conducted in which constables
and head constables can appear directly after 5 years of service. The Committee was informed that there are
16,785 vacancies of constables and the process of recruitment is underway. Efforts were being made to
change the sequence of the examinations so that the recruitment process becomes faster. The DG, CRPF
replied that this problem could be solved if the recruitment of constables is done 2 years in advance against
the anticipated vacancies. Thereafter, the DG, CRPF apprised the Committee that 3,651 grievances were
received in the year 2017-18 and out of that 2,946 were disposed off. Most of the grievances were regarding
transfers and pension.
II. Presentation of the representatives of BSF
5. Thereafter, the OG, BSF gave a power point presentation and gave an overview of the computer
advance, BSF education loan scheme and DGs merit scholarship. He apprised the Committee about the
Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Inforrnatics (BISAG) through which he was able
to address the entire force at the same time. Regarding grievance redressal system in BSF, the DG stated
that the grievances received through the mobile app were mainly about transfers and pension. He further
briefed the Committee about the ration money per day for a personnel, housing and accommodation satisfaction
level in the Force and the Golden Jubilee Seema Prahari Kalyan Kawach Policy (GJSPKKP).
5.1 Some of the Members raised queries regarding infiltration across the International Border (IB) and
the efficiency of Unarmed Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) in checking the cross-border infiltration and smuggling
incidents. The DG, BSF replied that with the help of technology no cases of infiltration across the International
Border (IB) were reported in 2016, 2017 and 2018. The DG, BSF then apprised the Committee about an
online coaching system through which the wards of the BSF personnel could avail online coaching classes
wherever they were stationed at.
5.2 The Members then raised queries regarding the stagnation at the post of constable in BSF. The
Committee was informed that it takes more than 20 years for a constable in BSF to become a Head Constable.
When Committee was informed that cadre review of Group A officers had completed, Chairman observed
that it should have been started from C instead of Group A as the problem is in Group Band C. The DG , BSF

81
apprised the Committee about the Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS) that is
being installed as a pilot project in Jammu and Assam. In response to query, The about the funds allocated
for the Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS) the DG, BSF replied that ` 50 crore
has been allocated for CIBMS for the year 2018-19.
III. Presentation of the representatives of CISF
6. Thereafter, the DG, CISF gave a power point presentation and gave an overview of the attrition rate
and the housing satisfaction level in CISF. The DG, CISF stated that once the ongoing projects get completed,
the satisfaction level in the non-PSU sector, which is funded by Ministry of Home Affairs, will reach
approximately 20.95%. 2,090 ready made flats have been purchased from DDA and DSIIDC in Delhi and
Ghaziabad.
6.1 The Chairman asked about the demand for the deployment of CISF in the private sector. The DG,
CISF replied that there was a demand for more deployment. The CISF was deployed in the private sector on
QRT pattern i.e. the access control, frisking etc. is done by their own security personnel and the CISF is
deployed for a contingency situation.
6.2 The DG, CISF further informed the Committee that all the mess committees have a quality control
committee and the ration money is the same as other CAPFs, i.e., ` 98 per day. Welfare measure such as
prepmantra, financial literacy programme etc. were being run in the CISF as well. He further apprised the
Committee that the CISF has a robust e-grievance portal and out of 3,065 grievances received so far, 2,673
have been disposed off and 392 are pending. The grievances were invariably about transfer and postings.
The Chairman raised a query as to why the maximum number of grievances were regarding transfer and
postings. The DG , CISF replied that this is because of geographical imbalance that exists in the force.
Approximately, 50% of the personnel come from northern India and for the post of constable, the recruitment
is based on the population of a particular region. The DG; CISF then briefed the Committee about disbursement
of ` 19.25 lakhs for specially-abled wards of the personnel under the Director-General’s financial assistance
and the provision of creche facilities. Thereafter, he stated that the CISF has received no grievance regarding
pension. He also apprised the Committee about the technological advancements in the Force and the ‘Lost
and Found’ web application through which more than 94,000 items of wide range have been found that
were lost or left at the airports.
6.3 Thereafter, the Chairman and the Members raised queries regarding the time taken by the CISF to
check the abandoned baggage at the airport for bombs, strength of the dog squad of CISF and the practice
of pair patrolling not being followed at the Indian airports. The representatives of the Ministry replied that
usually the checking of the abandoned baggage does not take more then 10-15 minutes but at some airports
the CISF does not have its own dedicated Bomb Disposal Squad (BDS). The Committee was further informed
that inside the terminals, terminal marshals are deployed in small bullet-proof enclosures and plainclothes
people called CIW also keep a watch at the airport terminal.
7. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.38 
P.M.

82
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 25th October, 2018 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
5. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
9. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
10. Shri Faizal P.P . Mohammed
11. Shri Nagarajan P.
12. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
13. Shri Dilip M. Patel
14. Shri S. Selvakumarachinayan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed
them that although the Committee had met once on 4th October 2018 after its reconstitution, but certain
decisions could not be taken in that meeting for the want of quorum. Therefore, the day’s meeting was
convened to deal with administrative matters that mandatorily require quorum.
3. The Chairman then took up the first item i.e. to select  the subjects for examination and report by the
Committee. He recalled that the reconstituted Committee had already held a sitting to discuss the subject
‘Worsening Traffic Management in Delhi’ and suggested to continue its examination.
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee took up item No. 2 of the agenda, i.e., to  consider and adopt the draft
214th and 215th Reports of the Committee.
*** Relates to other matter.

83
6. * * *
7. The Committee, then, considered the draft 215th Report and adopted the same without any change.
8. * * *
9. * * *
7. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.