RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
C.S. (H.A.)-59 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1996 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 26th November, 1996) 
(Laid in the Lok Sabha on the 26th November, 1996) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 1996/Kartika , 1918 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. CoMPOSITION ot-" THE CoMMITrEE (i)-(ii) 
2. REl>ORT 1-3 
3. RELEVANT MINUTEs oF THE MEETINGS or THE CoMMtTrEE 5-13 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
11. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
12. Shri N. Rajendran 
13. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
14. Shri Raj Babbar 
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
17. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
18. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
21. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
22. Shri Vijay Goel 
23. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
24. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
25. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
26. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
27. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
28. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
29. Prof. M. Kamson 
30. Shri Idris Ali 
31. Shri Gopalbhai Kalan Tandel 
32. Shri Khelsai Singh 
*33. Shri Rajesh Pilot 
34. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
35. Shri Sharad Yadav 
36. Shri Taslimuddin 
37. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
38. Shri Sudhir Giri 
39. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
40. Shri N. Dennis 
• Nominated w.e.f. 8th October. 19'>6 Vi~ Shri Tarn Chand Baghorn. M.P. 
(i) 

41. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
42. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
43. Shri Kanshi Ram 
44. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
45. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur , Director 
Shri G.C . Miglani , Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Thirty-fifth Report of the 
Committee, relating to the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996•. 
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred*" the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996, 
as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the lOth September, 1996 and pending therein. to the 
Committee for examination and report. 
3. The statement of objects and reasons of the Bill states that following suggestions from 
different fora and to take care of the changes which have taken place in the Capital market, 
operation of corporate sector and liberalisation policies. a need has been felt to undertake a 
comprehensive revision of the Companies Act. 1956 and accordingly Government has set up 
a Working Group to rewrite the Act. Since the whole exercise will take a considerable time 
to complete, some changes in the Act were felt imminent and therefore , this Bill. The Bill 
mainly seeks (i) to provide protection to the depositors; (ii) to provide protection to 
employees' interest in case of winding up of a Company; and (iii) to simplify some 
procedural and legal requirements in the interest of corporate sector. 
4. In its meeting held on the 8th October. 1996 the Committee heard the Secretary, 
Legislative· Department on various aspects of the Bill, but deferred his further evidence till 
the representative of the Department of Company Affairs which was the administrative 
Ministry concerned with the Bill appeared before it and explained the nature of the 
proposed amendments and their broad thrust. 
5. In its meeting held on the 9th October, 1996 the Committee heard the representative 
of the Department of Company Affairs on the salient features of the Bill and the urgency of 
the Bill pending the comprehensive redrafting of the entire Companies Act currently in 
progress. In the course of his presentation, the Committee was informed about the 
composition of the Working Group which has been assigned with the task of redrafting the 
Companies Act. The Committee expressed its displeasure over the composition of the 
working group as it was not broad ba~ed and representative in character in that the investors 
and the representatives of Industry and institutions like Institute of Chartered Accountants 
of India, Institute of Cost and Works. Accountants of India , institute of Company Secretaries 
of India etc. had not been given adequate representation . The Committee strongly feels that 
the Working Group be expanded so as to include official representatives of the said 
organisations/institutions formally sponsored by them and well known experts in. the related 
fields so that it inspires greater confidence in the minds of the public. 
6. In its sitting held on the 23rd October, 1996. the Committee took up clause-by-clause 
consideration of the Bill. 
7. The Committee also invited suggestions/views of the different repre sentative 
organisations of industry such as Confederation of Indian Industry (Cil); Associated 
• Publi~hed in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-11. Section 2. dated the lOth September. 1996. 
••Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II. dated the 12th September. 1990. 
1 

2 
Chambers of Cpmmerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM); Punjab, Haryana and Delhi 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHD) and Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) on the amendments sought to be effe.cted in the 
Companies Act through this Bill. The Committee, however, got response only from the CII 
by the due date in the form of an exhaustive paper covering entire gamut of framework of 
the Companies Act, 1956 submitted by them earlier to the Government as also to the 
Working Group engaged in revising Company Law. The Committee noted that the proposed 
amendments in the Bill before it were limited in scope and already cover some suggestions 
advanced by the CII in their note under reference. The Committee feels that their 
suggestions which are exhaustive in nature and touch upon various aspects of Companies Act 
as a whole will be taken note of by the Working Group on redrafting of Companies Act, 
1956. 
8. The Committee considered and adopted this Report in its sitting held on the 1st 
November, 1996. 
9. The principal changes suggested by the Committee in the Bill and the reasons 
therefor are set out hereinafter: -
Ciause 4 
The Committee welcomes the amendment proposed to be made through this clause in 
Section 58 (A) of the Companies Act , 1956 to debar such companies as default in making 
timely repayment of deposits to the public from accepting further deposits till the default in 
this behalf is made good by them. The Committee, however , feels that the penal provision s 
which presently exist in the Act'to bring to book the Companies Which harass the depositors 
are seldom invoked or even if they are invoked , the necessary will to pursue them to their 
logical end is lacking on the part of official enforcement machinery. The Committee is, 
accordingly, of the view that the enforcement machinery be geared up to ensure more 
vigorous implementation of these penal provisions so that the depositors, particularly the 
small investors who cannot afford to wage protracted legal battles with the defaulting 
companies, do not continuously suffer in getting their hard earned money back. The 
Committee also recommends that strict norms of accountability be laid down in this regard 
and such of the officials as show laxity in dealing firmly with the companies fiddling with 
public money are held liable and proceeded against under the rules. 
Clause 5 
This clause seeks to amend Section 80 (SA) of the Companies Act, 1956 to enhance the 
issue period of redeemable preference shares from ten years to twenty years so as to enable 
the companies to mop up finance for capital intensive projects, particularly in the 
infrastructure sector. The Committee , while agreeing with the general principal of this 
clause , recommends that a provision should also be made in this clause whereby investors 
can exercise the option of redeeming the shares at the end of ten years' period, unless they 
opt to keep them with the companies for a full period of twenty years. 
Clause 6 
This clause seeks to amend Section 86 of the principal Act which presently permit s 
companies to issue only two kinds of shares viz.(i) equity shares and (ii) preference shares , 
by making an additional provision for issue of Non-Voting Shares (NVS) by companies upto 
25% of their equity capital with voting rights , subject to their making some basic disclosures 
while obtaining approval of their existing shareholders for issue of such shares. The intention 
is to enable the corporate sector to tap a pool of investors who may be interested in trading 

3 
off higher dividend yield against absence of voting rights and thus mobilize funds for their 
expansion and growth without running the risk of hostile take-overs. 
The Committee is not convinced with this line of argument as in its view the objectives 
contemplated may perhaps not be achieved and foreign investors who may only be interested 
in making big investments in the companies will hardly be forthcoming to invest their money 
in Non-Voting Shares unless they acquire a substantial say in the companies' affairs. In any 
case, when the entire Companies Act is proposed to be rewritten, the Committee fails to 
understand the logic or urgency behind introducing the concept of NVS by amending Section 
86 of the Act. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that there should be informed public 
debate and extensive inter-action with the experts in the field over this issue before NVS is 
made a part of corporate practices and incorporated in the corpus of company law. The 
Committee accordingly recommends that Clause 6 be dropped from the Bill. 
Clause 10 
This clause seeks to amend Section 530(2) of the principal Act, thereby providing an 
enabling provision and conferring powers on Central Government to prescribe such an 
amount from time to time as may be considered appropriate. by way of payment of salary 
and wages to its employees by a company. instead of rupees one thousand as stipulated 
under the Act at present, in the event of its being wound up. The Committee recommends 
that there should be a mandatory provision for review of the amount payable to its 
employees by a company, at specified regular intervals and the amount which is notified by 
the Government should be kept within the realm of realities and linked to the cost of living 
index. 
10. Clauses 2 to 4. 7 to 9 and 11 were adopted by the Committee without any change. 
11. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted. 
12. The Committee recommends that the Bill as reported by it , be passed. 
NEW DELHI; 
November 1, 1996 
SOM PAL 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
XII 
*TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 8th October, 1996, m Committee 
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal _ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
7. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
9. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
10. Shri Vijay Goel 
11. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
12. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
14. Prof. M. Kamson 
15. Shri Idris Ali 
16. Shri Gopalbhai Kalan Tandel 
17. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
18. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
1. Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary 
2. Dr. K.N. Ch~turvedi, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
3. Dr. S.D. Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel 
•Minutes of First to Eleventh meetings of the Committee relate to some other matters discussed by the 
Committee. 
5 

6 
2. • ... • 
3. • * 
:Z: 
4. The Committee then took up consideration of the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 
1996 and heard the Secretary, Legislative Department (Ministry of Law, Justice and 
Company Affairs) on some aspects of the Bill. The Committee, however , after some 
discussions decided to defer oral evidence of the Secretary , Legislative Departm e nt and 
Secretary Department of Legal Affairs who was also scheduled to appear before it later that 
day, till it heard the representatives of the Department of Company Affairs on the Bill. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 
Wednesday, the 9th October. 1996. 

xm 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9th October, 1996, in Committee 
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
7. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
9. Shri 'Jagatvir Singh Orona 
10. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
11. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri ldris Ali 
14. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
15. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(DEPARTMENT OF COMPANY AFFAIRS) 
1. Shri B.B. Tandon, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.R. Sridharan, Director 
3. Shri V.K. Gupta, Director (NIC) 
4. Shri S.P. Vasishtha, Joint Director (L) 
5. Shri S.K. Sharma, Research Officer 
2. The Committee took up further consideration of the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 
1996. Additional Secretary in the Department of Company Affairs made a presentation on 
the Bill in the course of which he explained the necessity of the Bill pending completion of 
the exercise of redrafting of the comprehensive legislation on the subject currently underway 
and the nature of proposed amendments which are intended to protect the interests of the 
depositors as also of the employees in the case of winding up of a company and to simplify 
some procedural and legal requirements in the interest of Corporate Sector. 
7 

8 
3. The members raised queries on some aspects of the amendments particularly those 
relating to doing away with the requirement of getting the alterations in their object clauses 
as approved in the General Meetings of the companies confirmed from the Company Law 
Board; desirability of enhancing the issue period of redeemable preference shares from the 
existing 10 years to 20 years; inserting a provision for introduction of issue of Non-Voting 
Shares by the companies and conferring powers on the Central Government to prescribe the 
amount payable by the companies to their employees in the event of their winding up. 
4. In response to a query from the Committee about the composition of the Working 
Group which has been set up by the Government for redrafting the Companies Act, 1956, 
the Additional Secretary of the Department gave the names of the persons nominated to 
form the Group. The Committee thereupon expressed its displeasure over the composition 
of the said Group as, in its view, experts or persons of eminence had not been selected to 
form this Group who could inspire public confidence. The Committee accordingly directed 
the Additional Secretary to convey its feelings on this account in appropriate terms to the 
Minister concerned. The Additional Secretary was also asked to submit written replies to the 
points/ queries raised by the members on the amendments as proposed in the Companies 
(Amendment) Bill, 1996 within a week's time. 
5. The Committee then ~djourned at 1.35 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 1\.M. on the 23rd 
October, 1996. 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday , the 23rd October , 1996, m 
Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
6. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
8. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
9. Shir Satya Pal Jain 
10. Shri Rajabhau Thakf tv:- '· 
11. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
J.2. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
13. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
14. Prof. M. Kamson 
15. Shri ldris Ali 
16. Shri N.S.V. Chithan 
17. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
18. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
19. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish KumaF, Joint Senetury 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur , Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up clause by clause consideration of the Companies 
(Amendment) Bill, 199.6. 
Clauses 2 and 3 
The Clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 4 
The Committee welcomed the proposed amendment as the bar on the Companies to 
raise fresh deposits unless thev repay in full the deposits along with the interest accruing 
9 

10 
thereon to the depositors would deter the Companies in some measure from defaulting on 
this account and unnecessarily withholding public money. The Committee, however, felt that 
the penal provisions existing in the Companies Act, 1956 to deal with the Companies which 
do not care to repay the deposits to the depositors on their maturity have hitherto had no 
salutary effect and the depositors have to wage protracted legal battles against such 
Companies. The Committee, therefore, took a view that the Government should take 
necessary steps to strengthen the enforcement machinery vested with the task of 
implementing these penal provisions and if necessary, incorporate more stringent provisions 
in the new legislation currently under way to replace the existing Act so as to ensure that the 
companies which fiddle with public money do not go scot free. With these observations 
Oause 4 was adopted without any change. 
ClaUJe 5 
The Committee did not feel convinced with the reasons advanced for enhancing the 
issue period of redeemable preference shares by the Companies from the existing 10 years to 
20 years. The Committee expressed the apprehension that the locking period for such shares 
would be doubled and the money of holders of such shares will remain locked substantially 
for a long period without their exactly knowing the state of affairs of such companies, which 
may jeopardize the interest of shareholders. The Committee, however , keeping in view the 
explanation given by the Government that the proposed amendment is basically intended to 
meet the requirement of the Companies which might like to raise the capital in the form of 
preference shares for a longer period and accepting the concept as such, felt that a proviso 
could be added in Clause 5 of the Bill to the effect that the holders of such redeemable 
preference shares, will have an option to take their share money back after expiry of a 
period of 10 years. The Committee accordingly decided to recommend that clause 5 of the 
Bill may be amended accordingly. 
Clause 6 
The Committee felt that it failed to understand the urgency behind introducing a 
provision for issuance of Non-Voting Shares by the Companies when the exercise for 
redrafting of the Companies Act, 1956 in its entirety is currently stated to be in progress. 
The Committee did not either feel convinced with the argument advanced that Non- Voting 
Shares will somewhat reduce the risk of hostile take overs of companies. The Committee 
rather expressed the apprehension that if in a case where an Indian Company has Non­
Voting Shares and a foreign Company has voting shares , the proposed amendment may turn 
out counter productive. The Committee opined that the concept of Non- Voting Shares even 
though in vogue in some countries is somewhat new to the corporate sector in our country 
and before it is brought into the corpus of legislation there should be informed public debate 
over this issue. The Committee accordingly decided to recommend that Clause 6 may be 
dropped from the Bill. 
Clauses 7, 8 and 9 
The Clauses were adopted without any change. 
Clause 10 
The Committee while accepting the Government's view that at the time of winding up , 
the present limit of Rs. one thousand is too insignificant if considered in the oontext of 
inflation of economy , opined that there should not be any reference to a fixed sum. The 
Committee feels that there should be a mandatory provisions for review of the amour .t so 
fixed after a specified period and that amount should be linked to the cost of Jiving index 
etc. TI.e Committee decided to recommend accordingly . 

11 
Clause 11 
The Clause was adopted without any amendment. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title 
Clause 1 , the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change. 
The discussion on the Bill was concluded . 
3. 
4. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P. M. on Friday, the 
1st November, 1996 . 
... Omitted portions relate to M>me olher malters di scus~ed by lhe Comm ittee. 

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Comm ittee met at 3.00 P. M . on Friday , the 1st Novemb er, 1996 in Committee 
Room A. Ground Floor, Parliament Ho use Annexe, New Delhi . 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
3. Dr. Jagunnath Mishra 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Shri N. R ajendran 
7. Shri Jalaludin A nsari 
8. Shri Ram Jethmala ni 
LOK SADHA 
9. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
10. Shri !,agatvir Singh Drona 
11. Shri ~jabhau Thakre 
12. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
13. Shri ~~tangat Ram Sharma 
14. Shri M.O .H. Farooq 
15. Prof. M. Kamson 
16. Shri Idris A1i 
J.7. 8hrl Tusllmuctdln 
18. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
19. Shri N. Dennis 
20. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
21. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Smt. Jaswant Kaur , Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani. Under Secretary 
2. At the outset. Chairman inform ed the members that suggestions on the Companies 
(Amendment) Bill 1996, were invited from four different org~misations representing industry , 
namely Confederation of Indian Indu stry (Cll). federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commcrc.~e ~md Industry (FlCCl) , Associated Chamber s of Commerce and lndustry of Indi a 
(ASSOCllA~-t) and Punjab- Hary<ina and Delhi Chambers of Commerce and Indu stry 
(PHD) by October. 18. 1996 but only one of them viz. CJI had responded with sugge stion s 
on the entire gamut of Compuny L;~w as such all of which were not relevant for purpo ses of 
consideration of the Companies (Amendment) Bill. 1996. A reference had never theless been 
made to their communication in the draft Report of the Committe e on the Bill. Sugge stion s 
12 

[ 
13 
on the Bill had subsequently been also received from two other organisations as well namely 
ASSOCHAM and PHD but as the Committee had by then completed clause-by-clause 
consideration of the Bill, their suggestions could not now be taken up for consideration by 
the Committee. 
3. * 
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up consideration of its draft 35th Report on the 
Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996 and adopted the same with certain modifications . 
5. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report in the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha on 
the second day of the ensuing winter session and authorised its Chairman and in his absence 
Shri Pranab Mukherjee to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Jagatvir Singh 
Drona and in his absence Shri Mungat Ram Sharma to lay the Report on the Table of Lok 
Subha. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.~t. 
••• omitted portions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 