PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ADMINISTRATORS -GENERAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABRA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELID 
SEPTEMBER, 1998/BHADRAPADA. 1920 (SAKA ) 

f 
C.S. (H.A.)-85 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ADMINISTRATORS-GENERAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 1998) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
SEPTEMBER, 1998/BHADRAPADA, 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
I. CoMPOsmoN oF lliE CoMMmu 
2. REPORT 
3. REI.EVANT MtNVlllS OF lliE Ma,,Ncs OF lliE CoMMmu; 
4. THE AO.\liNIST!tATORS·GENI:.RAL BILL, 1998 
PAvES 
(i)-(11) 
1- 1 
5 8 
9- 14 

COMPOSmON OF THE COMMITI'EE 
I. Shri Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanurnanthappa 
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
6. · Shri Raj Nath Singh 
7. Sllri Prafull Goradia 
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
cJ. Sbri K.M. Saifullah 
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
II . Shri' Janeshwar Misra 
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
13. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
14. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
15. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
18. Shri La! Bihari Tiwari 
19. Shri Vijay Goel 
20. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
21. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
22. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
26. Shrirnati Meira Kumar 
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
29. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief 
30. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
3 I. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
32. Shri Motilal Vora 
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subba 
34. Shri Sudhir Giri 
35. Shri Samar Choudhury 
36. Shri Mohan Singh 
37. Shri C. Sreenivaasan 
38. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi 
39. Shri Lalu Prasad 
924 RS F-2·A 
(i) 

40. Shn AbJul Ghnfoor 
4 1 Shn Chada Suresh R~eldy 
42. Shn RJme\h C!Jandrappa !1ga,mag• 
43. Shn Ramsheth Thakur 
44. Shn ,\.f. Golam Osman• 
45. Shn S K IJWLS\\muthlary 
SECIU<:TARIAT 
Shri S.m,h Kumar. Jmnt S~cr~tJI)' 
Shn Tar:m Chattcr;e.,, Dcp1 y ~C<retary 
Shn H C ~ethi, Under Scu tat) 
Shn \1<Jhcsh C Tiwar1, Commme.: Officer 
" 
• 
9'2• RS F-2·B 

I 
REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary S1a11ding Committee on Home Affairs. 
havmg been authorued by the Commtttee. present thts Fony-etghth Repon of the Committee relatmg to 
the Administr~tors-General (Amendmem) Bill. 1998. • 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees. 
the Chrum1an, RajyaSnbha, referred•• theAdministrators-Gencral (Amendment) Bill, 1998. a_, introduced 
in the Rajya Sabha on the 9th June. 1998, and pending the~in. to the Committee for exanunarton and 
repon. 
3. The Committee, in it\ meeung held on the 13th August. 1998. considered the Btll and heard the 
Secretary, Legi~lativeDepartment, Ministry of Law, Just ice and Compru1y Affairs. During his prescntauon 
he expla ined the salient features of the Bill and the circumstances neccssitatmg this legislation. 
4. The Committee then took. up clause-by -clause considemtion of the Bill. 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its mecttng held on the 9th Sep tember, 
1998. 
6. The background note on the Bill furnished by the Mimstry states that the law relating to appointment 
of an Admmistrator-General for every State and tts dunes is contatned m theAdmmistrnto rs-General Act. 
1963. The Act provides for the appotnt:ment of the Admmtstrator-General for any State who has the ngttt 
to apply for administrat ion of estates exceed ing Rs. 50,000/- in value of any deceased person living 
within that State. However. proceedmgs for letter of admmtstratton of estates em be undertaken by the 
Admimstrato r-General under the Act only tf he ts sauslied that there is apprehension of misappropriat ion, 
deterioration or waste of such assets if such proceedmg~ are not taken by it or that such proceedings are 
othcrwtse necessary for the protection of the assets. Section 29 of the Administr:nors-General Act, 1963. 
provides for issue of a certificate to a claimant claiming assets of a deceased otherw ise thm as a creditor. 
However. a certifi cate can be granted by the Admmistrator-General under the ~aid Secnon only in cases 
where the assets left by the deceased person (excluding any sum of money deposited in a Governme nt 
Saving Bank or any Provident Fund to whtch tbe provident Funds Act, 1925, applies) did not at the ume 
of death exceed in value in the whole the monetary !unit specified rn the Sec tion. In the Act. as originally 
enacted in 1963, the monetary limit specified in the Section was only Rs. 5,@/-. In 1972, as a result of 
representation made by the War Widows Association. Chandigarh. on behalf of the widows in general 
and war widows in particu lar. the Act was :lmendcd to mcrease the monetary limit toRs. I 5.0001-. The 
monetary limit 10 the said Section was further increased from Rs. 15.1XX'Jf. toRs. 50,0001- 10 1983 on 
account of the esca lation in the value of assets since the Act was last amended. 
6.1 The Ministry further informed that representations have again been received by the Government 
for raising the monetary limit in Sc.:tion 29 of the Act from Rs. 50,000/- toR s. 2.00,000/ - on account of 
consi derable decrease in the money value.1t has also been suggested that the enhancemen t of the statutory 
limits will be in the interest of the poor and legal heirs espec ially widows, minor children and other 
dependents of the deceased persons who will be spared of the long. protracted and expensive remedy in 
Civil Court. Since the subject matter of the proposal falls within Entry of the Conc urrent List of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, it was deemed proper to call for the views of the State Governments. 
Accordingly, all the State Governments and Union Territory Administmtions were requested to send their 
views in the matter. The replies received from 23 States/Union Territory Administrations show thut the 
• Published in tbc. Gat.ette or India. E.xtru.ordinlll)'. Pan II, Section 2. do.ted the 9th JuP<:. 1998 
" Rajy> Slbha Patluuncnwy Blllktln Part D. doud the tCth JWIC. 1998-
• 

I 
F 
2 
States/UTs have supported the proposal. The Ministry. therefore. proposed to amend Sections 9, 10, 29 
and 36 of the Administrators-General Act, 1963 with a view to raise the monetary limit from 
Rs. 50,000/- to Rs. 2,00,0001-. 
7. The Committee in its meeting held on 13th August, 1998, sought certain clarifications from 
the Secretary, Legislative Department. Under Section 29 of the Administrators-General Act, 1963, 
the Administrator-General is empowered to issue a certificate to a claimant claiming assets of a 
deceased otherwise than as a creditor . The assets left by the deceased person for the purposes of the 
said Section does not include any sum of money in a Government Savings Bank or any provident 
fund account to which the Provident Fund Act, 1925 applies. The Committe wanted to lcnow the 
exact definition of the term 'Government Savings Bank' and the various types of Savings Sanies 
covered by the said term. The Commi11ee further enquired •as to which were the various provident 
funds coming under the purview of the Provident Fund Act, 1925 and whether the General Provident 
Fund and the Public Provident Fund were covered by the said Act. The Committee went on to 
enquire the names of the States/Union Territory Administrations, other than the 23 States/UTs which 
~upported the Bill. and what were their views in that regard. 
8. The Secretary replied that as far as the Bill was concerned, about all the savings schemes of the 
Post Offices like NSS. NSC etc., floated either through subordinate legislation or through notiftcations 
were covered . He clarified that it did not inlcude the savings accounts of the commercial banks and 
nationalised banks. The Secretary stated that in the area of provident funds there were three enactments 
of Parliament. Ona was the Provident Fund Act, 1925; the second one was the Employees' Provident 
Fund, 1952, and the third one was the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968. These three Acts differed in their 
nature. The Provident Fund Act of 1925, was enacted with a view to giving recognition to oertain provident 
funds which were already in existence . It may be a provident fund created under the proviso to Article 
309 of the Consiitution relating to the Government employees or any provident fund created by the 
railways . The Employees' Provident Fund Act covered the industrial employees. The Public Provident 
Fund Act, 1968 was a broad-based legislation. It was applicable to everybody. It was open 10 anybody to 
open an account either in one of the designated nationalised banll:s or in the post offices. 
9. Thereafter, several que~ies were raised regarding partition of property in case of more than one 
claimant under the Hindu Succession Act; payment of stamp duty and its applicability under Muslim 
Personal Law. The Commillee was informed that the Administr.ttor-General could malcc an application 
before the High Coun thirty days after the de:1til of a person. Within 30 days the rightful person could 
m~e a claim in regard to the property and the .High Court would decide the matter after hearing the 
various parties. If nobody had come forward to claim the property, the Administrator-General could 
malce an application to the High Court for the issue of a teller of administration. When a Hindu died 
intastate, his depende~ts could move the Administrator-General and as per the Hindu Succession Act. the 
Adminislrator-General would hand over the property collectively to them. He couldn't partition it . . 
I 0. The Committee was informed that the institution of Administrator-General was only meant to 
protect the assets. The Administration of the property was always done by the Civil Courts. Even the 
Administrator-General derived power from the High Court. The High Court was the overall authority in 
respect of administration of the assets. If there was a dispute, it was always the civil court which would 
decide the matter. The Administrator-General did not enter into the arena of disputes. He was only the 
custodian of the property. for its safe keeping. The principle underlying this legislation was that the 
property should not be misappropriated or disposed of. It was 81\ interim sort of arrangement. If there was 
no claim, he administered the property till the claim was made. He was lilce the official liquidator under 
the Companies Act. 
II. Having heard the Secretary, Legislative Department, on the provisions of the Bill and the 

i 
I 
3 
clarifications given by him to the various queries and having considered the papers furnished by the 
Department. the Committee agrees with ihe proposal of the Ministry to increase the monetilry limit from 
Rs. 50.000 as at present toRs. 2,00,000/- by suitably amending the reference to monetary limit in Sections 
9, 10,29 and 36 of the Administrators -General Act, 1963. 
I 2. Clause 2 was adopted by the Committee without any change . 
I 3. Clause I, the Enacting Formu la and the Title were adopted. 
NEw Daw; 
September 9, 199& 
~24 RS F-3· 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
Chairman, 
Commiuee on Home Affairs. 

} 
l 
RELEVANT MlNUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COM'viiTfEE 
TENTH MEETlNG 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 13th August, 1998, in Room No. 63, First Floor, 
Parliament House. New Delhi . 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I . Shn Pranab Mukherjee - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2 . Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Sbri H. Hanumanthappa 
4. Shri M. Venkaiab Naidu 
5. Shri Prafull Goradia 
6. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Shri K.M. Saifullah 
8. Shri C.M. Ibrahim 
9. Shri Janeshwar Misra 
I(). Shri Drupad Borgohain 
II . Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
12. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOKSABHA 
13. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
14. Shri lal Bihari Ttwari 
15. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
16. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Dan 
17. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi 
18. Maj . Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
19. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
20. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
2 I . Shri lshvarb hai Khodabhai Chavda 
22. Shri Motilal Vora 
23. Shri Sudhir Giri 
24. Shri Samar Choudhury 
25. Shri Chada Suresh Reddy 
26. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H. C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
' Mlnutc:s of fint to ninth mectin&s ~l:ued to &omc o1her m:~ ttcr. 
• 
5 

6 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE ANO COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
I. Dr. Raghbir Singh. Secretary 
2. Shrimati Sushma Jain. Joint Secretary 
3. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
2. * * * 3. * • • 
4. • * • 
5. * • • 
6. * * • 
7. • • • 
8. Thereafter . the Comminee took up consideration of the Administrators-Gcnernl (Amendment) 
Bill. 1998. and heard the Secretary, Legislative Department on the provisions of the BilL The Members 
raised certain queries and sought clarifications. from the Secretary on his presentation and the provisio ns 
of the BilL The Secretary replied to the points raised by the Members. 
' 
9. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill and adopted clause 2 
without any cha nge. Clause I, the title and the enacting formula were a.lso adopted . 
I 0. The Comminee also took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Indian Majority (Ame ndment) 
Bill, 1997. and adopted them without any change. Clause I, the title and the enacting formula were also 
adopted. 
II . The Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
I 2. TheCommill!)e then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.to meet again at 12.30P.M. on the 14th August, 1998 . 
._.., Omiued ponton reJatc:d 10 some 04bcr mauer. 

•xu 
TWELFI'H MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.N. on Wednesday, the 9th September, 1998, in Room No. 63, First Aoor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Pranab Mukhetjee- CluJirman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj 
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4. Shri H. Hanumanthappa 
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri Prafull Goradia 
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri K.M. Saifulla 
9. Dr. (Ms.) P. Selvie Das 
LOKSABHA 
10. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary 
I I. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
12. Shri' Lal Bihari Tiwari 
13. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi 
14. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt 
15. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Salcshi 
16. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri 
17. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik 
I 8. Shrj Mufti Mohammed Sayeed 
19. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy 
20. Shri lshvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
21. Shri Motilal Vora 
22. Shri Sudhir Giri 
23. Shri Samar Choudhury 
24. Shri Mohan Singh 
25. Shri Abdul Ghafoor 
26. Shri Cbada Suresh Reddy 
27. Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
28. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
29. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapan Chanetjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
•M•nutca of dcvc.ntb meeting n:Wc. to somccd)ermanc:r. 
7 
I 
1 

; 
' The Commouee consodered ot> dr.oft 1oth. 47th and 48th Reports on the 
(i) Indian MuJOnty (Amendment) Bill, 1997, (io) Marroage Law~ (Am~ndmcntl Bil l. 1997 ;ond (oii) 
Admimstrator>·General (Amendment! Bol 1998. respecuvely. Some member> raosed a few poonts woth 
regard to draft 46th and 47th Repons. After a bnef doscu~MOn the Chairman ~uggestcd that the 'Pint of 
the points raised in that regard could be suitably oncorporated m the Reports. The Committee agreed to 
the suggestion and authonsed the Chaom1 n to make the nece\Sary amendments/modification 10 t~ two 
Repons. The Commutce thereafter adoi' d all the three Report.~. 
2.1 The Committee authorised its Chainnanto decode about the dates for presenlmionllay10g of 
these Reports 10 RaJya Sabha and Lok Sabha no the next session of Parhament . The Commottee also 
authorised ots Chaonnan and 10 his absence one mem~r each of the Committee from the RaJYa Sabha to 
prcsem the three Reports in thnt I louse The Com omttte further authorised two of its members from Lok 
Sabha, each to fay the three Reports there The Commlllee left it to the Chainnan to decode the names of 
the member\ for presentationllaymg of tlo• Reports. 
2.2 The Comm ittee decided to lay the verbatim evid~nces connected woth the three Rcpom on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha along wnh the Repom. . 
3. • • • 
3.1 • • • 
4. • • 
5. • 
6. • • • 
6J )II 
7. The Committee adjourned at 3.45 P.M. to meet agaon at 11.00 A.M. on 
Thursday, the I Oth September. 1998. 
•• •Om1ttcd portion relilrc to some other matter, 

Dill No. IX of 1998 
THE ADMlNTSTRATORS GH..JERAI. (AMENDMENT) Bll.L, 1991l 
BILL 
furtl:<r m ,._nd tht Adminmmtorr·Gu:uul Art 1963. 
BE il enacted by Pathament an lhc Fony-runoh Ye"' of lhc Repubhc of lndo.o "' 
follows:-
I. 11w. Acl may be called the Adnunl5lralors-Gencral !AmcndmeniJ Ac1, 1 98 1 " 
n un 
11 "'"~d' whc 
6 
occ 
... aumstr "'Cr.l c 
words 'l~~oo ->.hs" 'hnll 
!I 
>6'1 
ut lr 11( 
.lu .. )n!d 
H) IIA\:1{~ 
"I I w,; 

STATEMENT OF OBlECI'S AND REASONS 
Section 29 of the Administrators-General Act. 1963 provides for issue of a cenificate to a 
claimant claiming assets of a deceased otherwise than as a creditor. However. a cenificate can be 
granted by the Administrator-General under this secuon only in cases where lhc assets left by the 
deceased person (excluding any sum of money dcpo~hed in a Government Savings Bank or any 
provident fund to which the Provident Funds Act. 1925 applies) did n01 atlhe date of lhe death 
exceed in value in lhe whole the monetary limit specifltd in lhe section. In lhe Act as originally 
enacted in 1963, lhe monetary limit specified in the section was only Rs. 5.000. The Act was 
amended in 1972 and 1983 enhancing the said monetary limit from Rs. 5,000 to Rs. I 5,000 and 
from Rs. 15,000 toRs. 50,000 respectiveby. 
2. Representations have since been received for enhancing the aforesaid monetary limit in 
sectton 29 oflhe Administnltors General Act, 1963 from Rs. 50.000 toRs. 2,00.000 on account of 
the decrease in the money value and also the escalation of value of assets.lt is,lherefore, proposed 
to increase the monetnry limit from Rs. 50.000. as at present. toRs. 2.00,000 by suitably amending 
the reference to monetary limit in sections 9, 10.29 and 36 of the said Act. 
3. 1he Bill seeks to achieve lhe above objects. 
New OEJ.Ht: 
Tht 3rd luM, 1998. M. THAMBI DURAl. 
10 

39 of 192.5 
• 
9. (/) lf-
ANNEXURE 
ExntAcrs FROM n<E ADMOOST!tATORS-0ENERAL ACT. 1963 
(45 OF 1963) 
• • • • 
(a) any person has died lenving within any Stale assets exceeding rupees fifty 
thousand in value, and 
(b) (whether the obtaining of probate of his will or letters of administration tO 
his estate is or is not obligato!)'), no person to whom any court would have jurisdic­
tion to commit administration of such assets has. within one month after his death, 
applied in such State for such probate, or letters of administration, and 
(c) {in cases where the oblaonong of such probate or letters of adminisltltion os 
nOI obligatO!)' under the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925), no person 
has taken other proceedings for the protection of the estate, 
the Administralor-General of the State in which such assets are, may, subject to any rules 
mode by the State Government, within a reasonable time after he has had notice of the death 
of such person, and of his having left such assets, take such proceedings as may be neces· 
581)' to obtain from the High Court !etten of administration of the estate of such person. 
{2) The Administrator-General shall not take proceedings under this section unless he 
is satisfied, that there is apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration or waste of such 
assets if such proceedings are not takon by him or that such proceedings are otherwise 
nccessal)' for the protection of the assets. 
tO. (/) Whenever any person ha.s died leaving assets within any State exceeding 
rupees fifty thousand in value, and the High Court for that State is satisfied thai there is 
imminent danger of misappropnacion. deterioration or waste of such assets, rcquoring im­
mediate action, the High Court may, upon the applicauon of the Admamstrator-General or 
of any person interested in such assets or an the due administration thereof. forthwith direct 
theAdminislrlltor-General-
{a) CD collection and take po$~ion of such assets, and 
(b) to hold, deposit, realise, sell or invest the same according to the direclions of 
the High Coun, and, in default or any such directions, according to the provi~ions of 
this Act so far as the same are applicable to such assc~•-
(2)Any order of the High Court under sub-section(/) shall entitle the Administrator­
General-
• 
(a) to maintain any suit or proceeding for the rceovel)' of such assets; 
(b) if he thinks fit. to apply for letters of administration of the estate of such 
deceased person; 
(c) ro retain out of the assets of the estate any fees chargeable under rurcs mode 
under this Act; and 
(d) to reimburse himself for all payments made by him in respect of such assets 
which a private odministrator might lawfully have made. 
• • • • 
11 
R1gh1 or Ad­
mini&tralor· 
Ocnera l 10 
apply for lld· 
mlnulnnlon 
ofes,totc:s.. 
Pa~rofAd· 
mmistrator­
<itnen1 •o 
collect and 
hold asserJ 
wht:« immc: · 
ckatc lt:tKln u 
mauln:d 

CHAPTER TV 
OIWIT OF CER'TU'lCAtt 
In who•.,.,.. 29. (/) Whenever any person has died leaving assets wilhin any State and the 
Adminisua· Administrator-General of such State is satisfied that such assets. excluding any sum of money 
~;~oe;;;:: deposited in a G<lvernment Savings Bank or in any provident fund to which the prov1sions 
eeruf.,.te. of the Provident funds Act. 1925. apply, did notal I he date or death exceed in the whole 19 of 1925 
fifty thousand nspees in value. he may grant to any person, claiming Olherwise 1han as a 
creditor to be interested in such assets or in the due administration thereof. a cenificate 
under his hand entitling the claiman t to receive the assers !herein mentioned left by the 
deceased within the State, to a value not exceeding in the whole fifly 1housand rupees. 
(2) No eenificate under this secuon shall be granted before the lnpso of one month 
' from the death unless before 1he lapse of the said one month the Admtnistrator-General is 
requested so to do by writing under the hand of the executor or the widow or other person 
entiUed to administer the estate of the deceased and he thinks fit to grant it. 
• 
(J) No cenificate shall tiC grant.,P under this section,-
(!) where probate of the deceased's will or letters of admimstration of his estate 
has or have been granted; or 
(ii) in respect or any sum of money deposited in a Government Savings Bank or 
1n any provident fund to which the prov1sions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925. 19 ol 1925 
apply. 
• • • • 
Admlnuua- 36. TheAdministralor-Genetnl shall not be bound to take out letters of administration 
lor-Generlll of the eslJlle of any deceased person on account of the assetS in re,pect of which he grants 
~~.~::';d.~~ any cenifieate undersecuon 29 or section 30, but he may do so if he rcvokc_, such certifica1e 
minlSlraoion under section 33. or ascertains that the value of the estate exceeded fifty thousand nspees. 
on acc.ounc or 
asse1s for * 
which h<hu 
1rnnted cc.r· 
orJCa~e. 
• 
• 
• • • 

RAJYASABHA 
A 
BILL 
runher to amend the AdministratOrS·General Ac~ 1963. 
( Slrri M. Thambl Dural, Minisrer of Law, Jus rice and Company Affairs) 
I 