PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 141
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09) OF THE MINISTRY 
OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH-EASTERN REGION
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26  FEBRUARY, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THIRD REPORT
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09) OF THE MINISTRY
OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH-EASTERN REGION
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-273

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER-I Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .............................................................. 2—10
CHAPTER-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ............................................................................ 1 1—16
CHAPTER-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ................................................................................. 17—18
4. R
ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS  O F T HE C OMMITTEE  —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 19—20
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES O F T HE M EETINGS O F T HE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 21—24

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2008)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sanjay Raut
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri T.K. Hamza
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
21. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
22. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
23. Shri Sachin Pilot
24. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
26. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
27. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
*28. Ms. Agatha K. Sangma
@29. V acant
#30. V acant
31. Vacant
* Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  1st December, 2008.
@ Consequent upon change in nomination as Member and appointment as the Chairman of DRPSC on Agriculture, Shri Mohan
Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  5th December, 2008.
# Consequent upon vacation of his seat in Lok Sabha as a result of his election to Legislative Assembly of Chhattisgarh,
Shri Ajit Jogi ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 26th December, 2008.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty First Report on the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in its One Hundred and Thirty-third Report on Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Parliament on 16 April, 2008.
3. The Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region (DoNER) furnished the Action Taken
Note on the One Hundred and Thirty-third Report of the Committee on 13th August, 2008.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
24th February, 2009.
5. Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
24 February, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
and Thirty-third Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2008-09). The One Hundred
Thirty-third Report was presented to/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the
16 April, 2008.
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report, have been categorized as follows:
Chapter–I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Government: Paras: 7.5; 7.6; 8.6; 8.13; 8.14; 9.10; 10.9; 13.8; 15.9, 15.10;
16.10; 16.12; 18.8; 19.4; 20.3; 21.7 (of the One Hundred and Thirty-third Report).
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation as
mentioned in Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter–II: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee
has not accepted or is not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Paras: 11.7;
12.10; 16.11; 16.13; 21.6; 22.5 (
ibid).
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation or unsatisfactory
implementation of recommendations contained in Chapter-II and desires that the Ministry should
furnish logical explanation and convincing responses in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter–III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of
the Government have not been received: paras 14.4; 15.11; 17.4 (
ibid).
The Ministry has furnished either incomplete or interim replies in respect of
recommendations placed in Chapter–III. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorized in Chapter–III detailed
and pointed in the light of the letter and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the A TNs have been discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee is concerned that even though the Ministry of DoNER made a projection of
Rs.2922 crore for the current year, the actual allocation made was Rs.1455 crore under plan
scheme. The Committee has been given to understand that due to the reduction in the allocation
by almost 50%, many projects would suffer. The Ministry will not be able to implement the schemes
for the development of the region. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
allocation to the Ministry be made as per its requirement as it would be in the interest of the
overall development of the North-East Region. (Para 7.5 of 133rd Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The Ministry of DoNER had sought allocations of Rs. 1200 crore each under the NEC and
NLCPR Plan Schemes. These are major Plan Schemes of the Ministry for 2008-09. However,
Planning Commission allocated Rs. 624 crore and Rs.650 crore respectively for the said Schemes
for 2008-09.
1.1.3 Immediately after the allocation of BE 2008-09 provision for NEC and NLCPR Plan
Schemes, the Ministry of DoNER has taken up the issue of higher allocation with the Planning
Commission. Discussions are presently going on at the highest level.
Further Recommendation
1.1.4 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Planning Commission should
consider making budgetary allocation to the Ministry of DoNER as per its requirement, so
that the projects undertaken should not remain incomplete for want of funds.
1.2 OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee is not convinced by the reasoning given by the Secretary, NEC on the
visibility aspect of the development. The component of private investment is a totally different
matter to be viewed in the proper context and perspective. First of all, the outcome of the public
investments should be visible and transparent. Then only a positive message will go for private
investment. The Committee appreciates that there are basic and inherent problems in converting
public investment into tangible results. That can only be achieved if there is a sense of commitment
among implementing agencies and the State Governments. The Committee recommends that
sincere efforts should be made to ensure that whatever investment is made for the development
of NER should yield concrete result so much so that the outcome should manifest itself
(Para 7.6 ibid)
2

3
Action Taken
1.2.2 The Ministry has noted the recommendation of the  Committee for future guidance. It has
strengthened its monitoring mechanism to ensure mat the implementation of projects lead to
achievement of desired objectives. Detailed monitoring formats have been evolved for area
inspection by officers allotted to each state, as area officers.
Further Recommendation
1.2.3 The Committee would like to underscore that strengthening of monitoring
mechanism for the projects in the NE Region is absolutely essential. As natural corollary,
the monitoring formats that have been evolved should be strictly adhered to.
1.3 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee feels that the efforts made by Ministry of DoNER to persuade Ministries/
Departments to change their norms according to the condition of the NER have not yielded the
desired results. The Committee recommends that more vigorous efforts need to be made by the
Ministry of DoNER so that more and more Ministries/Departments change their norms in respect
of their flagship programmes and spend the allocated amount in the NE. (Para 8.6 ibid)
Action Taken
1.3.2 This Ministry has taken up with those Ministries, whose unspent balances form major part
of the NCPR, to amend norms for incurring expenditure on their flagship schemes, as per condition
of the North East, so as to ensure that these Ministries are in a position to spend 10% their GBS
in the North East Region.
1.4 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee views with concern the fact that even though DoNER had projected
Rs.12 crore for NLCPR, only Rs.650 crore has been allocated for the current financial year. The
Committee also took note of the fact that for NLCPR the projection was made on the of
performance during the last two years. The Committee further notes the unspent balance lying with
other Ministries. The Committee therefore recommends that the allocation for NLCPR may be
increased appropriately at RE stage to meet the requirement of various projects proposed to be
taken up by the Ministry. The Committee also recommends that allocation may also be made from
out of the unspent balance of various Ministries. The Committee desires that the Ministry of
DoNER may peruse the matter at highest level for early release of the funds. (Para 8.13)
Action Taken
1.4.2 M inistry has already taken up with the Planning Commission for higher allocation of funds.
Discussions are at presently going on at the highest level.
Further Recommendation
1.4.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should consider
making budgetary allocation to the Ministry of DoNER as per its requirement so that the
projects undertaken should not remain incomplete for want of funds. .

4
1.5 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee is constrained to observe that the State Governments could not complete 233
projects within the time schedule mainly due to the delays in utilization of funds and limited
working seasons. The Committee is however not convinced by the reasons for the backlog in
completion of projects. The Committee strongly recommends that the State Governments should
strictly adhere to the time schedule in this regard (Para 8.14 ibid)
Action Taken
1.5.2 Considering the delay in completion of projects under NLCPR, Hon’ble Minister had written
to the Chief Minister of North Eastern States on 16.05.2008 requesting their personal attention to
this vital matter to expedite completion of the projects sanctioned under NLCPR. Ministry of
DoNER regularly reviews the progress of projects and pursues with the States regularly.
1.6 NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee takes a critical view of the allocations made for NEC. The allocation of
Rs. 624 crore in BE 2008-09 as compared to the allocation of Rs. 600 crore in the previous year,
is in no way commensurate with the number of projects to be taken up by NEC. Besides the new
projects, the NEC has also several spilled over projects. The Committee is in agreement with the
view that it is difficult for NEC to fulfil its role as a regional planning body due to financial
constraints. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the NEC may be provided with suitably
enhanced allocation at RE stage so that NEC projects which are facing difficulties due to shortage
of funds do not get affected. (Para 9.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.6.2 M inistry has already taken up with the Planning Commission for higher allocation of funds.
Discussions are at presently going on at the highest level.
Further Recommendation
1.6.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should consider
making budgetary allocation to the Ministry of DoNER as per its requirement so that the
projects undertaken should not remain incomplete for want of funds.
1.7 ADVOCACY AND PUBLICITY
Recommendation
1.7.1 The Committee takes note of the reply given by the Ministry that media campaign will be
operational soon. The Committee would like to be apprised of the activities to be undertaken under
the media plan. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to achieve the objectives
of the strategy in right earnest. The Committee is also of the view that whatever steps that are
being taken under ‘Advocacy and Publicity’ and its results are still not visible. It feels that there
must be inherent weaknesses and problems in the plans being made. In the present age of
globalization, efforts should be made to bring the North-East Region into the mainstream of the
country at the earliest and for that Advocacy and Publicity is the most effective medium. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that renewed thrust may be given on media campaign and it
should be effectively used (Para 10.9 ibid)

5
Action Taken
1.7.2 A Media Campaign by the Ministry has been finalized and will be launched by the Ministry
in the current year, which includes newspaper advertisements and TV commercials on various
themes like natural beauty, tourism, investment opportunities, cultural uniqueness, developmental
work of the Central Government etc., radio jingles/spots, sponsored features in Newspapersl
Magazines, arranging panel discussions on TV etc.
1.8 NERAMAC
Recommendation
1.8.1 The Committee recognizes the fact that the North East Region, though industrially backward
due to poor infrastructure, has great potential in terms of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture. This
potential of the region has remained unharnessed and here the NERAMAC comes into the picture
which could accelerate the growth in these sectors. The Committee expresses its disquiet over the
fact that the Ministry in general and NERAMAC in particular are not able to tap the potential
available in abundance and this shows poor planning and initiative. Sincere efforts are required
to be made to harness these resources. The Committee recommends that the pineapple juice
concentrate plant in Tripura may be revived by providing it better machineries and skilled
manpower. (Para 13.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.8.2 It has been decided to re-structure and modernize the pineapple juice concentration plant of
NERAMAC at Nalkata (Tripura) under NLCPR scheme. Detailed project report in this regard has
been received and is being processed for funding of the project.
1.8.3 Besides the above project, following initiatives have been taken for strengthening of
NERAMAC:—
Diversification of existing pineapple juice concentration plant in Tripura to a multi-fruit
processing unit.
Setting up a multi-fruit processing Unit at Silchar in Assam.
Setting up a Central Quality Assurance and Packing unit with common brand for marketing
of processed products from the North East.
Setting up of one more cashew processing plant of 4 tons per day capacity in Mankachar
in Assam.
1.8.4 The Corporation has opened its branch office in every State of the North East Region to
widen and improve its operations. It has tied up with North Eastern and Handicrafts and Handloom
Development Corporation Ltd. (NEHHDC) to broadbase market for NE products
1.9 PROMOTION OF TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY
Recommendation
1.9.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the NE region has a great potential to become
an attractive tourist destination in the country particularly for eco and adventure tourism. If the
tourism potential of the region is to be fully tapped, sufficient infrastructure and peaceful
environment should be in place at the earliest. Moreover, tourism in NE provides a large number
of employment opportunities. The eco-tourism not only provides livelihood for local communities

6
and adds importance to local traditions and cultures, but also generates substantial revenue for
environmental conservation and management. The Committee is pleased to note that in the proposed
BE 2008-09, an amount of Rs. 9 crore has been allocated for Tourism which is an increase of
79.64% from the last year. (Para 15.9 ibid)
Action Taken
1.9.2 As a follow up action on the recommendation of the Fourth Sectoral Summit on Tourism
and Hospitality Sector, a Tourism Conclave was held to attract LTC Tourists to the NER. This
followed issuing of relaxation to travel to NER by Air even to those who are otherwise not entitled
to travel by air and also convert their Home Town LTC into anywhere in India specific to NER.
In the month of June and July this facility generated a huge tourism activity and visits of
Government employees to Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya and other States in the Region. This activity
is expected to pick up in the coming festive season. This facility is upto 2009-10. Other efforts
are also being made by holding information sharing seminars and workshops with all stakeholders.
1.10 PROMOTION OF TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY
Recommendation
1.10.1 The Committee appreciates the several initiatives including Media Campaign and involving
the private sector for development of the tourism sector, taken by the Ministry. However, a lot more
is yet to be done and a lot of investment is required to develop tourist infrastructure in the NER
to make it one of the most attractive tourist destination not only in the country but in the world
as well. The Committee desires that a long-term perspective plan and a roadmap may be prepared
for creation of better tourism infrastructure on a fast track basis as it is the main hurdle in the
way of development of tourism sector in the region. (Para 15.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.10.2 The Government is making all possible efforts for improving and upgrading infrastructure
in the North East Region by adopting PPP mode to make it feasible and accelerate the speed. In
this regard, IL&FS is setting up chain of budget hotels in the Region. This will be a significant
step for promoting tourism in the Region.
1.10.3 NEC has also taken up concrete steps in developing infrastructure in the North East Region.
Some important projects undertaken are as follows:
1. More than 7700 kms of roads constructed.
2. Bridge over the Brahmaputra at Tezpur and bridge over Barak River at Raniferry Ghat,
Silchar.
3. Support to the rail-cum-road bridge over the Brahmaputra at Jogighopa.
4. Funding of upgradation of 10 (ten) airports in the region including the LGB
International Airport at Guwahati.
5. Improving air connectivity through support to Alliance Air for procurement of 4
(four) 50 seater aircrafts for operation in NE Region.
6. Inter-State Bus Terminus at Guwahati and Silchar in Assam and Dimapur in Nagaland.
7. Eight Transmission Lines 1285.50 Circuit KMs. Another 369 Ckt.Kms. of Transmission
Lines are being supported and the work is in progress and expected to be completed
by the end of 2009.

7
8. NEC, in collaboration with the IL&FS, is helping in establishing of budget hotels in all
the NE States for promotion of Tourism; one Yatri Niwas in Guwahati is also coming
up.
Further Recommendation
1.10.4 Even though Home Town LTC has been allowed for travel to NER, but the Committee
has been given to understand that several government employees could not utilize this
facility due to lack of sufficient flights and hotels/guest houses. Therefore, Government
needs to look into these aspects. The Committee has been given to understand that in
several parts of North Eastern States, helicopter services are available to compensate the
lack of road, rail and air link. However, as Central Government’s LTC Rules have no
provision for reimbursement of expenditure incurred on journey performed by helicopter,
Central Government employees are unable to avail the helicopter facilities for visiting
various parts of North Eastern Region. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government may examine this aspect and make necessary provision in the LTC Rules for
the reimbursement of expenditure incurred on journey performed by helicopter by the
Central Government employees.
1.11 CONNECTIVITY
Recommendation
1.11.1 ‘Connectivity’ within the NE Region is of utmost importance if this region is to be brought
into the political, social and economic mainstream of the country. The Committee is of the considered
view that Government should adopt a proactive approach and should be diligent in implementing the
various policy initiatives. This area should be given topmost priority in the scheme of governance
of the NER and special impetus be pr ovided wherever needed. (Para 16.10 ibid)
Action Taken
1.11.2 Connectivity is given utmost importance by the Ministry of DoNER and NEC. More than
60 percent of NEC’s budget is committed to the transport and communication sector. Till now,
with the support of NEC, about 7700 Kms. of roads have already been constructed.
1.11.3 Steps have also been taken to improve air connectivity by supporting upgradation of existing
10 airports in the NER with the help of Airports Authority of India (AAI). These are located at
Guwahati, Tezpur, Agartala, Silchar, Dimapur, Lilabari, Imphal, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Shillong.
Feasibility studies for upgradation of non-operational airports at Kailashhar and Kamalpur in Tripura,
Along, Daparijo, Ziro, Pasighat and Tezu in Arunachal Pradesh, Tura in Meghalaya have also been
taken by the Airports Authority of India. Efforts are being made to have a dedicated airline in North
East.
1.11.4 Efforts for increasing the rail network in the North East Region have also been taken by
Ministry of Railways. At present it is minimal and constitutes only 4% of the total rail network of
the country. The Ministry of Railways has been spending more than 10% of their GBS in the
region. Presently, work is in progress on 14 projects, which include eight new lines, 5 Gauge
Conversion and 1 Doubling of line.
1.12 CONNECTIVITY
Recommendation
1.12.1 The Committee recommends that development of proposed three Greenfield airports at

8
Itanagar, Cheithu and Pakyong should be given priority. The Committee desires that the proposal
regarding two new Greenfield airports at Tawang and Kokrajhar be examined expeditiously. The
Committee is pleased to know that the agreement between NEC and Alliance Air has been extended
for the year 2008 for operating ATR services between locations in the North East. The Committee
desires that airports at Silchar, Dibrugarh and Umroi may also be upgraded at the earliest. It
should be impressed upon the AAI to submit its DPR on non operational airports, namely,
Kailashahar, Kamalpur and Pasighat and DPR on Tezu airport, as early as possible.
(Para 16.12 ibid)
Action Taken
1.12.2 The Greenfield Airports at Itanagar, Cheithu and Pakyong will be constructed by the AAI
with direct funding from the Planning Commission. Feasibility report on the Tawang Airport has
already been submitted by AAI and the Airport has been found feasible. The report has been sent
to the Planning Commission for considering the same for preparation of the DPR. As per the
feasibility study carried out by the AAI it has been found that the airport at Kokrajhar is not
feasible. AAI has recommended upgradation of Rupsi airport in lieu  of Kokrajhar, Rupsi being quite
close to Kokrajhar. The State Government has accordingly been requested to confirm whether
upgradation of Rupsi is acceptable to them.
1.12.3 Further, the airports at Silchar, Dibrugarh and Umroi (Shillong) are already under
up-gradation. At Silchar, modification of terminal building, installation of the Doppler VHF (Very-
High-Frequency) Omnidirectional Range (DVOR), strengthening of apron and taxi way and V-Sat
have already been completed whereas strengthening and extension of runway is under progress. At
Dibrugarh, installation of Remote Area Business Message Network (RABMN), V-Sat and VHF
Receiver have already been completed, while the construction of terminal building is under
progress. Extension of runway and associated works, although planned, could not be taken up
because of problems of land acquisition. At Umroi Airport, installation of DVOR has already been
completed while up gradation of airport including runway extension and terminal building are under
progress. AAI has submitted pre-feasibility report for Kailashahr and Kamalpur. The Airports have
been found feasible and the Planning Commission has been requested to grant in-principle approvals
for the same. Detailed Project Reports for Pasighat and Tezu Airports have been received and are
being processed.
Further Recommendation
1.12.4 The Committee recommends that the Greenfield Airports at Itanagar, Cheithu and
Pakyong may be taken up at the earliest as it could help boost development in the region.
The Committee also recommends that the upgradation work proposed at other airports, may
be completed without further delay.
1.13 NORTH EAST INDUSTRIAL AND INVESTMENT PROMOTION POLICY (NEIIPP) 2007.
Recommendation
1.13.1 The Committee is pleased to note that several incentives have been taken for new industrial
units as well as the existing ones in the NEIIP, 2007. While appreciating the initiatives to attract
foreign investment in the region, the Committee feels that more emphasis should be given on
potential investors from other parts of India. However, in order to give fillip to the NEIIPP, 2007,
the Committee recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should interact with the Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises for promoting enterprises including agro and rural industries. The
Committee strongly feels that the benefits accruing from Micro Small Medium Enterprises
Act, 2005. Khadi and Village Industries Act, 2007 and North East Industrial and Investment

9
Promotion Policy, 2007 would go a long way in promoting MSMEs in the region provided adequate
institutional arrangement and proper awareness are in place. The Committee also recommends that
the Government should give high priority to the problem of connectivity in the region as without
proper and adequate connectivity the investors would not be convinced for investing in the region.
(Para 18.8 ibid)
Action Taken
1.13.2 To disseminate the knowledge of NEIIP, 2007 provisions, a workshop of investors has been
organized by NEDFI who have been given the role of distributing various kinds of subsidies under
the policy. CII and ICC Kolkata have also held informatics exchange programmes in the North East
Region and Kolkata to promote investment in the region. Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship
(IIE), Guwahati, an institute working under Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSME) is working to make, would be investors, aware of provisions and relaxations under the
NEIIEP-2007. In this connection, a meeting was held in the middle of June, 2008 with
entrepreneurs at IIE, Guwahati, under the Chairmanship of Minister for DoNER.
1.13.3 The Indian Institute of Entrepreneurs (IIE) is also working in the field of developing
clusters in important sectors such as Silk-Khadi Clusters at Dalbari, Assam; for Muga, Eri and Pit
products, Cane and Bamboo Cluster at Aizwal; for cane and bamboo, Nagaland; Beed making
Cluster in Mon district, Nagaland. As regards infrastructure, specially road connectivity, it is being
taken care of under Special Accelerated Road Development Programme of Department of Road
Transport and Highways, PMGSY of Ministry of Rural Development and also though NLCPR.
1.14 INITIATIVES UNDER INDIA’S LOOK EAST POLICY
Recommendation
1.14.1 The Committee recognizes that under India’ s Look East Policy, border trade with
neighboring landlocked countries is of utmost importance as the North East Region could provide
a link between India and South East Asian countries for increasing trade between the two regions.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ‘Look East Policy’ may be followed up vigorously
in close coordination with other concerned Union Ministries and State Governments. As pointed out
by the Secretary, Ministry of DONER, the infrastructure of the Land Customs Stations needs to be
improved for better border trade. (Para 19.4 ibid)
Action Taken
1.14.2 The Ministry of DoNER is vigorously following up points of action for the Look East
Policy vis-a-vis the North East with the concerned Ministries/organizations and State Governments.
A Task Force under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DoNER has been set up for this purpose. The
Ministry of External Affairs has opened a Branch Secretariat in Guwahati as part of the initiatives
under the Look East Policy and North East India. A chapter on Look East Policy: the North East
Perspective has been included in the NER Vision 2020 document. Ministry of DONER also actively
participates in discussions and consultations organized by the Ministry of External Affairs with the
countries that neighbour North Eastern India.
1.15 VISION NER 2020
Recommendation
1.15.1 The Committee desires that Vision NER 2020 should be formulated at the earliest for
overall development of the region. The Committee feels that the schemes for development of

10
transport infrastructure, industrial base, agricultural and allied sectors with special emphasis on
medicinal plants in the region should be given prominence in the Vision NER, 2020. The Committee
hopes that the Vision document would give a direction to the development process in the region.
The Committee recommends that the Government should strictly adhere to the schedule of adoption
of this Vision Document. (Para 20.3 ibid)
Action Taken
1.15.2 The NER VISION 2020 document has been finalized. The document was adopted by the
North-Eastern Council in its 56th meeting held at Agartala, on 12-13 May, 2008. The document was
formally released by the Honourable Prime Minister on 2nd July, 2008. The document sets up the
goals, identifies the challenges and suggests implementation strategy for development of various
sectors for peace and prosperity of the region.
Further Recommendation
1.15.3 The Committee desires that action plan to implement NER Vision, 2020 may be
prepared at the earliest.
1.16 POWER SECTOR
Recommendation
1.16.1 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of DoNER may examine the
recommendations made in the Sectoral Summit held in January, 2007, in collaboration with other
concerned Ministries and take a view on each of the recommendations at the earliest.
(Para 21.7 ibid)
Action Taken
1.16.2 Ministry of DoNER had examined the recommendations made in the Pasighat Summit on
Power (16-17 January, 2007) and has taken up the actionable points with the concerned Ministries/
organizations/NE States and the status thereon is reviewed from time to time. The last such review
was held during NEC Conclave held in Agartala (Tripura) on 12-13 May, 2008.

11
CHAPTER-II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED OR IS NOT SATISFIED WITH THE
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
2.1 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CAPACITY BUILDING
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee is happy to note that 36 students have been selected for training in
Commercial Pilot Licence (CPL) and Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (AME) and some young
persons have also been selected for airhostess training. The Committee however, wishes to observe
that these trainings are being held outside the North-Eastern region. If the North Eastern region
has to be strengthened and the capacity for the region has to be upgraded, such Institutes should
be opened there instead of sending people outside for training. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that an early decision may be taken on starting the Pilot Training Institute at Lilabari.
Whatever problems that are coming in the way be sorted out at the earliest and the Central Ministry
may take initiative in this regard. The Committee is of the view that there is huge potential for
fashion designing and fashion technology in the North East which is still to be tapped. The
Committee reiterates that a National Institute of Fashion Technology may be opened in the North
East at the earliest. The Committee is also of the view that there is a huge potential for
sportspersons in the North East and this potential has not yet been tapped. To tap this potential,
a separate Sports Institute or Sports Academy is required in the North East. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates that a Sports Academy may be opened in the North Eastern Region:
(Para 11.7)
Action Taken
Pilot Training Institute
2.1.2 In principle, approval for setting up the Pilot Training Institute at Lilabari, Assam has
already been granted on the 30th January 2006 by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The
techno-feasibility study was assigned to M/s Foundation for Aviation and Sustainable Tourism
(FAST), New Delhi and they submitted the draft report. Certain clarifications and supplementary
information sought from FAST have been received and FAST have been asked to submit the final
report. The main issue is related to the availability of instructors who are in short supply in this
country and the difficulties in attracting them to a remote location like Lilabari. Government of
Assam has identified a plot of land measuring 75 bighas near Lilabari for the purpose and is
awaiting the clearance of the Land Advisory Committee. The NEC is constantly pursuing the matter
with the Government of Assam. The institute is proposed to be established on a Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode. The draft Expression of Interest for inviting bidders has been sent to the
Ministry of Civil Aviation for their comments and vetting. An outlay of Rs 399.00 lakhs have been
kept in the Annual Plan 2008-09 for the purpose.
National Institute of Fashion Technology
2.1.3 The National Institute of Fashion Technology is an autonomous institute under the Ministry
of Textiles, Government of India. They decided to open a NIFT Centre in Shillong and have sent
the DPR to the Ministry for funding. The matter is in progress.
11

12
North East Adventure Sports Academy
2.1.4 Ministry has taken up with Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to find out how many
institutes/academies have been set up by them in each State of  the North East Region, to see
whether this Ministry also needs to establish an Adventure Sports Academy in the region.
Further Recommendation
2.1.5 The Committee expresses its concern over delay in setting up the Pilot Training
Institute at Lilabari, Assam. The Committee feels that issue of availability of instructors
should be sorted out at the earliest. The Committee further desires that the Ministry of
DoNER may expedite the process of getting land use clearance from the Land Advisory
Committee, Government of Assam, for the purpose. The Committee recommends that the
Government should expedite the process of opening a NIFT Centre in Shillong. The
Committee also recommends that the Government may take up on priority, the opening of
a Sports Academy or Institute in the NER.
2.2 EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS
Recommendation
2.2.1 The North East States Roads Projects (NESRP) is an important ADB assisted project. With
the implementation of this project, road connectivity in the North-East region will improve
significantly. The Committee, therefore, desires that EFC/CCEA approval for the project may be
obtained at the earliest. The Committee feels that the project must take off during 2008-09 and
there should not be any delay in this regard. The Committee recommends that follow up action on
the report of the consultants on North Eastern States Trade Investment Creation Initiative Project
(NESTICI) may be taken immediately. Efforts should be made to ensure that the implementation
of the project commences during the current year. The Committee observes that even though NER
Livelihood Project (NERLP) scheme was approved in September, 2006, the project is still at the
stage of selection of consultants for preparing the main project report. The project is taking a very
long time to take off and by the time it is implemented, there will be cost overrun which may
necessitate a review. The Committee therefore recommends that all out efforts should be made to
ensure that NERLP is implemented during 2008-09. (Para 12.10 ibid)
Action Taken
The North East States Road Projects (NESRP)
2.2.2 Prioritization of roads has been completed and Detailed Project Reports (DPR) for all the
identified roads are being finalized by the ADB consultants. EFC memo is under preparation and
will be finalized soon. All efforts are being made to operationalize the project during 2008-09.
2.2.3 North Eastern States Trade Investment Creation Intiative Project (NESTICI)
On the basis of the revised note of the consultant, prepared in consultation with ADB, the project
proposal was taken up with DEA for funding during 2008-09. However, DEA have, in consultation
with ADB, with reference to their Country Strategy Program, decided to include the project for
funding during the year 2011.
2.2.4 NER Livelihood Project (NERLP)
The process to appoint a consultant for preparing Detailed Project Report is at advanced
stage in consultation with World Bank and DEA.

13
Further Recommendation
2.2.5 The Committee is hopeful that the NESRP might have been operationalised by now.
About NESTICI, the Committee is unhappy with the decision to include the project for
funding during 2011. It is unable to understand the logic behind this decision and would like
to be informed about the details of the decision. The Committee expresses its displeasure
over the fact that for a scheme, like NERLP, which was approved in 2006, a consultant could
not so far been appointed for preparing a DPR. According to the Committee, this is a sad
state of affairs and a typical case of procrastination the Committee strongly recommends
to the Ministry to expedite action positively and implement NERLP in the second quarter
of 2009-10.
2.3 CONNECTIVITY
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee is satisfied that for BE 2008-09, an amount of Rs.63845.00 lakh, which is
an increase of 58.02% over the last year, has been allocated for transport and communication. The
Committee is happy to note that the Union Government’s intention is to invest an amount to the
tune of Rs.50, 000 crore on the road sector in the North-East region over the eleventh plan period.
The Committee is of the view that given the strategic location of the region, the roads on the Indo-
Myanmar border (under Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for North East of
DORTH), road to connect Mizoram and the Kaladan Multi-modal project (under MEA), tri-lateral
highway between India, Myanmar and Thailand, important roads in Myanmar (Tamu Kalewa road,
Rih Tidim and Rih Falam roads) should be upgraded/constructed at a fast pace and completed at
the earliest. (Para 16.11 ibid)
Action Taken
2.3.2 The Union Government is expected to spend around Rs.31,000 crore on the road sector in
the North East Region over the Eleventh Plan. Following are important road projects which have
been approved by Ministry of External Affairs for connecting Indo-Myanmar Border.
Kaladan Multi-modal Project
2.3.3 The Ministry of External Affairs is the implementing Ministry for the portion of the road
falling in Myanmar and DORTH is the implementing Ministry for the portion of road falling in India.
Inland Waterways Authority of India is the executing agency in Myanmar. The Mizoram
Government is conducting ground survey for the connecting road in Mizoram and they will then
prepare the DPR for the road from Mobu to Nalkawn. The process is expected to be completed
by August, 2008.
Tri-lateral Highway between India, Myanmar and Thailand
2.3.4 Ministry of External Affairs are getting the DPRs prepared for implementing the project.
Important roads in Myanmar (Tamu Kalewa road, Rih Tidim and Rih Falam roads)
2.3.5 A proposal to upgrade the Rih-Tidim and Rih-Falam roads in Myanmar in order to facilitate
a second border trade point with Myanmar at Zokhawthar (Mizoram) — Rih (Myanmar) is under
consideration of MEA. BRO has prepared DPRs for upgradation of both these roads. The proposal
is under active consideration of MEA to appoint an executive agency and Project Development
Consultant.

14
Further Recommendation
2.3.6 The Committee is constrained to note that progress on the projects on transport and
communication meant for North East Region are moving at snail’s pace. The Committee
desires that immediate action may be taken for implementing the projects mentioned above.
The Committee is hopeful that in respect of Kaladan Multi Modal Project, Mizoram would
have completed its ground survey and DPR immediately. If it is completed, further action
may be taken to execute the project. For the Trilateral Highway between India, Myanmar
and Thailand, Ministry of External Affairs may complete the DPR immediately and take
further necessary action. The Committee also recommends that a time-bound action plan
may be drawn up to upgrade the roads to Myanmar.
2.4 CONNECTIVITY
Recommendation
2.4.1 Regarding inland water transport, the Committee recommends that Indo-Bangladesh IWT
Protocol and Kaladan River multi-modal transport route from Mizoram to Sittwe Port should be
given utmost importance as they could help increase foreign trade with neighbouring countries.
(Para 16.13 ibid)
Action Taken
2.4.2 The Ministry of External Affairs has already approved the implementation of the project and
are themselves implementing it for the portion of the road falling in Myanmar. The portion of the
road falling in India is to be implemented by DORTH. Inland Waterways Authority of India is the
executing agency in Myanmar. The Mizoram Government is conducting ground survey for the
connecting road in Mizoram and they will then prepare the DPR for the road from Mobu to
Nalkawn. The process is expected to be completed by August, 2008.
Further Recommendation
2.4.3 Please see the recommendation made in relation to para no. 16.11 of the main
report.
2.5 POWER SECTOR
Recommendation
2.5.1 The Committee is of the view that there is an immense potential of hydro-power in the
region which has still not been fully harnessed. The Committee recommends that the emphasis
should be laid on completion of on-going projects without further delay before new projects are
taken up in the Eleventh Plan. (Para 21.6)
Action Taken
2.5.2 Hydro Power Potential for Mega and Major Projects at 60 % load factor has been assessed
for the country as 84000 MW, out of which 31857 MW (38%) is available in the North-Eastern
Region. This vast potential has yet to be tapped for utilization. Only 3.4% of the potential available
in NE (31857 MW) has been harnessed so far. Hence, ample scope exists in this region for
harnessing Hydro Power Potential in a sustainable manner.
2.5.3 The North Eastern Council has played a major role in the economic upliftment of the region
through infrastructure development in the power sector. In 1981, the installed Capacity of the

15
North Eastern Region was 410 MW only. In the last two decades, the total installed capacity has
increased to more than fivefold at 2033.12 MW, (as on April 2008) excluding Sikkim which
comprises of both Hydro and Thermal segments. Augmentation in Generation capacity of North
East has been made possible by ensuring active involvement of the North Eastern Council. The
NEC since its inception has contributed 673.50 MW of capacity addition (630 MW Hydro and
43.50 MW thermal).
2.5.4 Small/Mini Hydel projects with a total capacity of 4.5 MW have also been taken up on
viability gap funding basis by NEC, so far, in conformity with NEC’s Pasighat Proclamation on
Power. The projects are targeted to be completed by the end of 2010. An amount of Rs. 4.00 crore
has been released till date and the work is under progress.
2.5.5 21MW Baramura Gas Based project Unit-V , in Tripura at project cost of Rs 80.00 crore is
the only on-going Thermal Power project taken up and funded by North Eastern Council. An
amount of Rs 30.00 crore has already been released by NEC till date. The project is scheduled to
be completed in 20 months i.e. by end of the year 2009 and the executing Agency is the Tripura
State Electricity Corporation Ltd.
Further Recommendation
2.5.6 The Committee is unhappy to note that even though out of total hydropower
potential of 84000 MW in the country, 38% (31857 MW) is available in NE region, but out
of it only 3.4% of this has been tapped so far. The Committee recommends that all the
ongoing hydro power projects may be completed without further delay. The Committee
recommends that the ongoing thermal power project “21MW Baramura Gas based project
unit-V” in Tripura funded by North Eastern Council be completed within the stimulated
time-frame.
2.5.7 The Committee further recommends that the Government should explore in a big
way “Public Private Partnership Model” for tapping the huge potential of hydro-power
available in NE.
2.6 EDUCATION
Recommendation
2.6.1 The Committee feels that there is some mismatch in the figures pertaining to literacy and
dropout rates in the NE States. The Committee therefore recommends that the figures should be re-
checked/verified by the concerned authorities so as to get the true picture in this regard. Regarding
shortage of teachers in NE States, the Committee recommends that the Two Years’ Certificate
Course in Teachers’ Training offered by IGNOU through the distance learning mode, may be
availed of effectively for training of existing teachers. At the same time setting up of new teacher
training institutes may also be considered. The Committee is optimistic that the revised funding
pattern of 90:10 will give a boost to Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan in the NE Region. (Para 22.5 ibid)
Action Taken
2.6.2 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Human Resource Development for
ascertaining the correct number of dropouts in each of the North Eastern States and to initiate
remedial measures for reducing the number of these.
2.6.3 In response to this Ministry’s request to initiate measures for reducing the shortage of
teachers, Ministry of HRD has intimated that shortage of faculty is a national problem being faced

16
by the higher education sector both in the Universities, and Colleges and Technical Institutions. It
has taken following steps to alleviate the problem at national level, including NE Region.
(a) Retirement age of teachers has been increased from 62 to 65 years for teaching
staff;
(b) Where considered appropriate retired teachers have been permitted to be
re-employed;
(c) For teaching graduate students M.Phil qualification is now considered sufficient and
for post-graduate classes Ph.D. is adequate and exemption from passing next
examination has been granted as a temporary measure;
(d) The State Governments and other institutes have been requested from time to time
to expedite filling up of vacancies without enforcing any ban orders;
(e) For attracting students to do Ph.D. the fellowship amount has been increased
considerably;
(f) A Pay Revision Committee has been appointed by UGC for making recommendations
regarding revised pay scales for university teachers keeping in view the need to
attract and retain competent faculty in teaching posts.
Further Recommendation
2.6.4 The Committee notes that the response of the Ministry to its specific recommendation
regarding setting up new Teachers’ Training Institutes in the NE, is evasive. The Committee
urge upon the Ministry to initiate immediate action in a time-bound manner.

17
CHAPTER-III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
3.1 Transfer of Hill Area Development Programme (HADP) and Border Area
Development Programme (BADP)
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee expresses its deep concern that even though the two programmes i.e. Hill
Area Development Programme (HADP) and Border Area Development Programme (BADP) are
shown in the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 against the Ministry of
DoNER but the programmes are yet to be transferred to it. The Committee is constrained to note
that inspite of its recommendation in the One Hundred and Twenty Seventh report, the Cabinet
Secretariat has not taken any steps in this direction. The issue is pending with that Secretariat since
long. The Committee reiterates that such important issue should be resolved on priority basis.
(Para 14.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.1.2 The matter is being taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs/Cabinet Secretariat to take a
view on the issue.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3 The Committee fails to understand why the Government is dragging its feet in the
matter. The Committee would expect that Government would come out with a clear view in
the matter without any further delay.
3.2 PROMOTION OF TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee desires that the Ministry in tandem with the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the Ministry of Tourism should expedite the issue of relaxing the movement of tourists in the North-
Eastern region in the interest of development of NER and tourism. (Para 15.11 ibid)
Action Taken
3.2.2 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region had taken up with the Ministry of Home
Affairs, the issue of relaxation of Protected Area Permit/Restricted Area Permit (PAP/RAP)
restrictions. Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that in the case of Arunachal Pradesh, orders
for relaxation of P AP/RAP restrictions have been issued in May 2008. Proposals from the States
of Mizoram, Nagaland, Manipur and Sikkim are under consideration.
3.3 ROPEWAY AT TAWANG
Recommendation
3.3.1 The Ropeway Project at Tawang is a classic example of procrastination. The Committee
17

18
expresses its displeasure over the fact that the foundation for the Ropeway was laid by the
President of India in 2002 yet the progress of construction of this ropeway is not at all satisfactory.
Even though funds were allocated last year, it is a matter of concern that the State Government
was in the process of issuing tenders in August 2007. It is unfortunate that the Secretary could not
give the latest status of the project. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Ministry must take suitable initiatives and follow-up action to ensure completion of project without
further delay. Otherwise, the Committee apprehends that there would be time and cost overrun.
(Para 17.4)
Action Taken
3.3.2 The construction work at the site of the project has already started and work relating to
foundations of the towers is going on. The State Government has been advised to accelerate the
pace of the implementation of the project and submit latest physical/financial progress of the
project.

19
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSION/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Planning Commission
should consider making budgetary allocation to the Ministry of DoNER as per its requirement,
so that the projects undertaken should not remain incomplete for want of funds.  (Para 1.1.4)
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
The Committee would like to underscore that strengthening of monitoring
mechanism for the projects in the NE Region is absolutely essential. As natural corollary,
the monitoring formats that have been evolved should be strictly adhered to. (Para 1.2.3)
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should consider
making budgetary allocation to the Ministry of DoNER as per its requirement so that the
projects undertaken should not remain incomplete for want of funds. (Para 1.4.3)
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should consider
making budgetary allocation to the Ministry of DoNER as per its requirement so that the
projects undertaken should not remain incomplete for want of funds. (Para 1.6.4)
PROMOTION OF TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY
Even though Home Town LTC has been allowed for travel to NER, but the Committee
has been given to understand that several Government employees could not utilize this facility
due to lack of sufficient flights and hotels/guest houses. Therefore, Government needs to look
into these aspects. The Committee has been given to understand that in several parts of
North Eastern States, helicopter services are available to compensate the lack of road, rail and
air link. However, as Central Government’s LTC Rules have no provision for reimbursement
of expenditure incurred on journey performed by helicopter, Central Government employees
are unable to avail the helicopter facilities for visiting various parts of North Eastern
Region. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government may examine this aspect and
make necessary provision in the LTC Rules for the reimbursement of expenditure incurred on
journey performed by helicopter by the Central Government employees. (Para 1.10.4)
CONNECTIVITY
The Committee recommends that the Greenfield Airports at Itanagar, Cheithu and
Pakyong may be taken up at the earliest as it could help boost development in the region.
The Committee also recommends that the up gradation work proposed at other airports,
may be completed without further delay. (Para 1.12.4)
VISION NER 2020
The Committee desires that action plan to implement NER Vision 2020 may be
prepared at the earliest. (Para 1.15.3)
19

20
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CAPACITY BUILDING
The Committee expresses its concern over delay in setting up the Pilot Training
Institute at Lilabari, Assam. The Committee feels that issue of availability of instructors
should be sorted out at the earliest. The Committee further desires that the Ministry of
DoNER may expedite the process of getting land use clearance from the Land Advisory
Committee, Government of Assam, for the purpose. The Committee recommends that the
Government should expedite the process of opening a NIFT Centre in Shillong. The
Committee also recommends that the Government may take up on priority, the opening of
a Sports Academy or Institute in the NER. (Para 2.1.5)
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS
The Committee is hopeful that the NESRP might have been operationalised by now.
About NESTICI, the Committee is unhappy with the decision to include the project for funding
during 2011. It is unable to understand the logic behind this decision and would like to be
informed about the details of the decision. The Committee expresses its displeasure over the
fact that for a scheme, like NERLP, which was approved in 2006, a consultant could not so far
been appointed for preparing a DPR. According to the Committee, this is a sad state of affairs
and a typical case of procrastination the Committee strongly recommends to the Ministry to
expedite action positively and implement NERLP in the second quarter of 2009-10.  (Para 2.2.5)
CONNECTIVITY
The Committee is constrained to note that progress on the projects on transport and
communication meant for North East Region are moving at snail’s pace. The Committee
desires that immediate action may be taken for implementing the projects mentioned above.
The Committee is hopeful that in respect of Kaladan Multi Modal Project, Mizoram would
have completed its ground survey and DPR immediately. If it is completed, further action
may be taken to execute the project. For the Trilateral Highway between India, Myanmar
and Thailand, Ministry of External Affairs may complete the DPR immediately and take
further necessary action. The Committee also recommends that a time-bound action plan
may be drawn up to upgrade the roads to Myanmar. (Para 2.3.6)
POWER SECTOR
The Committee is unhappy to  note that even though out of total hydropower potential
of 84000 MW in the country, 38% (31857 MW) is available in NE region, but out of it only
3.4% of this has been tapped so far. The Committee recommends that all the ongoing hydro
power projects may be completed without further delay. The Committee recommends that the
ongoing thermal power project “21MW Baramura Gas based project unit-V’ in Tripura funded
by North Eastern Council be completed within the stimulated time frame.
The Committee further recommends that the Government should explore in a big
way “Public Private Partnership Model” for tapping the huge potential of hydro-power
available in NE. (Para 2.5.6, 2.5.7)
EDUCATION
The Committee notes that the response of the Ministry to  its specific recommendation
regarding setting up new Teachers’ Training Institutes in the NE, is evasive. The Committee
urge upon the Ministry to  initiate immediate action in a time-bound manner. (Para 2.6.4)
Transfer of Hill Area Development Programme (HADP) and Border Area Development
Programme (BADP).
The Committee fails to understand why the Government is dragging its feet in the
matter. The Committee would expect that Government would come out with a clear view in
the matter without any further delay. (Para 3.1.3)

21
MINUTES

22

23
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 24 February, 2009, in Committee Room ‘C’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramachandra Khuntia
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri Tapir Gao
11. Shri T.K. Hamza
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
14. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
15. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
16. Km. Agatha K. Sangma
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda
of the day.
3.0 * * *
23
*** Relate to other matters.

24
3.1 The Committee, then, took up for consideration the draft 141st Report on the Action Taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s 133rd Report on the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) pertaining to Ministry of DoNER. The Committee adopted the
Report with minor modifications.
3.2 * * *
4.0 * * *
4.1 * * *
5. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports in both Houses of Parliament during
the Session. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence, Shri Sanjay Raut,
Member, Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, Member, Rajya Sabha
to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Naveen Jindal,
Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence, Shri Tapir Gao, Member, Lok Sabha, to lay a copy each
of the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.