CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1999-2000) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 19th April, 1999) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 22nd April, 1999) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 1999/Chaitra 1921 (Saka) 
C O N T E N T S
 1. Composition of the Committee 
2. Introduction (iii) 
3. Report
4. *Relevant Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee
*to be appended at the printing stage
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(1998-99)
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri
4. Shri H.Hanumanthappa
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh
7. Shri Prafull Goradia
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
9. Shri K.M. Saifullah
10. Shri C.M. Ibrahim
11. Shri Janeshwar Misra
12. Shri Drupad Borgohajan
13. Dr.(Ms.) P. Selvie Das
14. * Dr. Jagannath Mishra
15. · Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
LOK SABHA

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
19. Shri Vijay Goel
20. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi
21. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
22. Shri Anant Kuma Hegde
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
26. Smt. Meira Kumar
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed
29. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
30. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy
31. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
32. Shri Motilal Vora
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subba
34. Shri Sudhir Giri
35. Shri Samar Choudhury
36. Shri Mohan Singh
37. Shri C, Sreenivaasan
38. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi
39. Shri Lalu Prasad
40. Shri Abdul Ghafoor
41. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi
42. Shri Ramsheth Thakur
43. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
44. # Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
45. @Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
SECRETARIAT 
  
 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised
by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants (1999-2000) relating to the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.
2. The Committee heard the concerned officers of the Ministry considered the relevant documents placed before it
and discussed the Demands and other related matters, at its meeting held on 30
th, 31st March and 1st April, 1999.
3. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the following :-
i. Presentation made by the Secretaries/concerned officers of the related Departments;

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
ii. Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 1999-2000;
iii. Annual Reports of the Departments for the year 1998-99;
iv. Explanatory Note on the Demands received from the Ministry;
v. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Forty-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry;
vi. Written replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaires sent to it by the Secretariat; and
vii. Written clarifications on the points/issues raised by the Members in the meetings of the Committee.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the
15th April, 1999.
New Delhi PRANAB MUKHERJEE
April 15, 1999 Chairman
Committee on Home Affairs
  
 
(iii)
REPORT
1. The Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs comprises the following Departments :
i. Department of Legal Affairs
ii. Legislative Department,
iii. Department of Justice, and
iv. Department of Company Affairs
1. The main functions of the Department of Legal Affairs are :-
i. To render advice to the various Ministries/Departments of the Government of India on legal matters.
ii. To carry out the conveyancing work of the Central Government;
iii. To attend to the litigation work in the Supreme Court, High Courts and some of the subordinate
courts;
iv. To handle the treaties and agreements with foreign countries in matters of Civil Law;
v. To authorise officers to execute contracts and assurances of property on behalf of the President
under Article 299 (1) of the Constitution;
vi. To sanction grants-in-aid to certain institutions engaged in research in the field of law.
2.1. The Department of Legal Affairs is further concerned with appointment of the Law Officers, namely the
Attorney-General of India, the Solicitor-General of India and the Additional Solicitors-General of India, etc. The
Department of Legal Affairs administers the Advocates Act, 1961 and the Notaries Act, 1987. The Department is
also administratively incharge of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Appellate Board, Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Indian Legal Service and Law Commission of India.
2.2 The Department has a two-tier organisational set-up, namely, the main Secretariat at New Delhi and the
Branch Secretariats at Mumbai, Calcutta, Chennai and Bangalore.
1. The Legislative Department deals with the following matters:-

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
i. Scrutiny of Notes for the Cabinet in relation to all legislative proposals
from drafting and constitutional points of view.
ii. Drafting of all Government Bills including Constitution Amendment Bills before introduction in
Parliament; translation of all such Bills into Hindi and forwarding both English and Hindi versions
of the Bills to the Parliament Secretariats; drafting of non-official amendments and rendering of
assistance to Administrative Ministries to decide on the acceptability or otherwise of non-official
amendments;
iii. Drafting of Ordinances to be promulgated by the President;
iv. Drafting of legislations to be enacted as President’s Acts in respect of States under President’s rule;
v. Drafting of Regulations to be made by the President;
vi. Drafting of Constitution Orders, i.e. Orders required to be issued under the Constitution;
vii. Scrutiny of all statutory rules, orders and notifications and their translation into Hindi;
viii. Scrutiny of State Legislations in the concurrent field which requires assent of the President article
254 of the Constitution;
ix. The Department of Justice deals with the Constitutional organisation of the Supreme Court and the
High Courts and the appointment of Judges thereto, conditions of their service and with the
administration of judicial services in the Union Territories. Besides, it is the nodal Department in so
far as the administration of justice in States is concerned, Scrutiny of legislations to be enacted by
Union Territory Legislatures;
x. Elections to Parliament, Legislatures of States and Union Territories and Offices of the President and
Vice-President;
xi. Election Commission; Electoral Reforms;
xii. Apportionment of expenditure on elections between the Centre and the States/UTs with Legislatures;
xiii. Publication of Central Acts, Ordinances and Regulations and their authorised translations in Hindi
and other languages specified in the Eighth schedule to the Constitution.
4. The main functions of the Department of Justice include the appointment of judges of Supreme Court and
High Courts, their service conditions; Constitution and Organisation of Supreme Court and High Courts;
establishment of benches away from the principal seat of the High Courts; reviewing of strength of the judges in
the High Courts; administration of Contempt of Court Act, 1971 and Family Court Act of 1984; the
administration of justice in Union Territories, monitoring of pendency of cases in the courts; the National
Judicial Pay Commission and National Judicial Academy.
4.1. Though this Department forms a part of Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, it is under the
administrative control of Ministry of Home Affairs.
5. The Department of Company Affairs is the primary agency responsible for the development and efficient
functioning of the corporate sector comprising the Joint Stock Companies. Functions of the Department include
administration of the Companies Act, 1956 and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969
(MRTP Act), Indian Partnership Act, 1937, and the Societies Registration Act, 1860, and to exercise supervision
over the activities of the Institute of Chartered Accountants. It also holds administrative control over the
Institute of Company Secretaries and the Institute of Costs and Works Accountants.
BUDGET IN GENERAL
6. The total budgetary allocation made for the Ministry of Law and Justice for the year 1999-2000 is shown
under four Demands namely Demand Numbers 58, 59, 60 & 61. Demand No. 58 which constitutes a major
portion of the total allocation, relates to the Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative Department and
Department of Justice. The financial requirement of the Department of Company Affairs is covered under the
Demand No. 61.

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
7. Demand Nos. 59 and 60 have been assigned to the Election Commission of India and the Supreme Court of
India , respectively. The expenditure to be incurred on the Supreme Court of India is `charged’.
DEMAND NO. 58 – LAW AND JUSTICE
8. The Budgetary provision under this Demand includes expenditure to be incurred on Secretariat-General
Services of the Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative Department, Department of Justice, Conduct of
elections, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, National Legal Services Authority, National Judicial Academy,
Infrastructural facilities for the judiciary, etc.
9. The Budget Estimates (1999-2000) under the Demand are given below :-
(Rs.in crores)
 
Plan Non-Plan Total
Revenue 70.00 145.64 215.64
Capital - - -
Total 70.00 145.64 215.64
  
  
 
General Observations
9.1 The Committee at its sitting held on the 15th April, 1999, noted with concern that some of the
recommendations made by it from time to time have not been taken by Government with seriousness they
deserve. There has been inordinate delay in their implementation and when recommendations have not
been accepted, no detailed and cogent reasons were given for not accepting them. The Committee,
therefore, strongly feels that Government may take earnest action in respect of such recommendations
pending before it for decision.
10. The Committee having considered all aspects makes recommendations/observations in respect of the
following:
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
10.1. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs made a presentation before the Committee on 30th
March, 1999. The salient points of his presentation are as follows:
National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) and Lok Adalats
10.2 The National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) a statutory body constituted under the National
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 ( as amended by the Act of (1994) is responsible for extending free
legal assistance to poor and weaker sections of the society entangled in litigation before various courts
including Supreme Court . Rs.4.00 crore has been provided as grants-in-aid for the various functions of the
NALSA which inter alia
 include organising Lok Adalats and legal aid to the persons declared eligible

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
10.3 The Committee , in its 45th Report on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Law,
Justice and Company Affairs had recommended to lay the Annual Report and Audited Statement of
Accounts of NALSA on the Table of the Houses of Parliament. In its Action Taken Note the Department
of Legal Affairs had stated that the action for submission of Annual Audited Statement of Accounts of
NALSA would be possible only after the form and the manner in which the Accounts were to be
maintained as well as the modalities of the Legal Aid Fund are finalised in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and the Comptroller-General of Accounts . On being asked
about the latest position in that regard, the Department replied that as decided in the first annual meeting of
NALSA held on 13.9.97, the modalities for handling and operation of the Legal Aid Fund were worked out
by a Committee and submitted to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) as far back as 29
th
January, 1998 and the matter had still been pending with them even after being constantly persued by the
Department of Legal Affairs.
10.4 The Committee is constrained to note that the matter relating to the modalities for handling and
operation of the Legal Aid Fund, which is a pre-requisite before laying of the Annual Report and
Audited Accounts of NALSA before Parliament, has not been attended to by the Ministry of Finance
with the expedition that it deserves. Had this not been so the matter would not have been pending with
them for over a year. The Committee however, reiterates its earlier decision and recommends that the
Annual Report and Audited Statement of Accounts of the NALSA should be laid before the Parliament
without further delay.
10.5 When the funding of the NALSA came up for discussion in the Committee, it wanted to know from
the Department the number of person who have been provided legal aid and advice by the State Legal
Service Authorities/State Legal Aid and Advice Boards. As desired by the Committee, the Department
furnished details in this regard (see Annexure A) from perusal of the Annexure it would be seen that as on
27.3.99, a total of 23,53,995 persons have received legal aid and advise all over the country so far.
10.6 During the financial year 1997-98 an amount of Rs.5 crore was allocated under the Head `NALSA’ at
BE stage, however, only an amount of Rs.95.46 lakhs was actually spent during that year. The explanation
given by the the Ministry for gross under utilisation was that the Central Authority was constituted only in
the year 1997 and it became functional only in the beginning of 1998. The Committee in its 39
th Report
had observed that the said amount was quite inadequate. Despite this observation of the Committee the
grant was reduced at RE stage to Rs.3.38 crores. The Committee in its 45th Report had recommended that
the Government should at least increase the allocation to Rs.5 crore so as to restore it to the 1997-98 BE
stage and thereafter review the allocation with a view to enhancing it even beyond Rs.5 Crores. In the
financial year 1998-99 an amount of Rs.4 crore was allocated for the authority at BE and RE stages. The
Committee has been informed that the matter was taken up during the pre-budget meeting with the
Ministry of Finance. The Ministry was reluctant even to retain the same budgetary provision at RE stage
due to less expenditure incurred by the NALSA. In view of this the said budgetary provision of Rs. 4 crore
has been retained for the year 1999-2000 also. The Committee has been further informed that in case
NALSA is able to incurre substantial expenditure, the position can be reviewed at RE stage.
10.7 In this context it may not be out of place to mention that during the financial year 1998-99 the
NALSA was able to spend Rs.3 crore out of the budgetary grant of Rs. 4 crore. The under utilisation has

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
been mainly on account of the fact that the schemes initiated by the authority had not been implemented
and as such did not become functional throughout the country. It is expected that in the current fiscal
when all the schemes become operative, the authority would require more than Rs.5 crore per year.
10.8 The Committee, having noted that the explanations of the Department for the under utilisation of
the allocated amount and also having noted the future programme of action to be taken by the authority
during the year 1999-2000, is optimistic that the work of the authority would commence in full swing
and all the schemes would become operational throughout the country.
10.9. Several different and newer ways of settling disputes both quickly and inexpensively have come up
to avoid long, expensive and enormously complicated procedures for seeking legal redress through judicial
courts. One such method is Lok Adalat. Lok Adalats which were initially started and encouraged by a few
judges of the Supreme Court in October-November, 1985 as a way of promoting voluntary settlement of
disputes inexpensively and expeditiously have got the statutory status under the Legal Services Authorities
Act, 1987 which covers Legal aid, Lok Adalats and Legal assistance services and intends to secure the
operation of the legal system in order to promote social justice , particularly for the weaker sections of the
society who because of economic and other disabilities can’t afford the costs or delays involved in normal
court procedures. The juridiction of Lok Adalats is very wide. They can determine and arrive at
compromises or settlements between the parties to a dispute in respect of any matter falling within the
jurisdication of civil, criminal or revenue courts or tribunals. The award of the Lok Adalat can be enforced
in law as it is deemed to be a decree of a civil court or tribunal and such award is final and binding upon all
parties in dispute to avoid further costs, expenses and delay. No appeal has been provided from such an
award to any court. The Lok Adalat has been given the powers of civil court under the Civil Procedure
Code while trying disputes and the proceedings before the Lok Adalat are deemed to be the proceedings of
a court as provided in Indian Penal Code.
11.1 The Committee was informed that the working of the Lok Adalats was being reviewed and monitored
from time to time by the National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) and a further innovative scheme has
been introduced by the NALSA aftger the first Annual Meet of the State Legal Services Authorities held
on 12.9.1998 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi at which a resolution was passed that separate Lok Adalats
should be established within the premise of those Government Deapartments, Public Sector Undertakings
and Statutory bodies which, on account of the nature of their activities , are involved in large scale
litigation with general public. Pursuant to the resolution, NALSA has introduced a scheme to resolve the
disputes in the Departments ifself without incurring any expenditure.
11.2 Lok Adalats can take up not only pending matters in the courts but matters at pre-litigative stage also.
11.3 In response to a written question, the Department of Legal Affairs replied that the actual amount
likely to be utilised under the Major Head "2014" for the year 1998-99 would be in the proximity of
Rs.3.00 crores. The BE 1998-99 and RE 1998-99 under the Head were 4 crore each. Rs.1.00 crore is likely
to be surrendered. The Department further stated that out of Rs. 3.00 crores, funds in the sum of Rs.2.4609
crore was allocated to the State Legal Services Authorities, Supreme Court Legal Services Committee and
Kurukshetra Universiy etc., as per break up given below:-
a. State Legal Services Authorities 2.2589 crores
b. Supreme Court Legal Services Committee 0.20 crore
(c) Universities/Law Colleges 0.002 crore

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Grand Total 2.4609 crores
11.4 The amount allocated to the Supreme Court Services Committee and different State Legal Services
Authorities throughout the country is for meeting the expenditure on Lok Adalats, Legal Aid, Legal
Literacy and Legal Awareness Compaign, establishment of permanent Lok Adalats, appointment of Legal
aid Counsels in the courts of all the Matgistrates in the country and publicity to legal services so that more
and more persons in the country come to know about these schemes and programmes and take benefit
thereof. No specific amount, as such, has been sanctioned especially for holding Lok Adalats. The
Committee was informed that as on 27.3.99, 33,394 Lok Adalats had been held in different parts of the
country settling since its inception in October-November, 1985, 87,31,956 cases out of which 4,57,595
cases belonged to the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal. (For details please see Annexure ‘B’). The
Department has also informed the Committee that the State Legal Services Authorities have been advised
to take up the matter with the State Government for issue of notifications enhancing the income ceiling to
Rs.25,000/- per annum in respect of cases up to High Courts. The Department has also informed that it is
proposed to request the concerned State Governments and State Legal Services Authorities to complete
necessary action in this regard within six months. As regards enhancement of income ceiling for cases
before the Supreme Court, the matter is under process for amending the relevant provisions of the National
Legal Services Authority Rules, 1995.
11.5 In view of the increasing pendency of cases in higher and subordinate judiciary, the Committee
recommends that more funds may be allocated for holding Lok Adalats and at the same time the
NALSA should be instructed to enhance its output. The Committee would also like to stress that the
rules for enhancing the income ceiling for cases before the Supreme Court may be amended at the
earliest and the State authorities may be pursued to enhance the income ceiling for the cases up to High
Courts.
Law Commission
12. The Law Commission of India is a non-statutory body constituted by the Government from time to
time. The Commission was originally constituted in 1955. It is reconstituted every three years. The present
Law Commission (15th Law Commission) was constituted with effect from 1st September, 1997 for a
period of three years. The Committee has been informed that the Commission has so far submitted 168
reports, 81 of which have already been implemented. 17 reports have not been accepted by the
Government . 12 reports of the Commission are currently under process for being laid on the Tables of
Parliament. The remaining reports are pending for implementation /consideration with various
Ministries/Department of the Government who are administratively concerned with the subject matter of
the reports.
12.1 The Committee in its 45
th Report, had recommended to ensure the accountability of the
administrative Ministries of the Government for implementation of the accepted recommendations. The
Department in its ATN, had replied that the question of implementation of the pending reports was being
pursued with the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation and desires that the concerned Ministries/Departments may be pursued and periodical
meetings with them may be called once in a month to look into the progress in that regard. In any case
accountability may be fixed by the Government in cases where the concerned Ministries/Departments
have not started the implementation of the accepted reports of the Law Commission. As regards reports

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
relating to the subjects falling under List III of the seventh schedule to the constitution of India, the
Committee recommends that the matter may be taken up in priority basis with the States
Governments/UT Administration and it should be impressed upon them to implement those reports in a
time bound manner.
 Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT)
13. The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, constituted under the Income-tax Act, deals with second appeals
in all matters relating to direct taxes, and appeals against orders of revision of Commissioners as well as
orders of acquisition of properties under Chapter XXA of the Income-tax Act. At present there are 53
Benches of the Tribunal spread over 24 cities. The Government created 15 additional benches of the
Tribunal on 1.4.97 . The Tribunal is headed by a President and three Vice-Presidents. The Tribunal
consists fo Judicial Members and Accountant Members. The sanctioned strength of the Members of the
tribunal is 106. An Appeal lies to the High Court from the order of the Tribunal passed on or after
1.10.1998.
13.1 The Committee in its 45
th Report had expressed its displeasure over the non-functioning of the 14
benches out of 15 newly created benches of the Tribunal on 1.4.97 and had recommended to make them
functional without any further delay. The Department in its ATN, had informed the Committee that the
delay in making the new benches functional was mainly due to want of suitable office accommodation for
housing them. Regarding the present status in that regard, the Committee has been informed that the newly
created bench at Rajkot has already become functional in the new building. As regards Chandigarh, it has
been decided to accommodate for the time being the newly sanctioned second Chandigarh bench in the
same office premises where the existing bench is already functioning. The accommodation for the new
benches at Vishakhapatnam, Panaji and Agra has already been hired and partitioning work is in progress.
As regards new bench at Jodhpur, it may be stated that the accommodation was found, but because of
dispute between co-owners of the building, there has been some delay in taking possession of the building.
Efforts are being made to get the possession from the co-owners as soon as possible, failing which
alternate accommodation has also been identified. Accommodation has been found for the new bench at
Bangalore and the CPWD has been approached for giving estimates for Mumbai and Delhi. Vigorous
efforts are being made to find Government accommodation from the general pool.
13.2 The Committee has been informed that as on 31
st March, 1999, 3.03 lakh cases were pending before
the Tribunal. Number of steps have been taken to reduce the pendency of cases, such as identification of
cases involving issues already settled by High Courts/Supreme Court, grouping of cases involving
common issues organising camp benches at places where there is no bench, sending of members on tours
to stations where there is shortage of members etc. These steps have been able to arrest the pendency level
around 3 lakhs for the last three years.
13.3 The Committee recommends that more benches of ITAT should be established in Delhi North-East
and other parts of the country to provide for speedy trial of cases and reduce the pendency thereof.
13.4. The Committee feels concerned about frequent transfers of the Members of the ITAT from one
place to another resulting in victimisation of Members and wants the Ministry to uphold the credibility
of ITAT by evolving a uniform policy for transfer and posting of the Members. The Committee was
informed that Supreme Court has given an interim direction to that effect, pending final decision of the
Court that the President of the ITAT shall have full powers in the matter of postings and transfers of the

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Members and that he need not take Government’s approval in the matter. The Committee recommends
that Members should be provided a fixed tenure during which they should not be transferred so that
they could work without fear or favour.
Appointment of Notaries
14. The Committee has been informed that there are 815 applications for appointment of Notaries pending
in the Department. Applications are received and processed on a day to day basis. However, some
applications are pending for more than one year. The norms for appointment of a Notary are prescribed
under the Notaries Rules, 1956, under which an advocate having 10 years of practice may apply for
appointment as Notary on the prescribed form (memorial), which has to be countersigned by persons of
locality including a Magistrate, a Bank Manager, a Merchant and other local residents. Thereafter the
Competent Authority examines the application and may ascertain from State Bar Council, Bar Association
and other authority in the area where the applicant proposes to practice as Notary, the objections, if any, to
the appointment of the applicant as Notary. The applicant is also given an opportunity of hearing against
the objections, if any. After considering the objections and the various factors mentioned in Rule 7 of the
Notaries Rules, 1956 a decision to recommend appointment or rejection of the applicant is taken by the
Competent Authority.
14.1 However, the Committee feels that long and undue delay in the appointment of Notaries should be
avoided and the Department should expedite the process in a particular time frame.
General Recommendation
15. The Committee has been informed that pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee in its 45th
Report, the Department of Legal Affairs has constituted a cell headed by an Additional Secretary and
assisted by two Joint Secretaries and Legal Advisers for monitoring the functioning of Government
Counsels. As regards the fee structures for Government lawyers, a proposal for the upward revision of the
fees at various levels is under consideration of the Government . Government Advocates , Counsels and
panel Advocates in the Supreme Court, various High Courts, Central Administrative Tribunal Benches,
District and Subordinate Courts are appointed on the basis of their qualifications experience, standing at
the Bar, competence and the like, the Committee has been informed.
15.1 The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction at the manner in which the Government is monitoring
the performance of Government Lawyers since the mechanism for fixing their accountability on the
basis of their performance in pleading the cases in courts has yet not been evolved
16. To a pointed query regarding the automation and utilisation of recent advancements in Information
Technology Computers in the field of Law, the Department of Legal Affairs have stated that the use of
modern Information Technology will greatly help in the better handling of legal work in the Department.
At present, the library in the Ministry has only been provided with a computer terminal. The library has
started indexing latest Supreme Court cases reported in various legal journals. It has also started indexing
articles published in almost 50 legal journals , being subscribed to by the library. However, there is no
denying of the fact that the library needs full computerisation in keeping with the recent advancements in
information technology.
16.1 The Committee recommends that all the Departments of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs should be provided with the latest tools Information Technology and the modernisation of the

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
offices may be taken up in a phased manner.
17. The Committee has been informed that the Department of Legal Affairs attends to the litigation work
of the Central Government in various courts. The litigation work involves an element of urgency and the
staff has to sit late in office invariably so as to ensure that the Counsels in change of cases are given their
briefs in time for cases which are listed for hearing next day. Further a number of meetings with the Law
Officers and the Government Counsels invariably take place after office hours for which services of
drivers as well as litigation staff are required on day-to-day basis for performing duties after office hours.
The existing provision for overtime allowance is totally inadequate to meet the expenses on this account as
the overtime bills of the staff members have not been settled for about three years as a result of which the
brief distribution work after office hours is greatly hampered. The adequate provision for overtime
allowance would not only save crores of rupees involved in court cases by distribution of briefs amongst
the counsels in time but would also avoid embarrassment to the Government in cases having hearing on
important policy matters.
17.1 The Government is deeply concerned about this state of affairs and strongly recommends that
sufficient allocation be made for payment of overtime allowance to the staff so that they could attend to
work of urgent nature even after the office hours. On the one hand Government wants to clear the
pendency of cases in the courts and devising ways and means by way of amending laws, creating more
courts/benches/tribunals, organising seminars/meetings etc., on the other hand court cases are not
being attended due to insufficient allocation and payment of OTA to the Department staff. The
Committee feels that this is an avoidable situation and adequate funds for OTA must be provided at RE
stage.
18. The Committee in its 45
th Report had recommended that the Law Commission should undertake a
study of the complex issues which had arisen in the wake of the World Trade Organisation regime coming
into force and come out with appropriate recommendations within a given time frame. The Ministry in
their ATN has stated that the Law Commission is willing and interested to pursue the study if proper terms
of references for such study are indicated and services of full time technical experts in the field are
provided. The Law Commission has accordingly, suggested that the Law Ministry may interact with
various other Ministries/Departments of the Government for identifying the precise legal issues which
need examination by the Commission to enable it to make meaningful contribution in this important area.
18.1. On being asked what further action the Department of Legal Affairs has taken in the matter, it has
been replied that they have taken up the matter with all the concerned Ministries to identify various issues
related to World Trade Organisation regime which require examination by the Law Commission. On
receipt of the views from the Ministries, terms of reference will be finalised and sent to the Law
Commission.
18.2 In this connection, the Committee urges upon the Department to finalise at the shortest possible
time, the terms of reference of the proposed study by the Law Commission and all necessary
arrangements should be made/steps taken so that the study could commence without losing any time.
Legislative Department
19. The Secretary, Legislative Department in his presentation before the Committee on 30th March, 1999
inter alia stated that the Legislative Department is basically concerned with drafting of all Government Bill

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
including Constitution Amendment Bills before their introduction in Parliament, Ordinances , Legislations,
Constitution Orders etc. It is also entrusted with publication of Central Acts, Ordinances and Regulations
and their authorised translations in all the Languages specified in the 8th Schedule to the Constitution.
During the presentation , the Secretary, Legislative Department stated that the Legislative Department was
one of the oldest limbs of the Government of India. The origin of the Department dates back to 1833. The
principal job of the Legislative Department happens to be drafting of all sorts of central legislations . In
certain eventualities, it also drafts State legislations when there is President’s Rule in a particular State.
The second important function of the Department is to undertake scrutiny of subordinate legislation . The
draft of the subordinate legislations under various Central Legislations are prepared by the respective
Ministries and Departments of the Government of India. They send it to the Legislative Department for its
scrutiny from drafting and legal angle. In view of the Official Languages Policy of the Government and in
view of the provisions of the Official Language Act of 1965, all Bills which are introduced in Parliament,
would be accompanied by Hindi version . Similarly, in the matter of subordinate legislation, if certain rules
are to be framed, they should have a Hindi version also. The Legislative Department has a full-fledged
Official Languages Wing. The principal job of the Wing is to undertake translation of all those instruments
into Hindi for publication purposes. The Department has been given certain administrative responsibilities
like electoral reform matters, Elections of the President of India and the Vice President of India. Besides
that, as many as 75 Legislations are the responsibility of the Department which is the maximum number of
legislations to be administered by a single Department in the entire Government set up. Those legislations
pertain to List III subjects, like divorce, marriage, infant guardianship, transfer of property, Registration
Act, Civil Procedure Code, Bankruptcy, Arbitration etc. The policy formulation in respect of the
legislations are initiated by the Legislative Department. If any changes are required in the Acts, then the
Bills are drafted by the concerned Departments. The Legislative Department has also been giving training
to the officers of the State Legislative Departments since1905. As late as in 1989, the Cabinet took a
decision that there should be a formal institution for legislative drafting and training and thus the Institute
of Legislative Drafting and Research was established . The Institute imparts certain training courses for the
officers of the State Governments. The Institute does not have any regular faculty and the officers in the
Legislative Department form the faculty. They visit the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training
(BPST), Lok Sabha Secretariat and deliver lectures. Besides the above functions, another important
function of the Department is to bring out in the print form all sorts of legislations, be it principal
legislations or sub-ordinate legislations so as to make it available to the society at large. All Acts of
Parliament, both in English and Hindi and in the regional languages are printed. A couple of months back,
the Department has initiated the task of putting together the entire material relating to principal legislations
on on-line computers and now one can have any Indian Legislation, all Central unrepealed Acts on the
Internet. The Department has undertaken one more project to put the entire subordinate legislations on on-
line computers. The subordinate legislation happens to be a huge volume. The compilation was, hitherto,
being done by respective Departments, the Secretary informed the Committee.
Repeal of Obsolete Legislations
20. During the course of presentation the Secretary, Legislative Department intimated the Committee that
the Legislative Department used to repeal Legislations as per the on going practice. The Secretary also
informed that the Government had constituted the Commission for Review of Administrative Law in May,
1998 to examine the issue of repealing the obsolete laws. The Committee had recommended vide its
Report on 30th September, 1998 that of the 2,500 unrepealed Central Acts, about 1300 of them were
obsolete and they should be repealed immediately. That report is being processed in the Ministry of

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and in the Legislative Department . To assess the situation in
the event of repealing these laws, various Secretaries of different Ministries/Departments of Government
of India had been requested to offer their comments/objections in the matter. The Legislative Department
was getting certain feed back. Many of them have communicated that they do not have any objection if
those Legislations are repealed.
20.1. The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Government with regard to repealing the
obsolete laws which no longer serve any use/purpose. The Committee recommends that the work may be
completed in a time bound manner and the State Governments may also be advised to follow the Union
Government regarding repealing the obsolete laws passed in their respective assemblies. The State
Governments may also be advised to prepare a list of obsolete laws which are no more in use in their
states.
Institute of Legislative Drafting and Research
21. With a view to increasing the availability of trained legislative drafters in the country, the Institute of
Legislative Drafting and Research was established as a Wing of the Legislative Department in January,
1989. The Institute has been imparting theoretical as well as practical training in Legislative Drafting
under four separate courses namely:-
a. Basic Course in Legislative Drafting of six months duration for officers of the State
Governments/Union territory Administrations;
b. Advance Course of three months’ duration for the senior level officers of the State
Governments/Union territory Administrations;
c. Refresher Course of short duration (in the nature of a workshop) for the senior level officers of
the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations; and
d. Appreciation Course of two weeks’ duration for the officers of the various Central Government
Ministries/Departments.
21.1 The Institute also arrange awareness programme in Legislative Drafting for the benefit of Law
students of various Universities visiting it.
21.2 The Committee has been informed that the said training programme is organised for six months i.e.
from April to September. The theoretical training is imparted in the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and
Training (BPST), Lok Sabha Secretariat and practical training in the Legislative Department by the
officers of the Department.
21.3 The Committee notes that the work related to Legislative Drafting is of far reaching impact on the
different wings of the Union and State Governments but far the purpose the Institute of Legislative
Drafting and Research, a wing of the legislative Department, does not have any independent
infrastructure or set up. The officers of the Department have to deliver lectures in the BPST, Lok Sabha
Secretariat and impart on job training besides their normal duties. The training programme is
organised for only short durations. The Committee recommends that the Institute of Legislative
Drafting and Research should be provided with such facilities that it can work as a full fledged
institution under the aegis of the Legislative Department and courses should be organised throughout
the year. The State Governments should be encouraged to send their officers for getting necessary
training in the field of Legislative Drafting.

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Electoral Reforms
22. Government held a meeting with political parties on 22.5.1998 to discuss various proposals on
electoral reforms and consequent upon a decision taken in that meeting, an 8-Member High Powered
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Indrajit Gupta, Member of Parliament, was constituted to:-
a. examine the pattern of State Funding in other countries where it is in vogue and suggest
concrete proposals for providing State Funding to candidates set up by recognised political
parties; and
b. examine, in detail, the following related proposals and make suitable recommendations;
(i) maintenance of accounts by political parties;
i. (ii) ban on donation by companies to political parties;
(iii) inclusion of expenses of political parties in the election expenses of
candidates for purpose of ceiling on election expenses; and
(iv) empowering of the Election Commission of India to fix ceiling on
election expenses before every General Election.
22.1 The Committee consisted of the following members-
1. Shri Indrajit Gupta, M.P. (Chairman),
2. Shri Somnath Chetterjee, M.P. (Member)
3. Dr. Manmohan Singh, M.P. (Member)
4. Shri V.K. Malhotra, M.P. (Member)
5. Shri Madhukar Sarpotdar, M.P. (Member)
6. Shri R. Muthiah, M.P. (Member)
7. Shri Digvijay Singh, M.P. (Member)
8. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav, M.P. (Member)
22.2 The High Powered Committee submitted it recommendations to the Government on 14th January,
1999. It has, inter alia, suggested partial State funding of elections, in kind, to the candidates set up by the
recognised political parties.
22.3 Pursuant to another decision taken in the aforesaid meeting of political parties, Government has
written to the Election Commission to review and reformulate the Model Code of Conduct. The Code so
reformulated, could be considered for giving statutory effect. In addition, the Election Commission has
also been requested to review its order relating to Reservation and Allotment of Symbols in consultation
with political parties.
22.4 The Committee recommends that the Government should take expeditious decision in the matter
pertaining to the Electoral Reforms arrive at a consensus.
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES WING
23. During the national independence movement it was felt that only political freedom will not be
sufficient to prove to the world that India is an independent Nation/State. An independent Nation/State is

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
one which does not have to depend upon other languages (or the languages of the foreign rulers) to manage
its affairs. Keeping this in mind the Constituent Assembly on the14thSeptember, 1949 adopted Hindi in
Devnagari script as the Official Language of the country. With the enforcement of the Constitution on the
26th January, 1950 Hindi became the Official Language of the Union of India according to article 343 of
the Constitution. On the recommendations of the Committee of Parliament on Official Language, the
President issued an order to the Ministry of Law to constitute a Standing Commission of legal experts. In
pursuance of the directive issued by the President, the Official Languages (Legislative) Commission was
constituted in the year 1961.
23.2 Later on, the Government decided to departmentalise this work and put it on a permanent footing.
With this objective the Commission was abolished and the Official Languages Wing was created as a part
of the Legislative Department. All those functions which were earlier assigned to the Commission, have
been entrusted to the Official Languages Wing besides some other functions. This was done with effect
from the 1
st October, 1976.
23.3 The principal functions assigned to the Official Languages Wing of the Legislative Department are:
i. to prepare and publish a standard legal terminology for use, as far as possible, in all official
languages;
ii. to prepare authoritative texts in Hindi of all Central Acts and Ordinances and Regulations
promulgated by the President;
iii. to prepare authoritative texts in Hindi of all Rules, Regulations and Orders made by the Central
Government under any Central Act or Ordinance or Regulation promulgated by the President;
iv. to prepare authoritative texts of all Central Acts and Ordinances and Regulations promulgated
by the President in the respective official languages of the States and to arrange for the
translation of all Acts passed and Ordinances promulgated in any State into Hindi, if the texts of
such Acts or Ordinances are in a languate other than Hindi;
v. to perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the Government of India from time to
time.
23.4 Subsequently, the following functions have also been added:-
1. Translation in Hindi of deeds, legal documents like contracts, agreements, leases, bonds, mortgages,
etc;
2. Translation into Hindi of all statutory notifications under section 3(3) of the Official Languages Act,
1963;
3. Translation into Hindi of Statutory Rules issued by Governments of non-Hindi speaking States for
being laid before Parliament when such States are under Presidential rule;
4. Translation into Hindi of all the Parliament Questions/Answers, Assurances, etc., relating to the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs;
5. Training in Legislative Drafting in Hindi to officers from Hindi speaking States;
6. Work relating to Coordinating Committee of Hindi speaking States for ensuring effective
coordination in the evolution of uniform legal phraseology and model of standard clauses in Hindi
and publication thereof;
7. Work relating to Hindi Salahkar Samiti of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs and
providing Grants-in-Aid to Voluntary organizations for promotion of Official Languages in the field

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
of law;
8. Publication of diglot editions of Central Acts (with legislative history) and popularisation thereof;
9. Preparation and maintenance of India Code in Hindi (Bharat Sanhita) and also in diglot from;
10. Publication of regional languages versions of the Constitution of India and arranging functions for
the release thereof.
23.5. In a written reply to the Questionnaire regarding the service conditions of the officers working for
Hindi side, the Legislative Department informed the Committee that Indian Legal Service Rules, which
comprise of four Grades viz., Gr. IV (equivalent to Under Secretary), Gr. III (equivalent to Deputy
Secretary), Gr. II (equivalent to Director) and Gr. I (equivalent to Joint Secretary) dates back to the year
1957 and include officers of both the Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs. The said
Rules have been framed for the recruitment of officers in the Legislative Department and Department of
Legal Affairs. The primary function of Legislative Department is to draft all Government Bills,
Ordinances, Rules & Regulations and the main function of the Department of Legal Affairs is to tender
legal advise to various Ministries and to handle litigation. Accordingly, Indian Legal Service Rules were
framed in 1957.
23.6 On the other hand, the primary function of the Official Languages Wing is to prepare and publish
standard legal terminology for use in all Official Languages and to prepare authoritative texts in Hindi of
all Central Acts and Ordinances and Regulations promulgated by the President and to arrange for
translation of the same. The Official Languages Wing came into being in the year 1976 and accordingly,
the Recruitment Rules for various Officers in the Official Languages Wing were framed keeping in mind
the duties and functions performed by the said Wing. The entry grade in the Group ‘A’ Service in the
Official Languages Wing is the Assistant Legislative Counsel (Hindi) [equivalent to Under Secretary]; the
next promotional post to that of Deputy Legislative Counsel (Hindi) [equivalent to Deputy Secretary],
Additional Legislative Counsel (Hindi) [equivalent to Director] and Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
(Hindi) [equivalent to Joint Secretary]. Since the duties and functions performed by the Officers of the
Hindi side are entirely different from those of the Officers belonging to Indian Legal Service, hence, as
already stated above, there is a separate set of Recruitment Rules for recruitment of the Officers of the
Hindi side in the Legislative Department.
23.7 The Committee feels that both the officers viz. Indian Legal Service Officers and Officers of Hindi
side in the Department are working for the same wing of the Government i.e. the wing assisting the
Government in Legislation work. The Committee recommends that the Indian Legal Service Rules
which were framed in 1957 should be arranged so as to include the officers working in the Official
Languages Wing in the Indian Legal Services. The Committee feels that the discrimination perpetrated
against Official Language Wing officers is absolutely unjustified.
VIDHI SAHITYA PRAKASHAN
24. Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan (hereinafter ‘VSP’) was intially created as a Journal Wing of the Legislative
Department in order to implement the provisions of Part XVII (Articles 343-351) particularly Chapters III
and IV thereof, read with recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee on Official Languages in the
year 1988 which had recommended that arrangements be made early to bring out authorised translation of
judgements of the Supreme Court and the High Courts in India.
24.1 These provisions are obligatory and mandatory. The obligation has been cast, inter alia
, on the

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Government of India in the Official Languages Department of Ministry of Home Affairs and Legislative
Department of Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.
24.2 The Journal Wing was set up in the Ministry of Law and Justice in 1968 with the objectives of
promoting the increasingly progressive use of Hindi in the legal field. This Wing was subsequently named
"Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan".
24.3 Initially, two monthly Patrikas one for reporting all reportable judgements of the Supreme Court of
India namely Unhchatam Nyayalay Nirnay Patrika (Uchchatam Patrika) and the other for reporting very
important selected judgements of the High Courts in India namely Uchcha Nyayalaya Nirnay Patrika were
being published. Later on, in 1987, the Uchcha Nyayalaya Nirnay patrika was bifurcated in two patrikas –
Civil and Dandik. These patrikas are being published monthly and consist of about 350, 225 and 225
printed pages respectively. In addition, VSP has also undertaken the following works:-
1. Digest of Patrikas.
2. Law Books in Hindi.
3. Translation of Legal Classics in Hindi.
4. Quarterly Vidhi Sahitya Samachar.
5. Awarding of various annual prizes for the best law publication in Hindi.
6. Getting law books in Hindi written by eminent authors and publishing the same.
7. Holding of conferences, seminars and exhibition-cum-sale at different places, particularly in
Hindi Speaking States for popularising legal literature in Hindi.
8. Translation and publication of very important judgements of Privy Council, Federal Court as
well as those of the Supreme Court earlier to April 1968.
24.4 Furthermore, the Presidential Resolution of 1988 as well as the presidential Resolution 1998 also
required acceleration of these activities.
24.5 The Committee has been informed that during 1997-98, 2 Law Books and 5 journals were published
while during 1998-99 one law book and 13 journals were published. 108 issues of Journals are under print
in various Government of India Presses. So far as publication is concerned, all the journals are in arrear,
namely, Supreme Court Journal since January, 1995 High Court Journal (Civil) since September, 1994 and
the High Court Journal (Criminal) since December, 1994. The manuscripts of as many as 108 issues of the
said journals are pending with the Directorate of Printing. The arrears in publications have been increased
due to non-execution of printing job by the Government of India Presses. Effortrs have been made at the
senior level to get the backlog cleared. With the introduction of computer system in Vidhi Sahitya
Prakashan, it is expected that the back log will be got cleared as expdeditiously as possible, the Committee
has been informed.
24.6 On being asked about the sharp variations in the budgetary provisions for the years 1998-99 and
1999-2000 in respect of the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan, the Legislative Department in a written reply,
informed the Committee that under Sub-Head ‘Publications’ the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan was provided
Rs. 66.49 lakhs in BE 1998-99 for expected bills of 68 ‘Patrikas’ and 8 ‘Text Books’ which were under
print in various Government of India Presses at that time. As against this upto October, 1998 the
Department could receive bills only to the extent of Rs. 73,645/- from various Government of India
Presses. Therefore, keeping in view the actual expenditure of Rs. 73,645/- till October, 1998 a provision of
Rs. 30.00 lacs was made in RE 1998-99, in RE the funds are provided keeping in view the trend of actual

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
expenditure for preceding seven months and in 1998-99, the reduction was compounded due to mandatory
cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance on all non-salary secretariat expenditure. In BE 1999-2000 a
provision of Rs. 40 lakhs has been made against the projected demand of 70.00 lakhs keeping in view the
ceiling limit prescribed by the Ministry of Finance.
24.7 The Committee had, in its 45th Report on the Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs recommended for a review of the working of the Vidhi Sahitya
Prakashan by a non-Official e.g. Special Audit Team because even after a lapse of about 30 years, no
review has been made. The Legislative Department has informed the Committee that the Department has
taken up the matter with the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, requesting them to
constitute a Special Audit Team for carrying out a review of the working of the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan
with particular reference to the following aspects:
i. To examine and report whether the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan had been able to achieve the objective
for which it was set-up aqnd if so, to what extent.
ii. The present state of affairs in Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan.
iii. Whether the activities carried out by the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan should continue to be undertaken
as a departmental activitiy. If so, to suggest maesures for improving its working.
iv. To examine whether the objective of the scheme can be achieved by any alternative scheme.
v. To examine whether any changes in its staffing pattern is called for and, if so, to suggest the same.
The Comptroller and auditor General of India have deputed on 4.1.99 a Special Audit Team which is still
continuing with the study of the Prakashan. No interim or any kind of report has so far been received by
the Legislative Department. The study/review is at its final stage and a report is expected by the end of
April, 1999.
24.8 The Committee notes that pendency with regard to the publications of Law books and journals by
the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan is increasing. It expresses its displeasure over the state of Affairs in the
Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan and recommends that after the receipt of the Report of the Special Audit
Team, the functioning of the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan may be revamped and the publication work may
be streamlined.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
25. The Additional Secretary, Department of Justice in his presentation before the Committee on 31st
March, 1999 , inter alia stated that the Department was created in the year 1971 and the subjects handled
by the Department are constitution and organisation of the Supreme Court and the High Courts,
appointment of Judges in the High Courts and the Supreme Court and their service conditions, Judges
strength, administration of Justice in Union Territories and monitoring of pendency of cases in courts.
Courts in the country are at three levels. At the district level, there is subordinate judiciary, at the state
level, High Courts and finally the apex court at the Union level. As per provisions of Articles 233, 234 and
235 of the Constitution, the supervision, control and appointment of subordinate judiciary is done at the
level of the State Governments and the concerned High Court. The Union Government is concerned only
with the appointment of Judges in High Courts and the Supreme Court. At present there are 18 High
Courts in the country. 11 States and one Union Territory have separate High Courts. Six High Courts,
namely, Punjab and Haryana, Bombay, Kerala, Madras, Calcutta and Guwahati High Courts have
jurisdiction over more than one State, the representative of the Department apprised the Committee.

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
25.1. The Committee, in its 17th, 31st, 34th 39th and 45th Reports had taken a serious view of the anomaly
to the effect that the Demands for Grants of the Department of Justice is met from that of the Ministry of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs whereas the Department is under the administrative control of the
Ministry of Home Affairs. In the latest ATN on the recommendation of the Committee, the Department of
Justice has stated that the Government has again examined the recommendation of the Committee
regarding transfer of the Department from the administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs to
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, but has decided to continue with the existing system in
view of the reason inter alia that the administrative linkage of the Department of Justice with the Ministry
of Home Affairs ensures better coordination in the appointment of Judges and the administration of
Criminal Justice with the States. In a written reply to the pointed questions as to in view of the reasons
furnished for status quo what is the rational for keeping the Department of Justice under the Law Ministry
only for budgetary purposes, the Department has replied that the Department of Justice was carved out of
the Ministry of Home Affairs as the Law Commission had suggested that all work relating to the subject of
justice should be unified into a separate Ministry of Justice for judicial administration should be handled in
a Ministry that should be immune to political pressures. Accordingly, Department of Justice was created
with transfer of 7 items of work from Ministry of Home Affairs to Department of Justice and placed in the
then Ministry of Law. Ministry of Law was also reconstituted with Department of Justice as a Department
under that Ministry.
25.2 The arrangement then made by retaining the administration and house keeping functions in Ministry
of Home Affairs while budget of the Department of Justice being in the Demands for Grants pertaining to
Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs, has worked well. In 1972, a proposal for Department of
Justice being a self contained Department by having its own administration, house keeping functions, etc.,
without depending on Ministry of Home Affairs was examined and it has decided that there was no need to
change it especially in view of the need for economy in Government expenditure, the Committee has been
informed.
25.3 The cardinal point to be considered in any change in the existing arrangement is the expenditure
involved on account of capital cost as well as cost of development of infrastructure facilities. Besides that,
it would also upset the close coordination that exists now between the Department of Justice and Ministry
of Home Affairs. Even though the Budget is voted in Demands for Grants for Ministry of law, Justice &
Company Affairs, the allocation is operated by Ministry of Home Affairs on behalf of Ministry of Law,
Justice & Company Affairs since 1971.
25.4 The Committee is not at all convinced with arguments put forth for maintaining to status quo.
Here, the Committee wishes to point out that the Law Commission had suggested for a separate
Ministry of Justice that should be immune to political pressures. The Committee fails to understand as
to how the Department of Justice could be insulated from political pressures so long as its
administrative functions remain with Ministry of Home Affairs. Having regard to all the points
explained by the Government having considered all the functional aspects of the Department, the
Committee reiterates it earlier stand and recommends that either the Department of Justice may be
made a full fledged Department under the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, headed by a
Secretary like other three Departments in the Ministry or alternatively the Demands for Grants of the
Department of Justice may be accounted for in the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Centrally Sponsored Scheme Relating to Infrastructural Facilities for the Judiciary

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
26. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme approved by the Government from the year 1993-94 relating to
infrastrctural facilities for the judiciary includes construction of court buildings and residential
accommodation for judicial officers/judges covering High Court and subordinate courts. The expenditure
on the scheme is to be shared by the Union and the State Governments on 50:50 basis. The central share is,
however, restricted to the amount allocated for this purpose by the Planning Commission, which has to be
distributed as per the guidelines laid down by them. The expenditure in respect of the Union Territories is
to be met fully by the Government of India.
26.1 The Committee has been informed that at the time of the approval of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
relating to development of infrastructural facilities for the judiciary by the Government during the year
1993-94, it was estimated that about Rs. 1200 crore would be required during the Eighth Five Year Plan
which would be shared by the Centre and States on 50:50 basis. However, an amount of Rs. 180.43 crore
was provided by the Planning Commission for implementing this scheme during the Eighth Five Year
Plan, i.e. from 1993-94 to 1996-97.As such, a proposal for the continuation of the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme in the 9
th Five Year Plan (1997-2002) was submitted to the Planning Commission.
26.2 It was mentioned that the State Governments and UTs’ Administrations have a shelf of projects ready
for many years to come. These projects would take time for completion, requiring funds in the coming
years. It was also mentioned in that it might be necessary to appoint more Judges for the disposal of
pending cases in the Courts for which the basic infrastructural requirements like Courts and residential
accommodation would be necessary. Moreover, this being a capital intensive scheme, required
considerable lead time. It had actually taken off after conclusion of Eighth Five year Plan. To keep the
momentum, it would be very necessary to continue the Scheme in the 9
th Five Year Plan by providing
higher outlays. Accordingly, the Planning Commission was requested to provide Rs. 200 crore for
implementing the scheme in 1997-98. A request was also made to the Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission by Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs in July, 1998 for enhancing the allocation
from Rs. 52 crore to Rs. 100 crore during 1998-99 for implementing the scheme. A similar request has also
been made to the Planning Commission recently for allocation of Rs. 100 crore during the year 1999-2000.
26.3. The Ninth Plan outlay of the Department has been placed at Rs. 322.43 crores (at 1996-97 prices) by
the Planning Commission. During the year 1997-98, an amount of Rs. 52 crore was provided for the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme and Rs. 12 crore for the National Judicial Academy. The Planning
Commission has provided Rs. 70 crore for the Annual Plan 1998-99. Out of this, an amount of Rs. 52
crores (reduced to Rs. 48 crores at RE stage) was allocated for the scheme and Rs. 18 crores for the
National Judicial Academy. From 1993-94 to 1997-98, an amount of Rs. 276.43 crores has been released
to various States/Union Territories. For the Annual Plan 1999-2000, the Planning Commission has
provided an amount of Rs. 790.00 crores out of which Rs. 55 crores has been allocated for the Scheme and
Rs. 15.00 crores to the Academy. As per latest information available, under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme, construction of two new High Court buildings and 7 extension building for High Courts have
been completed. 12 High Court buildings/extension of High Court buildings are at various stages of
construction. Construction of 160 buildings for District/Subordinate Courts have been completed and work
on 427 buildings is in progress. Similarly 58 new bungalows for High Court’s Judges have been
constructed and 54 are under construction. Further, construction of 2195 residences for Judicial Officers
was taken up out of which 979 have been completed.
26.4 The Committee in its 45
th Report had recommended that the Union Government’s assistance for the

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
scheme should not be confined to 50:50 basis and if some State Governments should also increase the
allocation which would be in addition to the normal allocation. The Department in its Action Taken Notes
informed the Committee that a request was made to the Planning Commission for providing additional
amount for the scheme during the financial year 1998-99. The Planning Commission has expressed
inability to provide additional funds at present. However, allocation of additional funds will be considered
out of savings at the appropriate stage.
26.5 During the meeting of the Committee held on 31.3.99, the Department was again asked to provide
additional amount for the scheme to good performing states at the supplementary budget stage in
consultation with the Planning Commission. The Department, in a written reply, stated that a request has
already been made to the Planning Commission for enhancing the existing amount of Rs. 55 crores to Rs.
100 crores under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme during the year 1999-2000. The case for additional
allocation to the good performing States would be taken up in consultation with the Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance at the supplementary budget stage 1999-2000.
26.6 Having considered all the points/information placed before it, the Committee reiterates it
recommendations made in its 45
th Report and stresses that the Union Government’s share for the
centrally sponsord scheme for development of infrastructural facilities for judiciary should be raised to
75% and good performing states may be released additional amount. The states which have failed to
utilize the amount properly may be asked to expedite their performance under the Scheme.
NATIONAL JUDICIAL ACADEMY
27. National Judicial Academy (NJA) has been established by the Government of India for providing in
service training to judicial officers. The Academy is run by an autonomous body registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1960 (Act XXI of 1860). The NJA was registered with Registrar of Societies,
Delhi on 17.08.1993 and it came into existence w.e.f. that date. The management of the society is entrusted
to Governing Council under the Chairmanship of the Chief Justice of India. Two other Judges of the
Supreme Court, Secretaries to the Government of India in the Department of Justice, Department of Legal
Affairs and Department of Expenditure are its other members. The Registrar General, Supreme Court is
the Member Secretary of the Governing Council. The NJA is located at Bhopal in Madhya Pradesh with its
registered office in the Supreme Court premises at New Delhi. The building complex of the Academy is
already under construction at Bhopal. A certain portion of the fund under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
relating to infrastructural facilities for the judiciary is set aside for meeting the expenses of the NJA in
consultation with the Planning Commission.
27.1 In a written reply, the Department has stated that till March, 1998, an amount of Rs. 20.53 crore was
released to the National Judicial Academy. Out of this, an amount of Rs. 53 lakhs was released to enable
the Academy to meet its Secretarial expenditure. Rs. 20 crore were released to enable the Academy to
meet the expenses for the construction of its complex at Bhopal. The Academy has utilised the entire
amount of Rs. 20 crore released to it for construction and has furnished the requisite utilisation certificates.
27.2 Up to the end of the financial year 1998-99, an amount of Rs. 18 crore has been allocated and
released to the Academy. The Academy has furnished utilisation certificates to the tune of Rs. 8 crore so
far. The Academy has also informed that bills amounting to approximately Rs. 10 crores are pending with
it for payment and as such, the entire amount of Rs. 18 crore released to it during 1998-99 will be utilised.
Thus, the amount utilised is keeping pace with the amount allocated. The construction work of the

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
National Judicial Academy complex at Bhopal is progressing more or less as per schedule and is expected
to be completed by December, 1999.
27.3 The Committee is happy to note the progress of the construction work of the National Judicial
Academy.
NATIONAL JUDICIAL PAY COMMISSION
28. The first National Judicial Pay Commission was set up on the 21st March, 1996 under the
Chairmanship of the retired High Court Judge, Justice Shri K.J. Shetty, in pursuance of the Supreme
Court’s direction in 1991 in writ petition No.1022/89 (All India Judges Association v/s Union of India and
others). Its headquarter is at Bangalore. Its terms of reference include examination and recommendations
in respect of salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the members of subordinate judiciary of
the entire country. The Committee will also make recommendations regarding minimum qualifications,
age, method of recruitment, work environment etc. for the judicial officers. It will submit its report to the
State Government as the judicial officers are the employees of the respective State Governments. The
Committee has already recommended the grant of interim relief to the judicial officers. Rs. 1.42 crore has
been spent on the establishment of the Commission. For 1999-2000, a budget provision of Rs.60 lakhs has
been made for the Commission.
28.1 The Committee in its 45
th Report had recommended for expediting the submission of the Report by
the National Judicial Pay Commission. The Committee has been informed that the Supreme Court vide its
order dated the 15th July, 1998 has requested the Commission to submit its report expeditiously. The
Commission assured the Government in February, 1999 that it would not take more time than what was
necessary to submit its report with regard to judicial officers of the country. Minister of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs has also requested the Commission on the 12th March, 1999 to submit the Report by
August, 1999 conforming to the direction of the Supreme Court and the commitment of the Commission.
The Additional Secretary of the Department of Justice, during the course of presentation on the Demands
for Grants (1999-2000) also stated that the Commission is expected to give its report by August, 1999.
28.2 The Committee notes the factual statements stated above and hopes that the Commission would
submit the report by August, 1999.
Amenities and Facilities for Judges
29. A point was raised by members in the Committee that public interest litigations were field very
frequently in respect of providing accommodation, red-light on top of staff cars for Judges etc. A members
pointed out that some times frivolous public interest litigations were being field which should be
discouraged.
29.1 The Department in its written reply has admitted that certain public interest litigations in respect of
facilities to Judges namely accommodation, staff car, red-light on staff car, security, medical facilities etc.
have been filed in various High Courts. The Department has contested in the cases where the Union
Government is respondent and notices have been received from the Registry of the concerned High Courts.
29.2 The Committee directs the Department to apprise it of the stand taken by the Union Government in
those public interest litigations and keep it informed of the progress made in the cases from time to time.

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
USE OF HINDI IN SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS
30. A point was raised in the Committee regarding the use of Hindi in the Supreme Court and High Courts.
The Department of Justice in their written reply has informed the Committee that Article 348 (1) of the
Constitution provides that all the proceedings in the Supreme Court and every High Court shall be in
English until Parliament by law otherwise provides. No law has been made by the Parliament so far in this
regard. Under Article 348 (2) of the Constitution, the Governor of a State, may with the previous consent
of the President, authorise the use of Hindi language or any other language used for any official purpose of
the State, in proceedings of the High Court having its principal seat in the State, provided that decrees,
judgements or orders passed by the High Court shall be in English. Under Section 7 of the Official
Language Act, 1963, the use of Hindi or official language of a State in addition to English may be
authorised, with the consent of the President, by the Governor of the State, for the purpose of judgements
etc. made by the High Court for that State. So far, the Governors of the four Northern States namely,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh have authorised the use of Hindi in addition to
English language in the proceedings as well as the judgements, decrees etc. for the High Court of their
State. The Chief Justice of India had reported in October, 1991 that replacement of English at lower levels
of the judiciary by the State Language had already been implemented throughout India.
31.1. The Committee notes the factual position in this regard.
VACANCIES OF JUDGES IN SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS
31. The Committee in its 45th Report had felt concerned over the number of vacancies of judges in the
High Court which had a direct co0relation with the increasing pendency of cases in the Courts.
31.1 The Department, in its Status Note on the position of vacancies in the High Courts, has stated that
certain differences in perception on scope and the extent of ‘consultation’ in appointment of Judges both in
the Supreme Court and the High Courts and transfer of Judges and Chief Justices of the High Courts, arose
in 1998. To resolve the matter, a Presidential Reference under Article 143 of the Constitution of India was
made to the Supreme Court. The following 9 points of law were referred to the Supreme Court:
i. Whether the expression consultation with the Chief Justice of India in articles 217 (1) and
222(1) requires consultation with a plurality of judges in the formation of the opinion of the
Chief Justice of India or does the sole individual opinion of the Chief Justice of India constitute
consultation within the meaning of the said articles;
ii. Whether the transfer of judges is judicially reviewable in the light of the observation of the
Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgement that "such transfer is not justifiable on any ground"
and its further observation that limited judicial review is available in matters of transfer, and the
extent and scope of judicial review;
iii. Whether article 124(2) as interpreted in the said judgement requires the Chief Justice of India to
consult only the two senior most Judges or whether there should be wider consultation
according to past practice;
iv. Whether the Chief Justice of India is entitled to act solely in his individual capacity, without
consultation with other Judges of the Supreme Court in respect of all materials and information
conveyed by the Government of India for non-appointment of a judge recommended for
appointment;
v. Whether the requirement of consultation by the Chief Justice of India with his colleagues, who

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
are likely to be conversant with the affairs of the concerned High Court refers to only those
Judges who have that High Court as a parent High Court and excludes Judges who had
occupied the office of a Judge or Chief Justice of that court on transfer from their parent or any
other Court;
vi. Whether in light of the legitimate expectations of senior Judges of the High Court in regard to
their appointment to the Supreme Court referred to in the said judgement, the ‘strong cogent
reason’ required to justify the departure from the order of the seniority has to be recorded in
respect of each such senior Judge, who is overlooked, while making recommendation of a
Judge junior to him or her;
vii. Whether the Government is not entitled to require that the opinions of the other consulted
Judges be in writing in accordance with the aforesaid Supreme Court judgement and that the
same be transmitted to the Government of India by the Chief Justice of India along with his
view;
viii. Whether the Chief Justice of India is not obliged to comply with the norms and the requirement
of the consultation process in making his recommendation to the Government of India;
ix. Whether any recommendations made by the Chief Justice of India without complying with the
norms and consultation process are binding upon the Government of India?
31.2 The Supreme Court disposed of the Presidential Reference by its Advisory Opinion on October 28,
1998 as under:
i. The expression "consultation with the Chief Justice of India’ in Articles 217(1) and 222(1) of
the Constitution of India requires consultation with a plurality of Judges in the formation of the
opinion of the Chief Justice of India. The sole, individual opinion of the Chief Justice of India
does not constitute ‘consultation’ within the meaning of the said Articles.
ii. The transfer of puisne Judges is judicially reviewable only to this extent: that the
recommendation that has been made by the Chief Justice of India in this behalf has not been
made in consultation with the four senior most puisne Judges of the Supreme Court and/or that
the views of the chief Justice of the High Court from which the transfer is to be effected and of
the chief Justice of the High Court to which the transfer is to be effected have not been
obtained.
iii. The Chief Justice of India must make a recommendation to appoint a Judge of the Supreme
Court and to transfer a Chief Justice or puisne Judge of a High Court in consultation with the
four senior most puisne Judges of the Supreme Court. In so far as an appointment to the High
Court is concerned, the recommendation must be made in consultation with the two senior most
puisne Judges of the Supreme Court.
iv. The Chief Justice of India is not entitled to act solely in his individual capacity, without
consultation with other Judges of the Supreme Court, in respect of materials and information
conveyed by the Government of India for non-appointment of a Judge recommended for
appointment.
v. The requirement of consultation by the Chief Justice of India with his colleagues who are likely
to be conversant with the affairs of the concerned High Court does not refer only to those
Judges who have that High Court as a parent High Court. It does not exclude Judges who have
occupied the office of a Judge or Chief Justice of that High Court on transfer.
vi. ‘Strong cogent reasons’ do not have to be recorded, as justification for a departure from the
order of seniority, in respect of each senior Judge who has been passed over. What has to be

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
recorded is the positive reason for the recommendation.
vii. The views of the other Judges consulted should be in writing and should be conveyed to the
Government of India by the Chief Justice of India along with his views to the extent set out in
the body of this opinion.
viii. The Chief Justice of India is obliged to comply with the norms and the requirement of the
consultation process, as aforestated, in making his recommendations to the Government of
India.
ix. Recommendations made by the Chief Justice of India without complying with the norms and
requirements of the consultation process, as aforestated, are not binding upon the Government
of India.
31.3 The Committee has been informed that the Memoranda of Procedure on appointment of Judges in the
Supreme Court/Chief Justices and Judges of High Courts, as also the transfer of Chief Justices and Judges
of the High Courts are being revised incorporating the Advisory Opinion of the Supreme Court.
32. The Department has informed that as on March 23, 1999, the sanctioned strength of the Supreme Court
is 26 Judges out of which 25 Judges are in position, leaving 1 vacancy to be filled up. Seven vacancies
were filled up after receipt of the Advisory Opinion on October 28, 1998. The Government has, as on
March 26, 1999, not received proposal from the Chief Justice of India for filling up the sole vacancy in the
Supreme Court.
33. The Department has further informed that as on March 1, 1999, against the sanctioned strength of 587
Judges/Additional Judges, 448 Judges/Additional Judges were in position, leaving 139 vacancies to be
filled up. 31 new posts of Judges/Additional Judges have been agreed to in various High Courts. After
receipt of the Advisory Opinion of the Supreme Court, 48 Judges have been appointed in various High
Court. For filling up the existing vacancies of Judges/Additional Judges in the High Courts, 53 proposals
have been received from the State constitutional authorities and these are at various stages of
consideration.
34. The Committee has been informed that the Government, in its part, requests the Chief Justices to
initiate proposals/recommendations for filling up vacancies of Judges in the High Courts expeditiously. As
the procedure involves consultation with various constitutional authorities, it is not possible to indicate the
time by which all the vacancies would be filled in. Procedurally, unless recommendations/proposals are
made to the Government, posts would continue to remain unfilled as initiation of proposal for appointment
rests in Chief Justices and the Chief Justice of India for the High Courts and the Supreme Court
respectively.
35. Regarding the procedure for appointment of Judges the Committee has been informed that according to
the judgement of October 6, 1993, read with the Advisory Opinion of October 28, 1998, of the Supreme
Court of India the proposal for appointment of a Judge of a High Court shall be initiated by the Chief
Justice of the High Court. The Governor, as advised by the Chief Minister, should forward his
recommendation to the Union Law Minister as early as possible but not later than six weeks from the data
of receipt of the proposal from the Chief Justice of the High Court. If the comments are not received within
the said time frame, it should be presumed that the Constitutional authorities of the State has nothing to
add to the proposal. The Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs would consider the
recommendations in the light of such other reports as may be available to the Government in respect of the
names under consideration. The complete material would then be forwarded to the Chief Justice of India

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
for his advice. The Chief Justice of India would, in consultation with two senior most Judges of the
Supreme Court, form his opinion in regard to a person to be recommended for appointment to the High
Court. The Chief Justice of India and the collegium of two Judges of the Supreme Court would take into
account the views of the chief Justice of the High Court and of those Judges of the High court who have
been consulted by the Chief Justice as well as views of those Judges in the Supreme court who are
conversant with the affairs of that High Court. After consultations, the Chief Justice of India is expected to
send his recommendation to the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs within four weeks.
The Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs would then put up as early as possible,
preferably, within 3 weeks, the recommendation of the Chief Justice of India to the Prime Minister who
will advise the President in the matter of appointment. The Department added that it would be observed
that the time-frame for the constitutional authorities in the matter of appointment of Judges of the High
Court has already been proposed. The Government, on its part, requests the Chief Justices to initiate
proposals/recommendations for filling up vacancies of Judges in the High Courts expeditiously. As the
procedure involves consultation with various Constitutional authorities, it is not possible to indicate the
time by which all the vacancies would be filled up , the Department further added.
36. The Department has intimated that the observation of the Committee during the consideration of the
Demands for Grants, on the vacancies of Judges has been noted and the Chief Justices of the High Courts
would be apprised of this with a request to initiate proposals in time so that the vacancies are filled in
expeditiously.
37. The Committee has also been apprised that the transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another is
made by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India (vide Article 222(1) of the
Constitution). The Government had accepted, as a policy, the recommendations of the Law Commission in
its 80
th Report that there should be a convention according to which 1/3rd of Judges in each High Court
should be from any other State. The Government has decided that this may be implemented either by
making initial appointments from outside or by effecting transfers. Pursuant to this policy,
transfer/appointment of Judges and Chief Justices of the High Courts are being made on the
recommendation of the Chief Justice of India.
37.1. The Committee has been further apprised that prior to the judgement of the Supreme Court in
Advocates-on-Record Association vs. Union of India and others on October 6, 1993, proposal for
appointment of Judges could also be initiated by the Government. However, according to the Judgement of
October 6, 1993, read with the Advisory Opinion of October 28, 1998 of the Supreme Court of India the
initiation of the proposal for appointment of the Judge in the Supreme Court must be by the Chief Justice
of India, and in the case of a High Court by the Chief Justice of that High Court. For transfer of a
Judge/Chief Justice of a High Court to another High Court, the proposal has to be initiated by the Chief
Justice of India. This is the manner in which proposals for appointments to the Supreme Court and the
High Courts as well as for the transfers of Judges/Chief Justices of the High Courts must invariably be
made, the Committee has been informed by the Department.
38. In this context the Department has stated that one of the items of the National Agenda for Governance
is to set up a National Judicial Commission to make recommendations for Judicial appointments in the
Supreme Court and the High Courts and draw up a code of ethics for the judiciary.
39. Having considered all the aspects of the matter regarding appointment of Judges of Supreme Court
and High Courts and transfer of Judges of High Courts and the delay in filling up the vacancies of

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
High Court Judges, the Committee feels that the time has come when the basic substantial issues should
be deliberated at the highest level of the Government so that there could be an over all improvement in
the situation.
Accountability of Judges
40. Regarding the accountability of Judges the Committee has been informed by the Department that the
issue of judicial accountability was discussed in the Conference of Chief Justices held in 1990 and on the
basis of the broad consensus emerging out of the deliberations, the Chief Justice of India summed up the
position as follows:-
i. The Chief Justice of the High Court has the competence to receive complaints against the
conduct of the Judges of his court and when he receives any he would look into it for finding
out if it deserves to be closely looked into. Where he is satisfied that the matter requires to be
examined, he shall have facts ascertained in such manner as he considers appropriate keeping
the nature of allegations in view and if he is of the opinion that the matter is such that it should
be reported to the Chief Justice of India, he shall do so.
ii. The Chief Justice of India shall act in a similar manner in regard to complaints relating to
conduct of Judges of the Supreme Court and in regard to conduct of Chief Justices of the High
Courts.
iii. On the basis of the facts ascertained, the Chief Justice of the High Court or the Supreme Court,
as the case may be, shall take such appropriate action as may be considered proper, keeping the
interests of the judiciary as the paramount consideration.
41. The Department has further informed that in this regard the following resolution was also passed in the
Chief Justices’ Conference held on October 26 and 27, 1996:-
"Resolved that the Hon’ble CJI may constitute a Committee of Judges to finalise the
‘restatement of values’ of judicial life in the light of the suggestions made by the
various High Courts."
In view of above, necessary action with regard to accountability of the Judges of
High Courts and Supreme Court has to be taken by the Chief Justices of High Courts
and the Chief Justice of India respectively.
With regard to accountability in lower judiciary, it is stated that under Article 235 of
the Constitution of India, the administrative control over the members of subordinate
judicial service vests with the concerned High Court. Further, in exercise of powers
conferred under proviso to Article 309 read with Articles 233 and 234 of the
Constitution, the State Government frame rules and regulations in consultation with
the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State. The members of the
State judicial service are governed by these rules and regulations. Thus, the members
of subordinate judiciary are subject to disciplinary and conduct rules framed by the
State Governments and the High Courts".
42. The Committee recommends that like Legislative and Executive there should be code of conduct for
the judges and some mechanism or arrangement like Lokpal Type should be worked out.

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Pendency in Courts
43. The Additional Secretary, Department of Justice in his deposition before the Committee stated that the
pendency of Supreme Court is decreasing. There were 1,04, 936 cases as on 31st December, 1991. The
pendency has come down to 20,306 as on 1st February, 1999 (See Annexure-C). The Supreme Court has
noted that the decrease is due to the categorisation and grouping of cases, non-accumulation of defective
matters, reservations of more time for old pending cases. The pendency with High Courts is increasing
(See Annexure-D). there were 26.5 lakhs case pending as on 31st December, 1993. The pendency has
increased to 32.03 lakhs as on 30th June, 1998. The increase in pendency is due to various complex factors
e.g. more institution of cases, awareness of the rights on the part of the utilizers, population explosion,
industrial development in the country, increase in trade and commerce, emergence of socio economic
measures, grant of frequent adjournments by the Courts, frequent strikes by the advocates etc. The
Committee in its 45th Report, had recommended that measures taken by the Supreme Court should be
suggested to the High Courts also to bring down the pendency. Accordingly, the Minister of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs addressed letters to the Chief Justices of all the High Courts requesting them to
follow the some measures which were undertaken by the Supreme Court. Some of the High Courts have
responded that they have stated taking up those measures. However, the impact of taking those measures
on the pendency is not known because the overall pendency in all the High Court has increased. The
pendency in the subordinate courts,as on 31
st December ,1995 was 2.18 crores. It has gone down to 2.02
crores as on 30th June , 1998. The decrease in the pendency of cases in subordinate courts is mainly due to
classification of cases involving minor offences pending for two years or more in which proceedings have
not commenced and also due to appointment of special magistrates/special metropolitan magistrates under
sections 13 and 18 of Criminal procedure code, the steps taken by the State Governments for increasing the
number of judicial officers etc.
44. Regarding the various steps taken by the Government for expeditious disposal of cases in courts, the
Department of Justice has, in written reply, stated that the various Law Commissions of their Report have
made suggestions regarding speedy disposal of pending cases in Courts such as amendment in procedural
Laws, increase in Judge strength, establishment of more Special Courts/Tribunals, provision of modern
office equipments, etc. Government has taken a series of steps for speedy disposal of pending cases. These
include amendment of Civil Procedure Code and Criminal Procedure Code. The Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Bill, 1997 inter-alia contains a number of provisions which will facilitate speedy disposal of
all cases. Further, steps are being taken to increase the number of posts of Judges in the High Courts,
appointment of Special Judicial/Metropolitan Magistrates for disposal of petty criminal cases,
computerization in courts etc. The Government has also adopted alternative modes of dispute resolution
such as arbitration and conciliation . Lok Adalats have been given a statutory base with the enforcement of
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, as amended, w.e.f. 9.11.1995. Lok Adalats have proved to be an
effective and successful supplementary forum for resolution of disputes. Free legal aid is available for the
poor litigant. The Law Commission in its 154
th Report has made several recommendations with regard to
speedy disposal of cases viz. Separate and exclusive cadre for investigating agency, timely attendance of
witnesses, protection and facilities to witnesses, setting up of a separate Directorate of Prosecution,
addition of new sub-section 41A on custodial crimes, Protection of under trial prisoners, empowering all
the criminal courts to take bail, appointment of Special Magistrates under Section 13 and 18 of the
Criminal Procedure Code for disposal of petty cases, compensation to crime victims, summary trial
procedure for recording evidence, etc. The Report has been circulated to all the State governments for

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
soliciting their comments/views. Views of some State Governments/UT Administrations have been
received and are being processed.
45. The Department has further stated that "the Supreme Court of India in the case of Common Cause Vs.
Union of India on 1st May, 1996 directed for closing of few categories of criminal cases which were
pending for more than 2 years in Subordinate Courts and in which the trial had not commenced. Further,
the Supreme Court, in Writ Petition No.559 of 1994 – R.D. Upadhyay Vrs. State of A.P. and others is also
seized of the matter regarding pending criminal cases and under trial. The Supreme Court in the said Writ
Petition, in its order dated 10th December, 1998 has directed for releasing of the under trial prisoners
languishing in jail for more than six months for offences under section 107/151 of the Criminal Procedure
Code, on bail, on furnishing personal bonds to the Chief Judicial Magistrate concerned". The Department
has further informed that on the basis of the recommendations made by the various
authorities/Committees/Law Commissions etc., the High Courts have been requested from time to time to
take various measures to expedite the disposal of pending cases in the Subordinate Courts. Recently, the
Chief Justice of India has addressed a letter to the Chief Justices of all the High Courts impressing upon
the need to deal with the problem of delay in disposal of cases in the Subordinate Courts and to initiate
action for filling up the vacant posts of Judges/Judicial Officers so as to make the year 1999 as an "Year of
Action".
46. The Committee takes strong exception to the huge pendency of cases in courts which has shaken the
confidence of the people in the administration of Justice. The Committee is also is seized of the efforts
of the Government on that account for streamlining the procedure of courts by proposing to amend the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 which will go a long way in bringing down the pendencies in Courts.
Even then, the Committee feels that the Government should make all possible efforts for quick disposal
of cases.
All INDIA JUDICIAL SERVICE
47. The Committee has been informed that in the light of the recommendations of the First, Eighth and
Eleventh Law Commissions and also in pursuance of a recommendation of the Supreme Court of India
vide its judgement dated 13.11.1991 in the matter of All India Judges Associated vs. Union of India &
others (Writ Petition No.1022 of 1989), the question of creation of an All India Judicial Service is already
under consideration of the Government. An All India Service can be created only through a resolution to
be passed by the Rajya Sabha by not less than two-thirds of the Members present and voting, followed by
an enactment by the Parliament under Article 312 of the Constitution. The matter relating to creating of All
India Judicial Service is being processed accordingly.
48. The Committee recommends that the decision with regard to the creation of All India Judicial
Service may be taken at the earliest,
SETTING OF BENCHES OF SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS
49. The Committee has been informed that representations have been received from time to time from
various Bar Associations, other bodies, Members of Parliament, etc. for establishment of Benches of
Supreme Court in various parts of the country. The Governments of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka suggested that a Bench of Supreme Court may be established in the respective State capitals for
south India. The Chief Minister of Tripura sent in August 1983 a copy of the resolution passed by the Bar

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Association, High Court of Calcutta, requesting for establishment of a Bench of Supreme Court at
Calcutta. The Chief Minister requested the then Union Law Minister to accept the resolution of the Bar
Association. The Law Ministers of the eastern and the north-eastern States adopted a resolution
unanimously in their meeting held on 4.10.96 in Calcutta that it is essential for the Supreme Court to sit at
a suitable place in their regions to promote equal opportunity to all in operation of our legal system.
According to article 130 of the Constitution, " the Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place
or places as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President from time to time, appoint."
The Government has further informed that the matter has accordingly been referred to the Chief Justice of
India from time to time for his views. It has been intimated many a time by the Registry of the Supreme
Court and the Chief Justice of India since 1982 and as recently as 1997 that the suggestion for the
establishment of Benches of the Supreme Court outside Delhi was considered and was not agreed to by the
Full Court in a meeting presided over by the Chief Justice of India.
50. The Committee has not been informed about the reasons communicated by the Registry of the
Supreme Court for disagreement on establishment of benches of Supreme Court in different part of the
country. The Committee recommends that Government should think for setting up benches of Supreme
Court in Southern, Western and North-Eastern parts of the country.
51. The Additional Secretary, Department of Justice in his deposition before the Committee stated that
`proposals’ have been received from Bar Associations, State Governments and other persons for
establishing a bench apart from the principal seat of the High Courts. When a proposal was received from
the Uttar Pradesh Government for setting up of a Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the Western U.P.,
the Central Government set up a Commission known as the Jaswant Singh Commission in 1981 to
examine the issue. Later on, the terms of reference of the Commission were enlarged to include the
demand of a Bench of the Guwahati High Court, Benches of the High Courts of Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh and Madras. The Commission was also requested to suggest the broad principles of criteria to be
followed for setting up of the Benches of the High Courts. The Commission submitted its report to the
Government of India in 1985 recommedning, inter alia, establishment of a permanent bench of the
Allahabad High Court at Agra and a circuit bench at Nainital and Dehra Dun. The Commission also
recommended the setting up of a circuit bench at Raipur of the Madhya Pradesh High Court and
consideration of its coversion into a permanent bench after five years. Similarly, the Commission also
recommended the setting up of a circuit bench of Madras High Court at Madurai and its conversion into a
permanent bench after five years. The Commission also recommeded the broad principles and the criteria
to be followed for assessing the desirability of setting up of benches of High Courts away from their
principal seats and the factors to be kept in view in selecting the venue of such benches. The report of the
Commission was also laid on the Tables of the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha on 20.4.1987 and 21.4.87
respectively. The specific recommendations of the Commission regarding the Allahabad, the Madhya
Pradesh and the Madras High Courts were referred to the concerned State Governments in October, 1986
for their views and comments in consultation with the Chief Justices of the respective High Courts, as also
the Governors of those States. In 1989, the Government of Uttar Pradesh sent the proposal for the setting
up of a permanent bench of the Allahabad High Court at Agra. At that time the Chief Justice of the High
Court was totally opposed to the setting up of this bench, He mentioned that as a result of this, the High
Court might even break up. There were agitations and counter agitatios by bar associations. The bar
association of Allahabad was against the setting up of a bench at Agra, whereas the district bar association
of the Western UP demanded the setting up of benches of the High Court at various places in Uttar
Pradesh, even away from Agra. In 1994, the then Chief Minister again wrote to the Government of India

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
for establishment of a bench of the Allahabad High Court. At that time also, the Chief Justice of the High
Court was opoosed to this and he mentioned that the circumstances prevailing at that time were not
conducive for the setting up of a bench of the Allahabad High Court in Western UP. In 1995, the then
Chief Minister again wrote in this regard and the matter was left to be decided by the Central Government
in this respect. The Judges are to be deputed to the benches by the Chief Justices and the administration is
also to be looked after by the Chief Justices of respective High Courts and the infrastructure facilities are
to be provided by the respective State Governments. It is, therefore, necessary to evolve a consensus
among all the three authorities, that is, the bar, the State Governments and also the High Courts. It was,
therefore, decided that let the concensus be evolved and the initiative to that effect was left to the State
Government. The Government of Uttar Pradesh was informed accordingly. No such proposal after that has
been received from the Government of Uttar Pradesh in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court concerned, although the State Government has been reminded about the matter. About Madhya
Pradesh there is a difference in the recommendation made by the Commission for the setting up of a
bench. In the case of Uttar Pradesh, it is required is be set up by a parliamentary resolution. But in the case
of Madhya Pradesh, a bench can be set up by the Chief Justice of the High Court after the approval of the
Governor under section 51 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. Two writs were filed in the Madhya
Pradesh High Court, one for setting up of a bench at Raipur and the other against the setting up of this
bench at Raipur. These writ petitions were transferred to the Supreme Court and the Madhya Pradesh
Government informed the Central Government that the setting up of this bench is a very sensitive matter
and it required a careful consideration. The Government of Madhya Pradesh has not sent any proposal in
consultation with the Chief Justice to the Central Government. In fact, the Chief Justice of the High Court
himself can set up a circuit bench with the approval of the Governor as provided in the States
Reorganisation Act of 1956. The same is the position in regard to the Madras High Court. There also a
circuit bench can be established by the Chief Justice of the Madras High Court with the approval of the
Governor. The State Government took up the matter with the Chief Justice of Madras High Court. The
Chief Justice of Madras High Court constituted a committee and that committee gave its report and then
the full court passed a resolution in 1995 for the setting up of a circuit bench at Madurai. The Chief Justice
also wrote to the State Government asking them to provide the infrastructural facilities. On an enquiry
from the Central Government, the State Government has informed that proceedings for acquiring 75 acres
of land are nearing completion and an amount of Rs.2.5 crores has also been earmarked by the State
Government for this purpose. They have informed that after this is completed, they will consult the High
Court and approach the Central Government for providing infrastructural facilities and also financial
assistance from the Central Government. The Karnataka Government has also sent a proposal for the
setting up of a bench of the High Court at Hubli-Dharwar. But, the Chief Justice of the Karnataka High
Court has all along been opposed to the setting up of a bench of the High Court away from the principal
seat of the Karnataka High Court. A proposal has also been received from the Government of West Bengal
for the setting up of a bench of the Calcutta High Court at Jalpaiguri. The proposal is under consideration
with the Government’.
52. The Committee, after having considered all the aspects of the setting up of benches of High Courts
away from their principal seats, is of the opinion that establishment of the benches of High Courts at
the places which are far off from their principal seat is the need of time, keeping in view of the problems
of the poor people. The Committee urges upon the Government to sort out the various hurdles coming
in the way of setting up of benches and ensure that there should not be inordinate delay in the matter.
DEMAND NO.59 – ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
53. Under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the administrative control of the
Election Commission vests in the Legislative Department which has its responsibility towards the
Parliament. In the matter of appointments/disciplinary cases of Group `A’ posts in the Election
Commission for which the President is the appointing authority, the Commission approaches the
Legislative Department for obtaining necessary approval of the appropriate authority till 1994-95 the
Demands for Grants of the Election Commission formed part of the Demand No. 58 of the Ministry of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs but since 1995-96 a separate Demand No.59 has been assisgned to the
Election Commission. The Expenditure of the Election Commission is voted. Budgetary allocation of a
total of Rs.9.21 crores has been made for the year 1999-2000 as against 8.70 crores allocated under the
Revised Estimate for 1998-99.
DEMAND NO.60 – SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
54. The Demand NO.60 of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
has been assigned to the Supreme Court. The expenditure to be incurred under this demand is charged. The
total Budget Estimate for 1999-2000 of the Supreme Court is Rs.30.27 crores as against 35.27 crores of
Revised Estimates for 1998-99. The Actuals for 1997-98 was Rs.17.35 corores.
55. The Committee wanted to know from the Ministry about the reasons for wide variations in the Budget
Estimates and Revised Estimates in respect of Demand No.60. The Ministry has explained that the
variations in Demand during the year 1998-99 was on account of the upward revision of Salary and
Allowances of the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India and Judges of the Supreme Court and Officers and Staff
of the Supreme Court w.e.f. 1.1.96, consequent to the implementation of the 5
th Pay Commissions Report.
The increase was mainly under the sub-head "Salaries". The Ministry was also asked to explain the reason
for 100% increase in Revised Estimate 1998-99 over Budget Estimates i.e. from Rs. 5 lakh to 10 lakhs
under Demand Major Head 2014 `Domestic Travel Expenses’. The Committee has been informed that the
work relating to Budget matter of the Supreme Court of India is handled by Financial Adviser (Finance &
MD), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. He has informed that the increase in the provison
under the head was due to the unscheduled internal tours undertaken by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India.
56. The Committee noted the factual position explained by the Ministry in this regard.
DEMAND NO. 61 – DEPARTMENT OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
57. The budget of the Department provides for the expenditure on the Secretariat of the Department of
Company Affairs, offices of the Registrars of Companies, Official Liquidators and Regional Directors and
also for expenditure on offices of Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, Director
General of Investigation & Registration and Company Law Board. The Budget Estimates and Revised
Estimates for 1998-99 were Rs.34.66 and 33.02 crore respectively. The total Budget Demand for the
 year
1999-2000 amounts to Rs.32.40 crores (i.e. Rs.32.10 crores under the Revenue Section and Rs.0.30. Crore
under the Capital Section as follows :
(in thousands of rupees)
Section S.No. Office Budget Estimates
Revenue 1 Headquarters 84093
2. Registrars of Companies 124689

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
3 Regional Directors 30331
4. Official Liquidators 39973
5. Monopolies and Restrictive 18470
Trade Practices Commission
6. Director General of 10140
Investigation & Registration
7. Company Law Board 12954
8. Canteens 1250
Capital 9. Provision for purchase of 0
Shares in the Companies
By the Central Government
Under Section 108-B of the
Companies Act, 1956
10. Purchase of Land/building/ 3000
construction of office
premises/residential
accommodation for staff
Total 324000
 
  
 
58. The Committee has been informed that under the Companies Act, 1956, fees are realised from the
companies under various heads such as for registration of companies, for filing of returns/documents by
Companies and for making applications etc. There are also receipts by way of costs awarded by courts in
prosecution cases under the Companies Act. Thus, Department of Company Affairs is a revenue earning
Department. Revenue earned by the Department during 1998-99 amounts to Rs.116.43 crores up to
December, 1998 as against Rs.154.21 Crores earned during the year 1997. As against the figures of
receipts, the budget of Rs.32.40 crores for the Department for the year 1999-2000 is comparatively small.
59. The Committee in its 45
th Report, had noted that the most of the offices of the Department of
Company Affairs are housed in rented building and had the Department of their own buildings so that it
did not spend substantial amount of money on the rents. The Department in its ATN had intimated that
many offices of the Department of Company Affairs are housed in Government buildings only. However,
some of the offices are housed in rented buildings. In most of the cases rent paid is very low as the
buildings were hired decades ago. The Department is making efforts to either house the offices in the
buildings owned by CPWD or in Government accommodation. In Ahmedabad, the Department has out
rightly purchased a constructed building from the State Government and shifted the office of Registrar of

CONFIDENTIAL
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/56_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Companies. Ahmedabad from a rental accommodation. In Gwalior also, a proposal is under consideration
for purchase of a building for the office of Registrar of companies, Gwalior very shortly. In Goa, a plot has
been purchased from a Government agency and work pertaining to construction of building is in progress.
The Department is making efforts to house the offices in Central Government/State Government/CPWD
owned buildings. In case a private building is hired, Rent Reasonableness Certificate is obtained from
CPWD. Non-availability certificate is obtained from CPWD, if a building is to be purchased for the
purpose of office accommodation.
60. After having been asked about the latest position in this regard the Department has in its written reply,
informed the Committee that Twenty offices of Regional Directors/Registrar of Companies/ Official
Liquidators are in Government/CPWD owned Buildings. Twenty two offices of Regional
Directors/Registrar of Companies/Official Liquidators are in rented buildings. More recently, the Office of
Registrar of Companies, Ahmedabad has been shifted to a building purchased by Department from Gujarat
Housing Board (Date:04.03.1996). One constructed floor has been purchased during this year from M.P.
Housing Board at Gwalior for the Office of Registrar of Companies, Gwalior. This office will be shifted to
the new premises shortly. A plot of land has been purchased at Panaji (Goa) by the Department for the
Office of Registrar of Companies, Goa. Construction of building is expected to commence in April, 1999.
61. The Committee has noted the factual position in this regard