Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.
211
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on th April, )4 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th )4 2018April,
The Cyclone Ockhi-Its Impact on Fishermen
and damage caused by it
TWO HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT
April, 2018/Chaitra, 1940


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT
The Cyclone Ockhi-Its Impact on Fishermen
and damage caused by it
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 4th April, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th April, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2018/Chaitra, 1940
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 414


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-26
Chapter-I Background................................................................................................ 1-5
Chapter-II Impact of Cyclone Ockhi .......................................................................... 6-13
Chapter-III Relief & Rehabilitation............................................................................... 14-26
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ......................................................... 27-31
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 3-40

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st September, 2017)
1. Shri P. Chidambaram —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri  Pratap Keshari Deb
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Dr. V. Maitreyan
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
9. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh
10. Shri R.K. Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
12. Shri S. Selvakumarachinnayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
20. Shri Kaushal Kishore
21. Shri Ashwini Kumar
22. Shri P. Nagarajan
23. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
24. Shri Dilip Patel
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
26. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
27. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
28. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
29. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
30. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
31. Shri B. Sriramulu
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Eleventh Report on ‘The Cyclone Ockhi - Its Impact on Fishermen and damage caused by it’.
2. In the Committee’s meeting held on 20th December, 2017,  the Home Secretary briefed the Committee
about the development of the Cyclone Ockhi and its rapid intensification from 29th November to 6th December,
2017. A presentation was made before the Committee by the Indian Meteorological Department and the
Ministry of Defence on the technical description of the cyclone, the efforts made by the Central Government
to enable the States of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and UT of Lakshadweep to deal with the cyclone.
3. The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the following
documents:-
(i) Background Note  on the rescue, relief operation and rehabilitation schemes in the affected Sates
of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and UT of Lakshadweep in the aftermath of recent devastating Ockhi
Cyclone received from the union Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) Presentation made before the Committee in its meeting held on 20th December, 2017 by the
Union Ministry of Home Affairs, Indian Meteorological Department and Ministry of Defence;
(iii) W ritten clarifications furnished by the Ministry, on the points/issues raised by the Members
during the meeting of the Committee; and
(iv) Replies furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs to the questionnaire sent by the Secretariat.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 2nd April, 2018 and adopted the same.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. For further convenience, abbreviations used in
the report have been compiled in a table under the Acronyms section.
P. CHIDAMBARAM
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
2 April, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary
Chaitra 12, 1940 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

                ACRONYMS
ACWCs – Area Cyclone Warning Centres
AIR – All India Radio
CS – Cyclonic Storm
CWCs – Cyclone Warning Centres
DA T – Distress Alert Transmitter
DG – Director General
ESCAP – Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
EEZ – Exclusive Economic Zone
FFC – Fourteenth Finance Commission
HLC – High Level Committee
ICG – Indian Coast Guard
IN – Indian Navy
IMD – Indian Meteorological Department
IMCT – Inter -Ministerial Central Team
ITCA – I nter-Tropical Convergence Zone
ISRO – Indian Space Research Organization
INCOIS – Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Service
ISN – International Safety Net
MRCC – Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre
MoES – Ministry of Earth Science
MIDH – Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture
M H A – Ministry of Home Affairs
NavIC – Navigation with Indian Constellation
NIO – North Indian Ocean
NWP – Numerical Weather Prediction
NDRF – National Disaster Response Force
NHM – National Horticulture Mission
NDMA – National Disaster Management Authority
NMSA – National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture
(iv)

(v)
PMNRF – Prime Minister s National Relief Fund
RAD – Rainfed Area Development
SCS – Severe Cyclonic Storm
SDMA – State Disaster Management Authority
SOP – Standing Operating Procedure
SDRF – State Disaster Response Force
SMS – Short Messaging Service
SEOC – State Emergency Operation Centre
SNC – Southern Naval Command
SAR – Search and Rescue
SC-NEC – Sub Committee of National Executive Committee
TANGEDCO – T amil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation
UTDRF – UT Disaster Response Fund
VSCS – V ery Severe Cyclonic Storm
VHF – Very High Frequency
WMO – World Meteorological Organization

1
REPORT
CHAPTER- I
BACKGROUND
1.1     Introduction
1.1.1 A very severe cyclonic storm ‘Ockhi’  hit the coast of Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Lakshadweep, during
November-December 2017, wreaking unprecedented havoc.  Eight coastal districts of Kerala, one district
of Tamil Nadu and a few islands of Lakshadweep faced the fury of the cyclone. The colossal human,
material and environmental losses caused by the cyclone in these States were beyond the endurance of the
affected people and the States. The devastating impact of Ockhi exposed not only the country s ability to put
in place a credible system of advanced cyclone warning but also comprehensive disaster mitigation
preparedness. The magnitude of death and destruction was enormous thereby warranting a relook at the
country s disaster response system.
1.1.2 Indian coasts are no strangers to cyclones. India’s east-coast witnesses several cyclonic storms at
periodic intervals.  But, Ockhi was unlike other cyclones.  It originated near the South-Western coast of Sri
Lanka and after reaching India, it ravaged the coastal areas of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and the Lakshadweep
islands. There were two uncommon features of cyclone Ockhi. First, its rapid intensification in a short span
of time from a deep depression into a cyclonic storm and second, its long gestation period.  The cyclone
gestated for 6.75 days at sea, much longer than the ‘long period average life’ of 4.7 days for very severe
cyclonic storms that occur over the North Indian Ocean.
1.1.3 The Committee had taken up the subject ‘Disaster Management’
1, in its meeting held on 24th October,
2017, for examination. In view of the magnitude of devastation caused by Ockhi, the Committee decided to
take up the subject “The Impact of Cyclone Ockhi Including Damage Caused by it and the Missing Fishermen
Due to the Cyclone” for in-depth examination and to report thereon. The Committee, in its meeting held on
20th December, 2017, heard the views of the Home Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry of
Home Affairs, representatives of National Disaster Management Authority, National Disaster Response Force,
Ministry of Defence, Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard and Indian Meteorological Department. All these
witnesses, while deposing before the Committee, gave a detailed account of the damage caused by cyclone
Ockhi and the various rescue, relief and rehabilitation measures undertaken by the Central Government, the
State Governments concerned and the Administration of the Union Territory Lakshadweep. The Committee
also took into consideration the background notes, replies to the questionnaire and other related materials
furnished by the MHA.
1.2 Genesis of Cyclone Ockhi
1.2.1 The background note furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that due to an active inter-
tropical convergence zone (ITCA) and the associated mesoscale convection,  a trough in easterly winds or
low-pressure systems developed over the southern part of the Bay of Bengal in November 2017. It moved
westwards, causing rainfall over the southern peninsular region of India at regular intervals. In this scenario,
a low-pressure area was formed over the Andaman Sea on 22nd November, 2017 under the influence of a
remnant upper air cyclonic circulation from the Gulf of Thailand. It lay over the southeast and adjoining east
central Bay of Bengal on 23rd November, the central part of the southern Bay of Bengal on 24th November,
southwest bay and the adjoining equatorial Indian Ocean on 25th November and southwest bay and adjoining
1 Parliamentary Bulletin Part – II, No. 57019, dated 14th November, 2017

2
southeast Sri Lanka on 26th November. Subsequently, it weakened and lay as a trough of low pressure over
the southeast Arabian Sea and adjoining Maldives on 27th November, and over the southeast Arabian Sea and
the region adjoining Lakshadweep and the Maldives on 28th November.
1.2.2 A fresh low-pressure area formed over the southwest Bay of Bengal, the adjoining area of south Sri
Lanka, and the equatorial Indian Ocean in the forenoon (0830 IST) of 28th November, 2017. It became a
well-marked low-pressure area in the early morning (0530 IST) of 29th November over the same region.
Under favorable environmental conditions, it concentrated into a depression over the southwest Bay of
Bengal off the coast of the southeast Sri Lanka in the forenoon (0830 IST) of 29th November. Moving
westwards, it crossed the Sri Lankan coast and emerged into the Comorin Sea on the evening (1730 IST) of
30th November. It further moved in the northwest direction and intensified into a ‘Cyclonic Storm’  (CS) in
the forenoon (0830 IST) of 30th November over the Comorin Sea.
1.2.3 There was a rapid intensification of cyclone Ockhi after its genesis as a depression.  It intensified
from a deep depression into a ‘Cyclonic Storm’ over the Comorin Sea within six hours. It intensified into a
cyclonic storm, within 24 hours. Thereafter, Ockhi moved towards the west-northwest direction, further
intensifying into a ‘Severe Cyclonic Storm (SCS)’ over the Lakshadweep area in the early morning (0530
IST) of 1st December, 2017 and into a ‘Very Severe Cyclonic Storm (VSCS)’  over the southeast Arabian
Sea, to the west of Lakshadweep in the afternoon (1430 IST) of 1st December. It then moved towards the
northwest direction and reached its peak intensity of 150-160 km/ph, rising to 180 km/ph in the afternoon
(1430 IST) of 2nd December with a recorded central pressure of  976 hectopascals (hPa).  It moved
towards the north-northwest direction for some time and then towards the north-northeast direction, while
maintaining its intensity, until the early morning of 3rd December. It then continued to move towards the
north-northeast direction and gradually dissipated. It crossed the southern coast of Gujarat, between Surat
and Dahanu, as a well-marked low-pressure trough around early morning (0530 IST) of 6th December,
2017.
1.2.4 Chronological genesis, intensification, weakening and dissipation of cyclone Ockhi, as furnished by
the Indian Meteorological Department, is given in the following table:
Date Time (IST) Stage of Cyclone L ocation
28.11.2017 0830 Low Pressure Area Southwest Bay off Sri Lanka
29.11.2017 0830 Depression Southwest Bay off Sri Lanka
30.11.2017 0230 Deep Depression Comorin Area
0830 Cyclonic Storm Comorin Area
01.12.2017 0530 Severe Cyclonic Storm Lakshadweep
1430 Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Lakshadweep
04.12.2017 1730 Severe Cyclonic Storm East-central Arabian Sea
05.12.2017 0830 Cyclonic Storm East-central Arabian Sea
1730 Deep Depression East-central Arabian Sea
2030 Depression East-central Arabian Sea

3
06.12.2017 0230 Well Marked Low North-east Arabian Sea
0530 Low Pressure Area South Coastal Gujarat
1.3 Cyclone Warning and Forecasting
1.3.1 As per the ‘Standard Operation Procedure of Cyclone Warning’ in India, the ‘Area Cyclone Warning
Centres’ (ACWCs) and ‘Cyclone Warning Centres’ (CWCs) issue warnings to ships at high seas, ships in
coastal waters, ports, fishermen, government officials and the general public regarding adverse weather
likely to be experienced in their respective areas. The bulletins and warnings issued by ACWCs/CWCs for
their respective areas of responsibility include:
(i) Four stage warning bulletin
(ii) Sea area bulletins for ships plying the high seas
(iii) Coa stal weather bulletins for ships plying coastal waters
(iv) Bulletins for Indian Navy
(v) Port warnings
(vi) Fisheries warnings
(vii) Four stage warnings for Central and State Government officials
(viii) Bulletins broadcast through AIR for the general public
(ix) W arning for registered users
(x) Bulletins for the press
(xi) W arnings for aviation (issued by the concerned Aviation Meteorological Offices)
1.3.2 The most important warning for disaster management is the one issued to the government officials
under a four-stage warning system. The First Stage warning known as “Pre Cyclone Watch” is issued 72
hours in advance of the commencement of adverse weather.  It contains an early warning about the
development of a cyclonic disturbance in the North Indian Ocean (NIO), the likely intensification of this
disturbance into a tropical cyclone and the adverse weather conditions that the coastal belt is likely to
experience.
1.3.3 The Second Stage warning, known as “Cyclone Alert”, is issued at least 48 hours before the expected
commencement of adverse weather over the coastal areas. It contains information on the location of the
storm, its intensity, likely direction of its movement, intensification, and the coastal districts that are likely to
experience adverse weather along with advice for fishermen, the general public, the media and disaster
managers.
1.3.4 The Third Stage warning known as “Cyclone Warning” is issued at least 24 hours in advance of the
expected commencement of adverse weather over the coastal areas. These warnings give information about
the latest position of the cyclone and its intensity, the likely point and time of landfall, associated heavy
Date Time (IST) Stage of Cyclone L ocation

4
rainfall, strong wind and storm surge along with their impact and advice to the general public, media,
fishermen and disaster managers.
1.3.5 The Fourth Stage of warning known as “Post Landfall Outlook”  is issued at least 12 hours in
advance of the expected time of landfall. It gives the likely direction of movement of the cyclone after its
landfall and adverse weather likely to be experienced in the interior areas. All the above warnings are issued
by ACWCs/ CWCs/and Cyclone Warning Division.
1.3.6 Cyclone Ockhi was an unusual cyclone, as was evident in its rapid intensification and unpredictable
course. The Committee enquired about the timely warning or forecasting from the Indian Meteorological
Department (IMD). The IMD, in its report submitted to the Committee, informed the Committee that the
cyclone was monitored and its movements were predicted continuously by the IMD since the genesis of the
low-pressure area over the southwest region of the Bay of Bengal on 28th November. Various national and
international Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models and dynamic-statistical models were utilized to
predict the genesis, track, and intensity of the cyclone. The IMD issued regular bulletins to the member
countries of the World Meteorological Organization/Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific (WMO/ESCAP) Panel including Sri Lanka and the Maldives, National  and State Disaster Management
Agencies, the general public and the media since the inception of the cyclonic system over the Bay of
Bengal.
1.3.7 During the meeting of the Committee, the Director-General, IMD submitted that after crossing Sri
Lanka s southern part, Ockhi took a northwesterly turn towards south Tamil Nadu, Kanniyakumari and
Trivandrum districts and then subsequently moved westwards. The unusual track towards the northwest
and the rapid intensification in those 18 hours were because of the unusually warm ocean and the heat
content at the ocean surface. The IMD informed the Committee that the next generation ocean cyclone
prediction models will have to be based on both oceanic and atmospheric models. At the moment, there
were only atmospheric models.  Oceanic models are also required since it was observed in the instant case
that the ocean was warming and behaving unusually as a result of global warming.
1.3.8 The Committee takes note of the submission by the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD)
that cyclone Ockhi was an unusual phenomenon, which was evident in its rapid intensification. The
Committee understands that forecasting rapid intensification of cyclones remains an area of concern.
However, the Committee wishes to stress upon the fact that rapid intensification of cyclones is no
longer a rare phenomenon and globally, several countries have evolved credible prediction models
for this phenomenon. The Committee is of the opinion that the prediction of rapid intensification of
cyclones is imperative, to bolster our existing capacity for advance cyclone warning.  The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the IMD should focus on intensive research to develop
forecasting models for the prediction of the ‘Rapid Intensification’ phenomenon. The Committee
also recommends that the IMD must acquire inputs on sea surface temperatures from thermal
satellites and integrate them into the cyclone forecasting models to make the prediction of cyclones
like Ockhi more accurate.
1.3.9 The Committee understands that cyclones like Ockhi are likely to happen more frequently
in the future due to the effects of global warming. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
IMD must learn from the best practices being followed globally to improve prediction of such
phenomenon. If necessary, research should be undertaken to predict such cyclones in collaboration
with international organisations.

5
1.3.10  A member of the Committee raised the issue that the State Government of Kerala had stated there
was no communication from the IMD to the State Governments regarding the cyclone, and hence, the
warnings could not be communicated to the fishermen. On the other hand, there have been reports that
petitions have been filed in the High Court against the State Government for failing to timely pass on the
communication received regarding the cyclone from the Central Government.
1.3.11  The IMD, in its written submission, informed the Committee that the first information regarding the
formation of a depression during the next 48-72 hours (i.e. 29th November, 2017 onwards) was issued on
28th November in the ‘Tropical Weather Outlook’ issued at 1200 hours IST. The system developed into a
depression in the forenoon of 29th November. In the first bulletin issued on 1150 IST, 29th November, 2017
the IMD indicated the west-northwestward movement of the system and its emergence into the Comorin
Sea by 30th November. It was also mentioned that the system would intensify further. The system entered
the Comorin Sea during the night of 29th November and intensified into a ‘Deep Depression’ in the early
hours (0230 IST) of 30th November and into a ‘Cyclonic Storm’ in the forenoon (0830 IST) of 30th
November.
1.3.12  The deep depression, after crossing over southern Sri Lanka, unusually intensified into a cyclone
during a span of 12-24 hours from 29th November 2017 morning over the Comorin Sea. The cyclone
specific advisory was issued on 30th November at 1155 hrs as per the protocol for south Tamil Nadu, south
Kerala, and Lakshadweep. However, the IMD submitted that the cyclone watch/alert could not be issued
due to unusual rapid intensification over the Comorin Sea. It was quite different as compared to other cases
of cyclone intensification that usually occurs over the central part of the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea.
In those cases, the usual provision of issuing cyclone alert/watch normally exists as per the Standard
Operating Procedure. In this case, a cyclone warning was issued directly on 30th November morning, only
to enhance the actions already initiated by the respective State Governments based on the regular bulletins
issued by the IMD since the forenoon of 29th November.
1.3.13  The Committee takes note of the submissions by the  IMD that the prediction of cyclone
Ockhi, due to its rapid intensification, was quite difficult. The Committee observes that the usual
Standard Operating Procedure of issuing cyclone watch and an alert could not be followed by the
Area Cyclone Warning Centres and the Cyclone Warning Centres when the depression developed
on 28th November and intensified rapidly into a cyclonic storm on 29th November, 2017. However,
the Committee feels that with the increase in sea temperatures due to global warming, the prediction,
of both the path and the intensity of cyclones, will become more difficult in the future. Therefore,
the Committee recommends that the Central Government should develop a Standard Operating
Procedure for such unpredictable cyclones in collaboration with other developed countries and
international organisations, so that the prediction of such unusual and rare phenomenon becomes
more reliable in the coming times.

CHAPTER II
IMPACT OF CYCLONE OCKHI
2.1 Damage Caused by Ockhi
2.1.1 Cyclone Ockhi caused ‘isolated heavy rainfall’ over south Tamil Nadu on 28th and 29th November,
2017 and ‘heavy to very heavy rainfall’ and isolated ‘extremely heavy rainfall’ over south Tamil Nadu from
30th November to 2nd December. It caused isolated ‘heavy rainfall’ over south Kerala on 29th November
and 1st December, and ‘heavy to very heavy rainfall’ on 30th November. In the Lakshadweep islands, it
caused ‘heavy to very heavy rainfall’ on 1st and 2nd December. There was also heavy rainfall along the
northern coast of Maharashtra and the adjoining southern coast of Gujarat on 5th December, 2017.
2.1.2 Ockhi hit the shoreline in the areas close to the Western Ghats and left a trail of destruction. Several
houses and roads were damaged, power and communication lines were mutilated, crops were ravaged, and
trees were uprooted due to the havoc. It was reported that rail and road traffic were also badly hit due to
inundation and landslides. Several fishermen lost their lives while they were at sea, and many fishermen,
who had ventured further into deep sea to fish before the arrival of the cyclone, were missing. It also caused
massive losses to the livelihood of people living in the coastal areas. The details of damage as furnished by
the MHA (as on 04th January, 2018):
Items T amil Nadu Kerala Lakshadweep
(i) Human lives lost 30 75 Nil
(district wise)
(ii) Livestock 7654 Nil 1691
(iii) No. of missing 203 141 Nil
fishermen
(iv) Houses damaged Hut damaged- 6262 Fully-221, Severely- Fully -87
Pucca/kutcha houses 3253 Partially -935
partly damaged-101
(v) Infrastructure z Mechanized boats z Boats- fully z Boats- fully
Damage partially-640 damaged/lost-384 damaged/lost-12
z Mechanized boats z Loss of road- 41 km. Boats partially
fully- 60 z Damage to Pumps – damaged-25
z Fiber Reinforced 180 z Houses - fully
Plastic (FRP)Vallams z Damage to Supply damaged-87
partially-3407 T anks – 430 Houses partially
z (FRP)Vallams fully- damaged-935
3407 z Government
z Electricity Board building-340
Poles-15,858 z Coconut trees -
z Transformers-95 32747
z Fallen Trees -25,526 z Other trees – 5514
6

7
z 38 Breaches in tanks NIOT drinking water
and 31 Breaches in plant was also damaged
channels/canals to some extent
z 103 Government
buildings damaged.
z Damage to 75.046
km State Highways,
98.93 km. National
Highways, 417.18 km.
Rural/Urban Roads.
(vi) Coconut trees - - 32747
(vii) Total crop area 6625 hectares 7817.43 hectares -
affected (in hectares).
(viii)Damage caused to The subject environment pertains to the Ministry of Environment & Forest, and
the environment their response is pending.
2.2 Missing Fishermen
2.2.1 The Committee was informed that 203 fishermen from Tamil Nadu and 141 from Kerala were missing,
as on 4th January 2018, and the number was decreasing as more fishermen were returning home. The
Home Secretary informed the Committee that fishermen, who venture into the high sea for fishing, go out
for extended periods of time.  The fishermen go up to 200 nautical miles and stay out for around a month,
which involves ten days of going, about ten days of fishing and ten days of returning. So the fishermen are
out at sea for about a month. The Committee was also informed that some fishermen had left prior to the
warning being issued. The Home Secretary stated that the missing fishermen might have taken shelter at
some other island and there was still hope that they might return. The Home Secretary also informed the
Committee that around 845 fishermen had been rescued in Kerala, Lakshadweep and Tamil Nadu and ships
had gone up to even 700 nautical miles during search and rescue operations. He also assured the Committee
that no efforts were being spared to rescue the missing fishermen.
2.2.2 The Committee observes that the advisory issued on 29th November did not clearly predict a
cyclonic storm and, therefore,  it was not taken with the seriousness it deserved. Moreover, rapid
intensification did not leave enough time for the IMD to issue a cyclone watch or alert and, therefore,
both the affected State Governments and the people were not sufficiently alert. Officially, a cyclone
specific advisory was issued only on 30th November, the very date of the arrival of cyclone Ockhi
but by then many fishermen would have already ventured out to sea. This was a clear departure
from the Standard Operating Procedure wherein the first cyclone specific advisory, the Pre-cyclone
Watch, is issued three days prior to the landfall of the cyclone. While rapid intensification of a
cyclone is a reasonable justification for this omission, the fact remains that the State Government
machinery and the people may not adequately understand the technicalities and therefore they
should be proactively informed in such cases. The Committee is of the opinion that the advisory
issued on 29th November, 2017 would have been taken more seriously had it clearly forewarned of
Items T amil Nadu Kerala Lakshadweep

8
an impending cyclone. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the IMD should be more proactive
and take every instance of weather disturbance with utmost seriousness in the future.
2.2.3 The Committee also feels that the advisory issued by the IMD might not have been given
wide publicity in the mass media and through radio stations. This might be the reason for the
concern raised regarding the absence of any prior warning or alert. The people should have been
alerted through media channels and radio stations in a timely manner before cyclone Ockhi hit the
coast. The Committee recommends that in the future, the Ministry should issue an advisory when
there are weather disturbances, as a measure of abundant precaution, to the State Governments.
All the media units and radio stations in such States may be sensitized and instructed to give wide
publicity, in a prioritized manner, to all the advisories, regarding any imminent disaster, issued by
the IMD and the Area Cyclone Warning Centres/Cyclone Warning Centres. The Committee also
recommends that coastal communities, like fishermen, who are at grave risk due to disasters, may
be regularly sensitized about the fact that certain natural disasters cannot be predicted well in
advance and they must, in their own interest, strictly adhere to any advisories/warnings in the
future.
2.2.4 The Committee also sought to know the details of the existing mechanism for establishing a
communication link with the fishermen, who venture into the deep sea for their livelihood, to promptly
transmit early warning forecast of the IMD.
2.2.5 The State Government of Tamil Nadu informed the Committee that as soon as the information regarding
an early warning bulletin is received, from the IMD or the State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA),
the Distress Management Cell functioning in the Directorate of Fisheries, and the Office of the Assistant
Director of Fisheries, at the District Level, transmit the forecast promptly to the Fishermen Associations,
Fisheries Cooperative Societies at village level, Fishing Harbour Management Committees, etc., by means of
telephone, fax, message (SMS) and other social media  platforms (like Whatsapp). The details of weather
warnings are displayed at the Fishing Harbour Notice Board and the messages are communicated to the
fishermen, who had already ventured into the sea prior to the forecast, and are fishing within a distance of
20 to 50 nautical miles, by means of mobile phones and Very High Frequency (VHF) sets.
2.2.6 Almost all the fishing boats that venture into the deep sea for multi-day fishing are equipped with VHF
sets for communication between the boats. Many boats have mobile phones and a few boats also have
Distress Alert Transmitter (DAT) in the fishing craft for communication. However, mobile phones can reach
up to 10-12 nautical miles only and the VHF sets are capable of providing communication between the
boats, within a radius of 50-60 nautical miles, when the weather conditions are very clear. The DA Ts
provided by the State Government and the Indian Coast Guard are utilised to send signals to the Coast Guard
stations when the fishing boats are in distress.
2.2.7 However, the Committee was apprised that a gap in communication system still exists in disseminating
early warning messages to those fishermen who are fishing beyond 50 nautical miles from the shore as there
are no means of communication available to the fishermen in such parts of the deep sea. The Committee
was also informed that the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) was taking the following measures
to address this lacuna:
Fishing vessel tracking system
2.2.8 ISRO has developed a satellite-based transponder having a range of 200 nautical miles to which the

9
Indian satellite “INSA T 5B” has the coverage. The vessel tracking system consists of a user terminal
(transponder) to be located in the fishing vessel and a central hub to receive the tracking information. The
transponder units have the facilities to track the position of the fishing vessel and to push short messages
having weather forecast and information on potential fishing zones. These transponder units are on trial in
Gujarat and Tamil Nadu. ISRO has also developed multiple vendors capable of delivering such units to the
fishermen community. These devices can be useful to locate vessels going into deep sea so that the alerts
received from the IMD and the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Service (INCOIS) can be
analyzed and deep sea fishing vessels, which are at risk, can be alerted about the threat and guided to safety
to prevent any loss of life. ISRO has already extended assistance to provide the transponders, on a trial
basis, to 500 boats.
Fisherman App
2.2.9 ISRO has also developed an indigenous solution, based on the satellite communication and navigation
systems, for addressing the concerns of safety of fishermen at sea.   The Fisherman App is a mobile-based
application using the position and messaging capabilities of „Navigation with Indian Constellation  (NavIC)
system, which enables navigation in the Indian Ocean region using a combination of Geostationary Orbit
(GEO) and Geostationary Orbit (GSO) satellites. It is a user-friendly app that works even on basic smartphones
along with a compact Bluetooth enabled NavIC device. This system enables the fishermen to receive the
alerts in emergencies such as cyclone, high waves, tsunami, etc. It provides information on potential fishing
zones and can also be used for geo-fencing applications. The inputs provided by agencies such as INCOIS-
MoES can be transmitted to the fishermen through NavIC system that covers the Indian mainland and 1500
km. around India. Field trials were successfully conducted off the Andhra Pradesh coast. NavIC devices are
being manufactured by the Indian industry and will be made available to fishermen communities in about
two month’s time. The State Government of Kerala has proceeded to collect the mobile numbers of active
fishermen in the State and decided to start a State level control room to transmit the messages and to
monitor the situation at the Directorate level.
2.2.10 The Committee was also apprised by the Ministry that the government of Tamil Nadu was in the
process of providing VHF sets (5 watts and 25 watts) at subsidized rates with requisite towers and shore
stations to enable the fishermen to communicate through VHF sets to the shore stations.
2.2.11 The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Government, in collaboration
with ISRO, to address this challenge. The Committee recommends that the trial of the vessel
tracking system, which consists of user terminals (transponders), installed in the fishing vessels
and a central hub to receive the tracking information, should be completed at the earliest and the
Central and State Governments should provide all assistance and resources to ISRO for the purpose.
The Committee also recommends that after the completion of the trial, the vessel tracking system
should be expanded to cover every boat that ventures out for deep sea fishing and all the remaining
boats may be equipped with Very High-Frequency sets and Distress Alert Transmitters, at subsidised
rates.
2.2.12 The Committee also takes note of the efforts of ISRO in developing the Fisherman App that
can work even on basic smartphones along with a compact Bluetooth enabled NavIC device. The
Committee recommends that all the State Governments of cyclone affected areas may be advised to
collect the mobile numbers of active fishermen, as is being done by the State Government of Kerala.

10
The Committee also recommends that the State Government of Kerala may be requested to complete
the collection of mobile numbers of active fishermen and start the operation of the State level
control room at the earliest to strengthen the monitoring system. The Committee further
recommends that the mobile phones fitted with NavIC devices may be made available to all the
fishermen within the next six months.
2.3 Search and Rescue Operation
2.3.1 The Committee also sought comments of the Ministry on the issue of delay in launching the search
and rescue operations as was highlighted in some news reports. The Home Secretary informed the Committee
that the Central Government had immediately deployed aircraft, ships and helicopters. The Indian Air Force,
the Navy and the Coast Guard were also pressed into action for the search and rescue operations.  The
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) teams were pre-positioned in the cyclone-affected areas of
Tamil Nadu and Kerala to assist the local administration. The Ministry maintained a close and regular
coordination with the State Governments, the Ministry of Defence and other concerned Central Government
Ministries and Departments. A Meeting was held by the National Crisis Management Committee under the
Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary which was attended by the concerned State Chief Secretaries.
2.3.2 In its written replies, submitted to the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee
that the first information for initiating Search and Rescue (SAR) operation was received by the Ministry of
Defence at the Southern Naval Command (SNC) at 1530 hours on 30th November, 2017. Five Indian Navy
(IN) ships at Kochi and two aircraft were immediately deployed for SAR operations. This number was
subsequently enhanced to ten ships and eight Indian Navy aircraft. In addition to the Indian Navy, the Indian
Coast Guard (ICG) launched a large-scale SAR Operation for rescuing the stranded fishing boats and
fishermen. Ten surface platforms of the ICG were immediately deployed in cyclone-affected areas by the
night of 30th November and the early hours of 1st December, 2017 for search and rescue operation at sea.
Dornier aircraft and helicopters were engaged on 1st December, 2017 by early morning for the extended
aerial search of the sea areas. ICG coordinated the rescue of twelve boats and seventy-one fishermen by the
night of 30th November, 2017 with the assistance of Fisheries Authorities of Tamil Nadu. Three additional
ships from other locations were deployed to augment the deep sea search efforts. A helicopter was also
deployed on the ICG ship to increase the coverage of search areas to locate distressed fishermen and
facilitate speedy recovery/assistance.
2.3.3 The track and progress of the cyclone were continuously monitored by various operation centres of
ICG . Based on the updates of the progress of the cyclone and the inputs received from the units at sea, the
planning of the SAR operation was continuously updated and SAR units were repositioned to achieve maximum
efficiency. Regular communication was maintained with the local fishing associations and inputs received
from them were factored in Search and Rescue plans. Based on the inputs and the requirements projected
by the Fisheries Department and fishing associations, the fishermen were also taken aboard the ICG ship to
undertake joint search and rescue mission. Regular Dornier sorties were conducted covering the areas from
Tamil Nadu/Kerala/Lakshadweep coast up to the fringes of the Indian EEZ.
2.3.4 International Safety Net (ISN) messages were activated on 1st December, 2017 and on subsequent
days, the Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) requested the mariners transiting through the
cyclone-affected areas to keep a lookout for missing fishermen/stranded fishing boats.

11
2.3.5 The Committee expresses concern over the fate of the missing fishermen and the reports
that there was a delay in the launch of ‘Search and Rescue’ operations. The Committee, however,
takes note of the submission of the Ministry that the Government, despite the unpredictable
circumstances, launched search and rescue operations in a timely manner. While the Central
Government has made efforts to rescue the fishermen stranded at sea, the Committee observes
that nearly 244 fishermen were still missing as on 4th January, 2018. With the search and rescue
operation being called off by the Government, the Committee painfully notes that the chances of
return of the remaining missing fishermen may now be very dim.  The Committee desires that the
Ministry of Home Affairs collect the final number of missing fishermen and submit a report to the
Committee. The Committee recommends that the Government must make adequate arrangements
for providing a viable means of livelihood to the families of missing fishermen and they should be
provided livelihood assistance, as an interim measure, without any delay.
2.4 Deployment of Forces
2.4.1 The Committee was informed that there is a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for deployment of
the NDRF. This SOP is also circulated to the Relief Commissioners of all the States/UTs by the NDRF. As
per the SOP, teams of the NDRF can be requisitioned by the States for deployment during the pre-disaster/
impending disaster phase as well as during the actual disaster.
2.4.2 In the pre-disaster phase, the State Governments request for pre-positioning of the Unit/Sub-units of
the NDRF, as a measure of pro-active response to deal with the impending disaster, when there are plausible
reasons to believe that the magnitude of the disaster will be beyond the managing capacity of the State
Governments.  In case of floods, cyclones, tsunamis and other disasters, where forecast or early warning
is available, the NDRF prepositions its teams in consultation with the respective state authorities as per the
forecast of early warning agencies like IMD, CWC, INCOIS, etc.
2.4.3 During the disaster phase, the District Magistrate concerned or the State Government can submit a
request for a specialised disaster response of the teams or the companies of the NDRF, to deal with the
disaster, when the gravity of the disaster is so severe that it becomes unmanageable for the State Government
to deal with even after proper use of the State Disaster Response Force (SDRF). The Committee was
informed that when a disaster is of a larger magnitude, the NDRF teams are mobilised even on a telephonic
request to save the time.
2.4.4 During the meeting of the Committee, a query was raised as to why seven battalions were prepositioned
in Gujarat, where the impact of the cyclone was minimal, while only four and three battalions were
prepositioned in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, respectively, where the damage caused by the cyclone was on a
much larger scale. An allusion to discrimination by the Central Government in the deployment of the NDRF
in the states affected by cyclone was also made. The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its written reply on the
query, submitted that the teams of the NDRF are deployed based on the requisition/request received from
the disaster-affected State(s) and during cyclone Ockhi, teams of the NDRF were prepositioned and deployed
for SAR operations, as requested by the respective States.
2.4.5 The Committee also sought details regarding date and time of prepositioning of the NDRF teams in
the States affected by cyclone Ockhi. The details furnished by the MHA are as follows:

12
Sl. Name of Place No. of Date & Time of Date & time of de-induction
No. teams Prepositioning
Kerala
1. Thrissur 02 On 01.12.2017 at 1545 hrs. On 04.12.2017 at 2320 hrs. one
team was withdrawn and one
is still at Thrissur.
2. Sabarimala 02 On 13.11.2017 but also Presently pre-positioned at
alerted in view of Ockhi Sabarimala for festival duty.
on 30.11.2017
Tamil Nadu
3. Kanyakumari 02 On 29.11.2017 at 2345 hrs. On 07.12.2017 at 0550 hrs.
4. Cuddalore 01 On 04.12.2017 at 0700 hrs. On 08.12.2017 at 1000 hrs.
5. Bn. HQ                    04 (Standby/Reserve)
Arakkonam
Gujarat
6. Surat 02 On 04.12.2017 at 0700 hrs On 07.12.2017 at 1305 hrs
7. Navsari 01 On 04.12.2017 at 0700 hrs On 07.12.2017 at 1330 hrs
8. Valsad 01 On 04.12.2017 at 0700 hrs On 07.12.2017 at 1400 hrs
9. Amreli 01 On 04.12.2017 at 0700 hrs On 07.12.2017 at 1400 hrs
10. Bhavnagar 01 On 04.12.2017 at 0700 hrs On 07.12.2017 at 1200 hrs
11. Somnath 01 On 04.12.2017 at 1600 hrs On 07.12.2017 at 0630 hrs
12. Bn. HQ Vadodara       03 (Standby/Reserve)
Maharashtra
13. Mumbai 03 T eams already deployed on permanent basis at RRC Mumbai
14. Bn. HQ Pune08         (Standby/Reserve)
(T otal teams pre-positioned -17 and Standby/Reserve - 15)
2.4.6 The Committee was also informed by the Ministry that the NDRF BN HQ Arrakonam, Tamil Nadu is
far from Kerala. Therefore, two teams were mobilized for Thrissur, Kerala in addition to the two teams that
were already deployed at Sabarimala, District Pathanamthitta for use within the State as well as for airlifting
to the Lakshadweep Islands, if possible, as it was the shortest route. Two teams that were prepositioned at
Kanyakumari assisted the local authority in the restoration of the roads by clearing the trees.
2.4.7 Moreover, as per the IMD s forecast vide their Bulletin No. 34 dated 3rd December 2017,  the
cyclonic storm was very likely to cross south Gujarat Coast near Surat, around midnight 5th December,
2017, as a deep depression. There was a warning of heavy rainfall over Saurashtra and south Gujarat on 5th

13
December 2017 (Valsad, Surat, Navsari, Bharuch, Tapi, Amreli, Somnath, Bhavnagar, etc.). In a meeting
held at the State Emergency Operation Centre (SEOC), Gandhinagar, on 1st and 4th December, 2017, the
Chief Secretary, Government of Gujarat requested the Commandant, 6th Battalion NDRF, who attended the
meeting, to pre-position seven teams of the NDRF.  Accordingly, two teams were pre-positioned at Surat
and one team each at Valsad, Navsari, Amreli, Bhavnagar, Somnath w.e.f. 4th December 2017.
2.4.8 One NDRF battalion was positioned each at Arrakonam (Tamil Nadu), Vadodara (Gujarat) and Pune
(Maharastra), where five teams were also kept as reserve in a state of alertness, in addition to the deployment
of the teams in the affected states.
2.4.9 The Ministry also submitted that two meetings of the National Crisis Management Committee were
held under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 1st and 4th December, 2017, respectively.  In these
meetings, when the affected states were specifically asked if they required any more teams of the NDRF,
other than the ones prepositioned/provided, no extra team was demanded by any of the concerned States
including Tamil Nadu, Kerala & Lakshadweep.  The Committee was assured that no shortage of forces was
reported by any of the States.
2.4.10  On perusal of the details of prepositioning of the NDRF teams,  the Committee comes to a
conclusion that there was timely prepositioning of the NDRF teams and the deployment was consistent
with the requisitions submitted by the State Governments of the affected states. However, the
Committee feels that the State Governments may not be able to make an optimal need-based
assessment of the requirements and sometimes the number of teams requested by them may be
more than the requirement, while at other times the number of teams requisitioned may not be
sufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the National Disaster Management Authority
(NDMA) should also make an independent assessment  of the number of battalions that may be
required for deployment as per the circumstances prevalent in the ground level. Such an arrangement
is all the more necessary in case of the disasters affecting  several States where each State will
make competing demands for prepositioning of the Forces. In such a situation, a rational assessment
of needs and optimal pre-positioning of the Forces may be essentially required from a national
perspective keeping the larger public interest in view.

CHAPTER III
RELIEF & REHABILITATION
3.1 Immediate Relief and Restoration Measures
3.1.1 Timely relief and rehabilitation constitute the defining features of an effective disaster response system.
Therefore, the Committee sought to know the immediate relief and restoration measures undertaken by the
Central and the State Governments during the course of the Cyclone Ockhi and thereafter. The Ministry of
Home Affairs, in its written submission, stated that the primary responsibility of undertaking rescue, relief
and rehabilitation measures in the event of a natural disaster rests with the State Government concerned.
The Central Government, depending on the requirement, supplements the efforts of the State Government
by providing logistics and financial support in cases of natural disasters that are of a severe nature and are
beyond the capacity of the State Government concerned. The Committee was informed that the following
immediate measures were taken by the Central Government and the State Governments/UT Administration
during cyclone Ockhi:
Measures Taken by the Central Government
3.1.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in close coordination with the Ministry of Defence and other Central
Ministries/Departments, extended all necessary assistance to Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Lakshadweep during
the Search and Rescue (SAR) operation.
3.1.3 The Central Government immediately deployed ships and helicopters of the Indian Airforce, the
Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard for search and rescue of the fishermen who were at sea during the
occurrence of the cyclone. Seven teams of the NDRF were deployed in the cyclone-affected areas of Tamil
Nadu and Kerala to help the local administration and to carry out search and rescue operation. The Committee
was apprised that the ships had gone up to 700 nautical miles during the search and rescue operation and
845 fishermen were rescued despite inclement weather conditions.
3.1.4 In o rder to supplement the efforts of the State Government, in dealing with the natural disasters,
including Cyclone Ockhi, the Government of India released the 2nd instalment of the State Disaster Response
Fund (SDRF) for the year 2017-18, in advance, to the State Governments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu,
pending the receipt of the Utilization Certificates. During the financial year 2017-18, the Central Government
released ` 153 crore and ` 561 crore to the State Governments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, respectively, as
the annual central contribution of SDRF.
3.1.5 The Committee was also informed that on 3rd December, 2017, the Defence Minister had visited
cyclone-affected areas and reviewed the search-and-rescue operations undertaken in the aftermath of
cyclone Ockhi. The  Prime Minister also visited cyclone-affected areas in Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and
Lakshadweep on 19th December, 2017 and interacted with the people, including fishermen and farmers.
He held separate detailed review meetings on the current situation and relief measures, at Kavaratti,
Kanyakumari, and Thiruvananthapuram. The Prime Minister announced the following package of relief
measures:
(i) The Centre will dispatch immediate financial assistance worth ` 325 crore to cater to the
requirements of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Lakshadweep, over and above the assistance of ` 280
crore to Tamil Nadu and ` 76 crore to Kerala.
14

15
(ii) The Government of India will support the reconstruction of approximately 1400 houses fully
damaged due to Cyclone Ockhi, on priority, under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY).
Under this programme, each beneficiary will get up to ` 1.5 lakh as support for building a new
house.
(iii) Insurance companies have also been advised to expeditiously pay the insurance claims of the
people affected by Ockhi.
(iv) An ex-gratia assistance of ` 2 lakh to the next of kin of the deceased and assistance of
` 50,000/- to each of those seriously injured due to the cyclone have been sanctioned under the
Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund (PMNRF).
3.1.6 The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Central Government and observes
that the ex-gratia assistance of ````` 2 lakh, to the families of the deceased, and ````` 50000, to the persons
seriously injured, are quite low. The Committee recommends that the assistance in case of death
and injury may be enhanced to at least ````` 5 lakh and ````` 1 lakh, respectively. The Committee also
recommends that the Government must announce a special assistance for the families of the missing
fishermen and urge the States to provide them alternate means of livelihood.
Measures Taken by Government of Kerala
3.1.7 The Committee was informed that the Revenue, Police and Fire Rescue Services, Marine Enforcement,
Fisheries Department and Coastal Police of the State of Kerala were pressed into service for the Search and
Rescue Operations within the available resources. Fisheries Department officials were deputed to Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Goa, and Karnataka to support their fishermen who had reached the coasts of these States in
the aftermath of the cyclone.
3.1.8 The State Government, in the aftermath of Cyclone Ockhi, declared the following immediate relief
measures:
(i) All active fishermen enrolled in the Savings-Cum-Relief Scheme of Fisheries Department
numbering 1.69 lakhs were provided a one-time assistance of ` 2000/person as the fishermen
community could not venture into the sea for over two weeks after 30th November 2017.
(ii) Families of the deceased were given ` twenty lakh (20,00,000/-) as ex-gratia.
(iii) All seriously injured individuals were extended ` five lakh (5,00,000/-) as assistance.
(iv) The State Government declared equal compensation for both the boats and nets lost.
(v) Children from the families of the deceased are to get free education and training in alternative
livelihood.
3.1.9  Apart from the relief measures, the Government of Kerala has also planned some corrective measures
for the future like fitting all boats compulsorily with GPS and revamping the coastal police by inducting 200
persons from fishermen community and giving preference to the kith and kin of the families of the deceased.
3.1.10  The Committee takes note of the relief measures undertaken by the Government of Kerala
and feels that these measures, if implemented sincerely, can make a positive impact on the families
of the affected persons. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken in this regard
within three months.

16
Measures Taken by Government of Tamil Nadu
3.1.11 The Government of Tamil Nadu released an amount of ` 5 crore immediately to the District Collector,
Kanyakumari for immediate relief and ` 20 crore was also released to the Tamil Nadu Generation and
Distribution Corporation (TANGEDCO) as Ways and Means advance for power restoration works in
Kanyakumari, Tirunelveli, and Thoothukudi districts.
3.1.12  A Relief Package to rehabilitate the livelihood of fishermen under immediate relief and restoration
measures was also sanctioned, the details of which are as follows:
Sl. Category Relief package announced
No. by the Tamil Nadu
Government
1 (a) Fishermen who died due to Ockhi cyclone  - 16 `20 lakh
(b) Other deaths due to Ockhi-14 `10 lakh
2. Fishermen injured/disabled (could not do fishing in future) `5 lakh
rehabilitation  assistance
3. Hospitalized and under treatment `50 thousand
4. Livelihood assistance to fishermen families `2,500/ family
5. Livelihood assistance to  the  families of missing fishermen `5,000/ family
6. Diesel & food allowance to the MFBs for returning to their base
(1) Gujarat, Maharashtra, Lakshadweep
(a) Diesel Allowance 1000 Litres / boat
(b) food allowance `2000/person
(2) Karnataka and  Kerala
(a) Diesel Allowance 750  Litres/ boat
(b) food allowance `2000/person
7. Diesel to country boats to return to  their base 200 Litres/boat
Food allowance `2000/per son
8. Assistance to the damaged craft, gear and engines As per the recommendations
of the assessment team
3.1.13  A summary of amount sanctioned for food and diesel allowance for fishermen stranded in other
States/UTs is as follows:
Sl. No. State Food Allowance Diesel
No. of fishermen Amount ( `) No. of Boats
1 Veraval, Gujarat 464 928000 55 55000
2 Malpae, Karnataka 320 640000 94 70300

17
3 Karwar, Karnataka 126 252000 9 6750
4 Ratnagiri, Maharastra 202 404000 24 24000
5 Devgad, Maharastra 212 422000 5 5000
6 Kerala and  Lakshadweep 244 468000 18 17500
TOTAL 1568 3114000 205 178550
(i) 3154 persons were evacuated and accommodated in 35 relief camps.
(ii) An amount of `42,50,000/- was sanctioned to provide livelihood assistance of `5,000/- per
family to the families of fishermen who went missing due to Ockhi.
(iii) A livelihood assistance to the tune of `5,000/- was sanctioned to the fishermen families of
Kanyakumari district affected by Ockhi. The bank accounts of 30771 fishermen families of
Kanyakumari District were credited with `5,000 each. In addition, lean fishing season special
allowance of `5,000 each which was due in the month of January was paid in advance to
28618 families through bank transfer.
(iv) An amount of  `2,20,95,800/- was sanctioned towards providing diesel for bringing back the
boats to respective hometowns and to meet ration expenses to the fishermen affected by
Ockhi.
(v) An amount of `2.72 crores has been sanctioned towards hut damages.
(vi) An amount of `0.21 crores has been sanctioned towards cattle loss.
3.1.14  The Committee notes the relief efforts undertaken by the Tamil Nadu Government and the
monetary assistance that has been provided to the affected persons. However, the Committee feels
that monetary assistance, at best,  could be a mere stop-gap arrangement and affected households,
especially those of deceased and missing fishermen, may not be able to sustain for long on monetary
assistance in the absence of a viable means of livelihood. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the State Government of Tamil Nadu should make arrangements to provide free education to
the children of the deceased/missing fishermen and training in an alternative livelihood to at least
one member of all the affected families.
Measures Taken by UT Administration of Lakshadweep
3.1.15 UT of Lakshadweep submitted that there was a warning of a storm surge, of one meter or above
astronomical tides, by IMD/INCOIS. In response to this warning people living in the low lying/vulnerable
areas were evacuated to designated shelters, at different points of time, depending upon the risk. All the
necessary arrangements for providing the basic amenities including food were made in the shelters.
3.1.16 Many fishing boats having registration numbers of Tamil Nadu and Kerala and crew from the mainland
were also rescued by the Lakshadweep Administration, with the help of the Indian Navy, the Indian Coast
Guard, and the Indian Air Force, and every possible support was extended to these fishing boats. The
Committee was informed that 367 fishermen from the mainland belonging to different states were rescued
from 34 fishing boats/MSVs. Eleven relief camps were opened for the rescued fishermen and all the basic

18
facilities, including medical aid and food, were provided to them. Relief material was also provided by Indian
Navy which was distributed to different islands. The Navy and the Coast Guard had also deployed various
ships and aircraft for the rescue of the fishermen.
3.1.17 Free rice from available stocks was also distributed at the rate of 2 kg. per adult and 1 kg. per child.
An amount of ` 10,000/- was provided, in cash, to the owners of the houses that were damaged completely
while ` 5,000/- were given to the owners of the partially damaged houses as an interim emergency relief.
The owners of the boats that were fully damaged were paid ` 5,000/- and the owners of the partially
damaged boats were paid ` 2,500/- as an interim emergency cash relief. The rescued fishermen belonging to
the mainland were also adequately compensated.
3.1.18 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the UT Administration of Lakshadweep to
rescue its fishermen as well as those from the mainland and to provide relief materials to them.
The Committee, however, feels that a sum of ````` five thousand provided, as an interim emergency
relief, for the damaged houses and boats, is paltry and may not be sufficient for even temporary
restoration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should
undertake immediate measures to provide enhanced and sufficient assistance, to the owners of
damaged houses and boats, without any delay.
3.2 Financial Assistance to the States
3.2.1 The Ministry submitted that the financial assistance in the wake of natural calamities is towards relief
and not for compensation of loss as suffered/claimed.  Relief means help to reduce the level of suffering and
mitigate the distress so as to bring out the affected people from the shock and trauma of suddenly losing
their means of livelihood. Further, the main objective of the relief fund is to assist the affected persons to
restart their economic activities. Relief is by way of gratuitous assistance as an immediate help to overcome
the stress.  On the other hand, compensation is basically a replacement for the damage in financial terms.
Insurance is one such instrument. It is generally understood that no country in the world is in a position to
fully compensate the losses incurred due to natural calamities.
3.2.2 The scheme of financing the relief expenditure under SDRF and NDRF is based on the recommendations
of the successive Finance Commissions. The present scheme, which is in operation from 2015-16 to
2019-20, is based on the recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC).  The 14th Finance
Commission had recommended an allocation of ` 61,220 crore in SDRF for the years 2015-16 to 2019-20
as against ` 33,580.93 crore recommended by 13th Finance Commission for the years 2010-11 to 2014-15.
The Central share of SDRF is to be released in two equal instalments, subject to fulfilment of conditions
given in the guidelines. The Ministry of Home Affairs has issued the guidelines to the states for operation of
SDRF for the award period of 2015-16 to 2019-20.
3.2.3 The Ministry, in its background note, also informed that contribution to SDRF is shared between the
Centre and the States in the ratio 75:25 for the General States and 90:10 for the Special Category States.
Finance Commission has mandated all the States to follow the required accounting practices to properly
account for relief expenditure.
3.2.4 The Committee perused the recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission on this issue. Para
Nos. 10.39 and 10.40 of the said report state that:
“10.39 Our examination of the existing arrangements leads us to conclude that the sharing formula

19
of 75:25 between the Union and State Governments for contribution to the SDRFs (earlier the
CRFs) is not appropriate, given the additional responsibility cast on States and their district
administrations by the Disaster Management Act, and the scale, frequency and magnitude of relief
and restoration undertaken in the recent past. In our view, there is a case for enhancing the share
of the Union Government in SDRFs. At the same time, even though many States urged us to
recommend that the SDRF be entirely funded by the Union Government, in our assessment State
contributions to the Fund need to continue to bring in States’ commitment towards, and ownership
of, relief measures.
10.40 We, therefore, recommend that all States contribute 10 per cent to the SDRF during our
award period, with the remaining 90 per cent coming from the Union Government. We have calculated
the State-wise amount, with the respective shares of the Union Government and each individual
State...”
3.2.5 The Committee takes note of the recommendation of the 14th Finance Commission and is at
loss as to why it has not been accepted and why the States still have to contribute 25% of SDRF. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the pattern of contributions to the SDRF may be
revisited as per the recommendation of the 14th Finance Commission.
3.2.6 In order to supplement the efforts of the State Governments in dealing with the natural disaster
including cyclonic storm ‘Ockhi’ the Government of India released 2nd instalment of SDRF for the year
2017-18 in advance to the State Governments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, pending receipt of Utilisation
Certificate. During the financial year 2017-18, the Central Government released ` 153 crore and ` 561 crore
to the State Governments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, respectively as the annual central contribution to
SDRF.
3.2.7 The Ministry submitted that the State Governments have informed that amounts (approx.) of `175
crore and `550 crore are available in SDRF accounts of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, respectively for providing
relief assistance to people affected by cyclone Ockhi. In case of the UT of Lakshadweep, the fund was
available under UT Disaster Response Fund (UTDRF), amounting to ` 10 crore, and under Major Head No.
2245-Relief on Natural Calamities amounting to ` 1.05 crore.
3.2.8 On the status of Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, with respect to
cyclone Ockhi, the Ministry informed that the MHA had already constituted IMCTs, which will visit Kerala
and Tamil Nadu, for on-the-spot assessment of the damage and the admissibility of such supplemental
central assistance in the wake of Ockhi.
3.2.9 Subsequently, the Committee was apprised that the Governments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu had
submitted a memoranda projecting the demand for immediate relief of ` 422.16 crore and ` 5255.07 crore,
respectively, for Ockhi. The UT Administration of Lakshadweep has submitted a memorandum projecting a
demand of ` 92.13 crore.
3.2.10  The Ministry then informed that the IMCT had completed its field visit recently and the report was
being finalized in conformity with the norms of the SDRF/NDRF. Thereafter it will be placed before the
sub-committee of the National Executive Committee (SC-NEC) and the High-Level Committee (HLC) for its
consideration and thereafter the decision on the quantum of additional assistance, from the NDRF, will be
taken as per the established procedure.

20
3.2.11  Based on field visits, the IMCT’s preliminary view was that the extent of damage is severe in nature
in the affected areas of the States.
3.2.12 The Committee observes that Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) visits the disaster-
affected States only after submission of the memoranda by the States. The Committee understands
that in the aftermath of the disaster, the priority of the State Government is to provide relief to the
people and the preparation of the memorandum may take some time. However, by the time the
IMCT visits the disaster-affected states, to make an assessment of the damage caused by the disaster,
the signs of the disaster are on the verge of diminishing. This may lead to variance in the damage
assessments of the State Government and the IMCT, as has been observed in most cases. The
Committee feels that this anomaly can be rectified if the assessment is done by a joint team of the
Central and the State Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that for every disaster
an inter-ministerial Central Government team should make a preliminary visit to the disaster-
affected areas, within one week of the disaster, and a joint preliminary damage assessment should
be done in conjunction with the State Governments concerned. The Committee feels that this will
not only eliminate the variance in the amounts assessed by the State Government and the IMCT
but will also expedite the process of approval and sanctioning of the funds.
3.2.13  The Committee sought to know the quantum of assistance the Central Government was planning to
give to the affected States and UT, to enable them to undertake necessary relief measures. The Ministry
submitted that the concerned State Government was required to undertake necessary relief measures in
case of natural calamities, including cyclones, through the funds readily available in the corpus of the State
Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) as per the norms.  In the case of a disaster of ‘severe nature’, additional
assistance is extended from the National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) after following the procedure laid
down, which includes an assessment based on the visit of an Inter-Ministerial Central Team. Financial
assistance is towards relief and not towards compensation of loss suffered. Additional expenditure, if any,
incurred over and above or on other than approved items/norms, is required to be met by the States from its
own resources.
3.2.14  In order to support the affected people of State, after the cyclone ‘Ockhi’ `413.50 crore ( ` 280.50
cr. from SDRF and `133 crore from NDRF on account basis) and ` 209.50 crore ( ` 76.50 cr. from SDRF
and `133 crore from NDRF on account basis) were released to the State Governments of Tamil Nadu and
Kerala, respectively, for carrying out relief measures. Further assistance under NDRF will be provided after
the consideration of the report of the IMCT by the High-Level Committee (HLC) as per the established
procedure. The Ministry also stated that in view of the intensity and the magnitude of Ockhi, it has been
classified as a calamity of ‘severe nature’ for all practical purposes.
3.2.15  The Committee was also apprised that the State Government of Kerala had submitted its memorandum
on 19th December, 2017, to the Central Government, seeking financial assistance of Rs 422.16 crores while
the Government of Tamil Nadu submitted its memorandum, on 21st December, 2017, seeking an assistance
of ` 5255.07 crore.
3.2.16  On the issue of a huge difference in the financial assistance sought by the State Governments and the
assistance finally approved by the Central Government, the Ministry of Home Affairs was asked to submit
the details of assistance from NDRF sought by the States vis-à-vis the amount approved by the HLC of the
Central Government during the last four years. The Ministry submitted the details in a tabular form which
are as follows:

21
Year: 2014-15
(` in crore)
Sl. Name of State Calamity Assistance       Amount approved by Difference between
No. sought by                    HLC Assistance Sought
States NDRF NRDWP* and Approved (%)
1. Kerala Flood/ Landslide - 141.65 38.77 - 72.63
(1st Memo) 2014
2. Nagaland Flood/ Landslide - 220.88 20.20 5.00 90.85
2014
3. Karnataka Flood - 2014 371.23 71.37 3.92 80.77
4. Uttar Pradesh Flood - 2014 769.07 176.75 - 77.02
5. Arunachal Flood/ Landslide - 2426.12 134.22 18.00 94.47
Pradesh 2014
6. J&K Flood/ Landslide - 2675.67 1602.56 20.00 40.11
Pradesh
7. Kerala Flood/ Landslide - 258.22 64.46 2.00 75.04
(2nd Memo)
8. Meghalaya Flood/ Landslide - 963.45 72.82 15.00 92.44
9. Andhra Pradesh Cyclone Hudhud/ 4861.18 737.60 8.13 84.83
Flood - 2014
10. Odisha Cyclone Hudhud/ 776.18 136.43 - 82.42
Flood -2014
11. Himachal Pradesh Flood/ Landslide/ 831.84 170.53 9.00 79.50
Cloudburst - 2014
12. Assam Flood - 2014 2450.02 387.20 6.53 84.20
*NRDWP: National Rural Drinking Water Programme
Year: 2015-16
(` in crore)
Sl. State Calamity Assistance       Amount approved by Difference between
No. sought by                    HLC Assistance Sought
States NDRF NRDWP and Approved (%)
1. Bihar Cyclone Storm- 434.79 317.09 - 27.07
2015
2. Gujarat Flood- 2015 979.69 561.82 9.45 42.65

22
3. West Bengal Flood- 2015 8834.36 1104.73 12.18 87.50
4. West Bengal Landslides - 2015 418.924 33.45 9.00 92.02
(Darjeeling)
5. Manipur Flash Flood/ 457.02 68.84 - 84.94
Landslides - 2015
6. Andhra Pradesh Flood- 2015 11 16.14 280.19 9.00 74.90
7. Assam Flood- 2015 1523.79 332.57 78.17
8. Himachal Pradesh Flood/Landslides 787.46 170.19 12.00 78.39
9. Nagaland Flood/Landslides 142.25 16.02 4.00 88.74
10. Tamil Nadu Flood- 2015 7955.36 1737.65 32.00 78.16
11. Puducherry Flood- 2015 488.72 35.14 - 92.81
12. Arunachal Flood/Landslides- 1737.36 66.33 18.00 96.18
Pradesh 2015
13. Manipur Earthquake - 2016 279.28 14.65 1.23 94.75
Year: 2016-17
(` in crore)
Sl. State Ca lamity Assistance       Amount approved by Difference between
No. sought by                    HLC Assistance Sought
States NDRF NRDWP and Approved (%)
1. Uttarakhand Flood/ cloudburst/ 369.93 188.91 20.00 48.93
Landslides - 2016
2. Assam Flood- 2016 10333.78 269.40 - 97.39
3. Bihar Flood- 2016 41 11.98 812.96 10.00 80.23
4. Andhra Pradesh Flood- 2016 313.24 63.68 1.60 79.67
5. Telangana Flood- 2016 943.17 311.75 2.47 66.95
6. Karnataka Flood- 2016 386.435 165.50 5.19 57.17
7. Himachal Flood/ Landslide/ 863.97 140.28 12.00 83.76
Pradesh Cloudburst - 2016
8. Manipur Hailstorm/ 37.26 19.11 - 48.71
thunderstorm - 2016
9. Rajasthan Flood- 2016 1375.48 362.92 7.35 73.62
10. Tamil Nadu Cyclone St orm 1977.10 264.11 2.06 86.64
V ARDAH

23
11. Uttar Pradesh Flood- 2016 812.50 303.05 - 62.70
12. Arunachal Flood/Landslides- 1061.18 81.69 21.61 92.30
Pradesh 2016
13. Nagaland Flash Flood/ Flood/ 163.56 25.89 2.71 84.17
Landslides - 2016
Year: 2017-18
(` in crore)
Sl. State Calamity Assistance       Amount approved by Difference between
No. sought by                    HLC Assistance Sought
States NDRF NRDWP and Approved (%)
1. Mizoram Flood/Landslides - 116.12 42.77 6.25 63.17
2017-18
2. Manipur Flood/ Landslides - 358.19 130.65 - 63.52
2017-18
3. Bihar Flood - 2017 7444.60 Under Process - -
4. Assam Flood/ Landslides - 2280.00 Under Process - -
2017
5. Rajasthan Flo od- 2017 1957.98 Under Process - -
6. West Bengal Flood- 2017 15924.78 Under Process - -
7. Gujarat Flood- 2017 2094.92 Under Process - -
8. Uttar Pradesh Flood- 2017 812.53 Under Process - -
9. Nagaland Flood/ Landslides- 750.63 Under Process - -
2017
10. Himachal Flood/ Landslides - 914.05 Under Process - -
Pradesh 2017
11. Andhra Pradesh Flood- 2017 844.64 Under Process - -
12. Sikkim Flood/Landslides- 245.80 Under Process - -
2017
13. Kerala Cyclone Ockhi-  422.16 Under Process - -
2017
14. Tamil Nadu Cyclone Ockhi-  5255.07 Under Process - -
2017
3.2.17 The Committee is surprised to observe a huge difference, ranging from a high of 97% to

24
27%, between the assistance sought by the States and the amounts approved by the High-Level
Committee of the Central Government in the aftermath of the disasters. The Committee is intrigued
by the fact that in most of the disasters, the shortfall between the funds sought and those approved
was more than 70% and in some cases, the shortfall was more than 95%. The Committee wonders
as to how the State Governments, especially those with limited sources of revenue such as the State
Governments of the North-Eastern States, are able to manage in light of such a huge shortfall. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government should sensitise the State
Governments about the approved norms for assistance so that exaggerated demands are not made.
At the same time, the Central Government should re-examine the norms and bring about necessary
changes in the policy of funding the damage caused by various disasters to ensure adequate relief to
the affected populace.
3.2.18  The Committee is also aware that the State Governments have, time and again, raised the
issue of the increase in the frequency and intensity of disasters and the spiraling costs of relief,
rehabilitation, and reconstruction. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central
Government should devise urgent measures to diversify the sources of financing and expand the
corpus of the National and State Disaster Relief Funds. The Committee may also be apprised about
the current mechanism being followed for funding the NDRF under the GST regime.
3.3 RECONSTRUCTION AND REHABILITATION
3.3.1 The Committee desired to know the strategy that has been formulated to ensure adequate reconstruction
and rehabilitation in the affected areas. The State Governments of Tamil Nadu and Kerala submitted their
respective strategies which are as follows:
Tamil Nadu
3.3.2 As reported by the State Government of Tamil Nadu, extensive damage took place in Kanniyakumari
district due to cyclone Ockhi. Restoration work was taken up under the direct supervision of Director
(Distribution) and Director (Transmission) with 28 teams formed under Chief Engineers/Superintending
Engineers with 250 officers and 8000 workmen. All the eleven 110 KV substations and four 33/11 KV
substations in Kanyakumari district were normalized on 03.12.2017 after attending to the breakdown in
transmission lines.
3.3.3 The Committee was also informed that many houses were damaged due to this cyclone and assessment
of the damaged houses was carried out by the special team formed by the Kanyakumari district administration.
The initial assessments indicated that 1153 huts were fully damaged, 5109 huts were partly damaged and
101 pucca/kutcha houses were partly damaged. Reconstruction has been proposed at a cost of `48 crore,
under ‘Blue Revolution’, for fishermen and under the PMAY , for tribal families.
3.3.4 The following long-term mitigation measures through ‘Building Back Better’ are under consideration
by the Government of Tamil Nadu:
(i) Development of Integrated Fishing Infrastructure in Kanyakumari district
(ii) Rehabilitation of farmers
3.3.5 Rubber is cultivated in Kanyakumari district in an area of 27,407 hectares of which 1408 hectares
were affected due to Ockhi. The assistance extended under the National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture

25
(NMSA) - Rainfed Area Development (RAD) and the Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture
(MIDH) are proposed as follows:-
Sl. Scheme Assistance proposed per T otal amount
No. hectare ( `)( ` in lakhs)
I Re-cultivation of Rubber Tree Saplings with Inter-cropping with Banana and Pineapple under 100%
assistance.
(a) National  Mission  on  Sustainable 25,000/- 352.00
Agriculture (NMSA) - Rainfed Area
Development (RAD) Horticulture
based Farming System (50%
Subsidy)
(b) State Fund 25,000/- 352.00
(Balance 50%)
II Pollination support through Bee Keeping (40% Subsidy) 20 sets of Honey Bee Hives and colonies
per hectare.
(a) Mission for Integrated Development 32,000/- 450.56
of Horticulture (Sub-scheme of
National Horticulture Mission)
TOTAL 82,000/- 1 154.56
3.3.6 Banana is cultivated in an area of about 6,382 hectares in Kanyakumari district, of which 1926.03
hectares (as per preliminary survey) had been damaged due to Ockhi. The assistance proposed under MIDH
- National Horticulture Mission (NHM) is as follows:-
Sl. Scheme Assistance proposed per T otal amount
No. hectare ( `)( ` in lakhs)
I MIDH National Horticulture Mission (40% Subsidy)
(a) Re-cultivation of Banana (sucker) 26,250/- 505.58
(For 1st Year) (2017-18)
(b) Re-cultivation of Banana (sucker) 8,750/- 168.53
(For 2nd Year) (2018-19)
TOTAL 35,000/- 674.11
Kerala
3.3.7 As part of the long-term rehabilitation plan, the Government of Kerala intends to implement the
following:
(i) Special assistance to the dependents of deceased fishermen and livelihood support for fishermen
deceased/disabled for fishing

26
(ii) Pension to fishermen disabled for fishing and special assistance for educating the children of
deceased fishermen
(iii) Upgradation of “motorized traditional fishing craft” into “mechanized deep sea fishing boats”
(iv) Upgradation of educational infrastructure facilities in coastal areas
(v) Establishment of residential marine Skill Development Institutes and National Skill Institute for
Fishermen
(vi) Safe housing for homeless fishermen
(vii) Revitalizing agriculture sector in the coastal area and supporting the animal husbandry for
alternate livelihood
(viii) Insurance coverage for the seagoing fishermen community
(ix) Revamping coastal police with sufficient facilities and setting up a community-centered digital
Early Warning System
(x) Building weatherproof coastal roads and constructing sea wall in highly vulnerable areas
(xi) Converting overhead power cables to underground power cables
(xii) Strengthening harbours, fish landing centers and debt relief for fishermen.
3.3.8 The Committee is apprehensive as to how the families of the deceased, missing and disabled
fishermen would survive in the absence of a regular income. The Committee recommends that the
Government while implementing the reconstruction programs must focus on the concerns of the
fishermen including a comprehensive package to provide them with sufficient funds and enable
them to restart their livelihood activities. The Committee also recommends that the State
Governments should undertake several positive measures for them such as a regular monthly
livelihood assistance for at least a year, debt relief, interest free loans, subsidy for purchasing new
boats, free education to their wards and training in alternate means of livelihood for at least one
member of their families. The Committee further recommends that the Central Government should
provide all necessary support and assistance to the State Governments concerned. The Committee
desires to be apprised about the progress in this regard within three months.
3.3.9 The Committee feels that neither the State Governments’ revenues nor the budgetary and
other forms of assistance from the Central Government are sufficient to provide adequate funds
for the purpose of restoration. The plans of the State Governments for the provision of safe housing
to the homeless fishermen, revitalisation of the agriculture and animal husbandry sectors, the
establishment of the Marine Skill Development Institutes, relief of debt of the fishermen, and
revamping the coastal police may require a significant amount of funds. The State Governments
will, therefore, need to mobilize resources from sources other than the budgetary allocations to
implement such measures. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government
should consider measures to seek more funds from sources such as the corporate sector by
categorizing their contributions to NDRF/SDRF under Corporate Social Responsibility funds and
motivate them to contribute generously to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund and NDRF/SDRF.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CYCLONE WARNING AND FORECASTING
The Committee takes note of the submission by the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD)
that cyclone Ockhi was an unusual phenomenon, which was evident in its rapid intensification. The
Committee understands that forecasting rapid intensification of cyclones remains an area of concern.
However, the Committee wishes to stress upon the fact that rapid intensification of cyclones is no
longer a rare phenomenon and globally, several countries have evolved credible prediction models
for this phenomenon. The Committee is of the opinion that the prediction of rapid intensification of
cyclones is imperative, to bolster our existing capacity for advance cyclone warning.  The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the IMD should focus on intensive research to develop
forecasting models for the prediction of the ‘Rapid Intensification’ phenomenon. The Committee
also recommends that the IMD must acquire inputs on sea surface temperatures from thermal
satellites and integrate them into the cyclone forecasting models to make the prediction of cyclones
like Ockhi more accurate. (Para 1.3.8)
The Committee understands that cyclones like Ockhi are likely to happen more frequently
in the future due to the effects of global warming. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
IMD must learn from the best practices being followed globally to improve prediction of such
phenomenon. If necessary, research should be undertaken to predict such cyclones in collaboration
with international organisations. (Para 1.3.9)
The Committee takes note of the submissions by the  IMD that the prediction of cyclone
Ockhi, due to its rapid intensification, was quite difficult. The Committee observes that the usual
Standard Operating Procedure of issuing cyclone watch and an alert could not be followed by the
Area Cyclone Warning Centres and the Cyclone Warning Centres when the depression developed
on 28th November and intensified rapidly into a cyclonic storm on 29th November, 2017. However,
the Committee feels that with the increase in sea temperatures due to global warming, the prediction,
of both the path and the intensity of cyclones, will become more difficult in the future. Therefore,
the Committee recommends that the Central Government should develop a Standard Operating
Procedure for such unpredictable cyclones in collaboration with other developed countries and
international organisations, so that the prediction of such unusual and rare phenomenon becomes
more reliable in the coming times. (Para 1.3.13)
MISSING FISHERMEN
 The Committee observes that the advisory issued on 29th November did not clearly predict a cyclonic
storm and, therefore,  it was not taken with the seriousness it deserved. Moreover, rapid intensification
did not leave enough time for the IMD to issue a cyclone watch or alert and, therefore, both the
affected State Governments and the people were not sufficiently alert. Officially, a cyclone specific
advisory was issued only on 30th November, the very date of the arrival of cyclone Ockhi but by
then many fishermen would have already ventured out to sea. This was a clear departure from the
Standard Operating Procedure wherein the first cyclone specific advisory, the Pre-cyclone Watch, is
issued three days prior to the landfall of the cyclone. While rapid intensification of a cyclone is a
reasonable justification for this omission, the fact remains that the State Government machinery
and the people may not adequately understand the technicalities and therefore they should be
27

28
proactively informed in such cases. The Committee is of the opinion that the advisory issued on
29th November, 2017 would have been taken more seriously had it clearly forewarned of an impending
cyclone. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the IMD should be more proactive and take
every instance of weather disturbance with utmost seriousness in the future. (Para 2.2.2)
The Committee also feels that the advisory issued by the IMD might not have been given
wide publicity in the mass media and through radio stations. This might be the reason for the
concern raised regarding the absence of any prior warning or alert. The people should have been
alerted through media channels and radio stations in a timely manner before cyclone Ockhi hit the
coast. The Committee recommends that in the future, the Ministry should issue an advisory when
there are weather disturbances, as a measure of abundant precaution, to the State Governments.
All the media units and radio stations in such States may be sensitized and instructed to give wide
publicity, in a prioritized manner, to all the advisories, regarding any imminent disaster, issued by
the IMD and the Area Cyclone Warning Centres/Cyclone Warning Centres. The Committee also
recommends that coastal communities, like fishermen, who are at grave risk due to disasters, may
be regularly sensitized about the fact that certain natural disasters cannot be predicted well in
advance and they must, in their own interest, strictly adhere to any advisories/warnings in the
future. (Para 2.2.3)
The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Government, in collaboration
with ISRO, to address this challenge. The Committee recommends that the trial of the vessel
tracking system, which consists of user terminals (transponders), installed in the fishing vessels
and a central hub to receive the tracking information, should be completed at the earliest and the
Central and State Governments should provide all assistance and resources to ISRO for the purpose.
The Committee also recommends that after the completion of the trial, the vessel tracking system
should be expanded to cover every boat that ventures out for deep sea fishing and all the remaining
boats may be equipped with Very High-Frequency sets and Distress Alert Transmitters, at subsidised
rates. (Para 2.2.11)
The Committee also takes note of the efforts of ISRO in developing the Fisherman App that
can work even on basic smartphones along with a compact Bluetooth enabled NavIC device. The
Committee recommends that all the State Governments of cyclone affected areas may be advised to
collect the mobile numbers of active fishermen, as is being done by the State Government of Kerala.
The Committee also recommends that the State Government of Kerala may be requested to complete
the collection of mobile numbers of active fishermen and start the operation of the State level
control room at the earliest to strengthen the monitoring system. The Committee further
recommends that the mobile phones fitted with NavIC devices may be made available to all the
fishermen within the next six months. (Para 2.2.12)
SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATION
The Committee expresses concern over the fate of the missing fishermen and the reports
that there was a delay in the launch of ‘Search and Rescue’ operations. The Committee, however,
takes note of the submission of the Ministry that the Government, despite the unpredictable
circumstances, launched search and rescue operations in a timely manner. While the Central
Government has made efforts to rescue the fishermen stranded at sea, the Committee observes

29
that nearly 244 fishermen were still missing as on 4th January, 2018. With the search and rescue
operation being called off by the Government, the Committee painfully notes that the chances of
return of the remaining missing fishermen may now be very dim.  The Committee desires that the
Ministry of Home Affairs collect the final number of missing fishermen and submit a report to the
Committee. The Committee recommends that the Government must make adequate arrangements
for providing a viable means of livelihood to the families of missing fishermen and they should be
provided livelihood assistance, as an interim measure, without any delay. (Para 2.3.5)
DEPLOYMENT OF FORCES
On perusal of the details of prepositioning of the NDRF teams,  the Committee comes to a
conclusion that there was timely prepositioning of the NDRF teams and the deployment was consistent
with the requisitions submitted by the State Governments of the affected states. However, the
Committee feels that the State Governments may not be able to make an optimal need-based
assessment of the requirements and sometimes the number of teams requested by them may be
more than the requirement, while at other times the number of teams requisitioned may not be
sufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the National Disaster Management Authority
(NDMA) should also make an independent assessment  of the number of battalions that may be
required for deployment as per the circumstances prevalent in the ground level. Such an arrangement
is all the more necessary in case of the disasters affecting  several States where each State will
make competing demands for prepositioning of the Forces. In such a situation, a rational assessment
of needs and optimal pre-positioning of the Forces may be essentially required from a national
perspective keeping the larger public interest in view. (Para 2.4.10)
IMMEDIATE RELIEF AND RESTORATION MEASURES
The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Central Government and observes
that the ex-gratia  assistance of ````` 2 lakh, to the families of the deceased, and ````` 50000, to the
persons seriously injured, are quite low. The Committee recommends that the assistance in
case of death and injury may be enhanced to at least ````` 5 lakh and ````` 1 lakh, respectively. The
Committee also recommends that the Government must announce a special assistance for the
families of the missing fishermen and urge the States to provide them alternate means of
livelihood. (Para 3.1.6)
The Committee takes note of the relief measures undertaken by the Government of Kerala
and feels that these measures, if implemented sincerely, can make a positive impact on the families
of the affected persons. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken in this regard
within three months. (Para 3.1.10)
The Committee notes the relief efforts undertaken by the Tamil Nadu Government and the
monetary assistance that has been provided to the affected persons. However, the Committee feels
that monetary assistance, at best,  could be a mere stop-gap arrangement and affected households,
especially those of deceased and missing fishermen, may not be able to sustain for long on monetary
assistance in the absence of a viable means of livelihood. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the State Government of Tamil Nadu should make arrangements to provide free education to
the children of the deceased/missing fishermen and training in an alternative livelihood to at least
one member of all the affected families. (Para 3.1.14)

30
The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the UT Administration of Lakshadweep to
rescue its fishermen as well as those from the mainland and to provide relief materials to them.
The Committee, however, feels that a sum of ````` five thousand provided, as an interim emergency
relief, for the damaged houses and boats, is paltry and may not be sufficient for even temporary
restoration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should
undertake immediate measures to provide enhanced and sufficient assistance, to the owners of
damaged houses and boats, without any delay. (Para 3.1.18)
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES
The Committee takes note of the recommendation of the 14th Finance Commission and is at
loss as to why it has not been accepted and why the States still have to contribute 25% of SDRF. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the pattern of contributions to the SDRF may be
revisited as per the recommendation of the 14th Finance Commission. (Para 3.2.5)
The Committee observes that Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) visits the disaster-
affected States only after submission of the memoranda by the States. The Committee understands
that in the aftermath of the disaster, the priority of the State Government is to provide relief to the
people and the preparation of the memorandum may take some time. However, by the time the
IMCT visits the disaster-affected states, to make an assessment of the damage caused by the disaster,
the signs of the disaster are on the verge of diminishing. This may lead to variance in the damage
assessments of the State Government and the IMCT, as has been observed in most cases. The
Committee feels that this anomaly can be rectified if the assessment is done by a joint team of the
Central and the State Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that for every disaster
an inter-ministerial Central Government team should make a preliminary visit to the disaster-
affected areas, within one week of the disaster, and a joint preliminary damage assessment should
be done in conjunction with the State Governments concerned. The Committee feels that this will
not only eliminate the variance in the amounts assessed by the State Government and the IMCT
but will also expedite the process of approval and sanctioning of the funds. (Para 3.2.12)
The Committee is surprised to observe a huge difference, ranging from a high of 97% to
27%, between the assistance sought by the States and the amounts approved by the High-Level
Committee of the Central Government in the aftermath of the disasters. The Committee is intrigued
by the fact that in most of the disasters, the shortfall between the funds sought and those approved
was more than 70% and in some cases, the shortfall was more than 95%. The Committee wonders
as to how the State Governments, especially those with limited sources of revenue such as the State
Governments of the North-Eastern States, are able to manage in light of such a huge shortfall. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government should sensitise the State
Governments about the approved norms for assistance so that exaggerated demands are not made.
At the same time, the Central Government should re-examine the norms and bring about necessary
changes in the policy of funding the damage caused by various disasters to ensure adequate relief to
the affected populace. (Para 3.2.17)
The Committee is also aware that the State Governments have, time and again, raised
the issue of the increase in the frequency and intensity of disasters and the spiraling costs of
relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Central Government should devise urgent measures to diversify the sources of financing and

31
expand the corpus of the National and State Disaster Relief Funds. The Committee may also be
apprised about the current mechanism being followed for funding the NDRF under the GST
regime. (Para 3.2.18)
RECONSTRUCTION AND REHABILITATION
The Committee is apprehensive as to how the families of the deceased, missing and disabled
fishermen would survive in the absence of a regular income. The Committee recommends that the
Government while implementing the reconstruction programs must focus on the concerns of the
fishermen including a comprehensive package to provide them with sufficient funds and enable
them to restart their livelihood activities. The Committee also recommends that the State
Governments should undertake several positive measures for them such as a regular monthly
livelihood assistance for at least a year, debt relief, interest free loans, subsidy for purchasing new
boats, free education to their wards and training in alternate means of livelihood for at least one
member of their families. The Committee further recommends that the Central Government should
provide all necessary support and assistance to the State Governments concerned. The Committee
desires to be apprised about the progress in this regard within three months. (Para 3.3.8)
The Committee feels that neither the State Governments’ revenues nor the budgetary and
other forms of assistance from the Central Government are sufficient to provide adequate funds
for the purpose of restoration. The plans of the State Governments for the provision of safe
housing to the homeless fishermen, revitalisation of the agriculture and animal husbandry sectors,
the establishment of the Marine Skill Development Institutes, relief of debt of the fishermen,
and revamping the coastal police may require a significant amount of funds. The State Governments
will, t herefore, need to mobilize resources from sources other than the budgetary allocations to
implement such measures. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government
should consider measures to seek more funds from sources such as the corporate sector by
categorizing their contributions to NDRF/SDRF under Corporate Social Responsibility funds
and motivate them to contribute generously to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund and NDRF/
SDRF . (Para 3.3.9)

MINUTES

35
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 20th December, 2017 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Derek O’ Brien
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
10. Shrimati Kirron Kher
11. Shri Kaushal Kishore
12. Shri P. Nagarajan
13. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
14. Shri Dilip Patel
15. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
16. Shri Mohammed Faizal PP
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar,  Director
3. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
5. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Home Secretary
2. Shri Bipin Mallick, Additional Secretary (DM)
3. Shri P .K. Srivastava, Additional Secretary (UT)
4. Shri S.K. Jindal, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Goutam Ghosh, Director
6. Shri Pradeep Kumar, Deputy Secretary

36
Representatives of National Disaster Management Authority
1. Shri Kamal Kishore, Member
2. Shri B. Pradhan, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar, Additional Secretary
4. Dr. V . Thiruppugazh, Joint Secretary
Representatives of National Disaster Response Force
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar, Director-General
2. Shri Ravi Joseph Lokku, Inspector-General
Representative of Ministry of Defence
Smt. Devika Raghubanshi, Joint Secretary (Navy)
Representatives of Indian Navy
1. Admiral S. N. Ghormade, Vice Admiral
2. Shri Kunal Rajkumar, Commodore
Representatives of Indian Coast Guard
1. Shri V.S.R. Murthy, Additional Director-General
2. Shri S. Paramesh, Deputy Director-General
Representatives of Indian Meteorological Department
1. Shri K.J. Ramesh, Director-General
2. Dr. M. Mohapatra, Scientist
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and informed them about the
agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the Ministry of Home Affairs and other concerned departments/
agencies on the impact of Cyclone Ockhi including damage caused by it and the missing fishermen due to
the Cyclone.
2.1 The Chairman then read out the Rule 294 (1) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) regarding declaration of interests.
(After the arrival of witnesses)
3.0 The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence,
National Disaster Management Authority and the Indian Meteorological Department to the sitting of the
Committee. The Ministry thereafter briefly informed the Committee on the damage caused by the
cyclone Ockhi and rescue, relief and rehabilitation measures undertaken by the Central and State
Governments.
4.0 The Director-General, Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) apprising the Committee about the
course taken by the cyclone Ockhi, its nature and severity of its impact stated that the cyclone first hit the
coastal areas of South Tamil Nadu and South Kerala on 30th November around 6.00 
P.M. and affected
Lakshadweep, north coastal Maharashtra and adjoining south coastal Gujarat. The Committee was also
informed that IMD had issued bulletins and disseminated information through fax, emails and over social
media to the concerned authorities and affected states or likely to be affected from time to time. It was also
informed that the cyclone was an unusual one and very rare as per the last 125 years records. It developed

37
from a depression into a storm and then severe cyclonic storm in a very, very short period of 18 hours and
the IMD had very less time to issue early warnings.
5.0 The Home Secretary stated that the Central Government immediately deployed logistics available with
the Indian Air Force, the Navy, the Coast Guard and the NDRF for search and rescue operations. He also
mentioned that coordinated effort was made by the National Crisis Management Committee, State
Governments, Ministry of Defence and other Central Ministries/Departments towards mitigating the miseries
faced by the affected people.
5.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that sometimes Fishermen set off to high Sea upto 200
nautical miles. Therefore it was not possible to warn them. All efforts were being made to rescue and trace
them for which the help of local fishermen was also sought. The State Government was conducting door to
door verification to know the details of the missing fishermen. The number of missing fishermen was
changing everyday as some had returned who might have landed in other States or islands. It was also
informed that the lives lost were substantial in sea and a few on land due to falling of trees and electric poles.
5.2 It was also informed by the Ministry that Prime Minister had announced immediate assistance of
RS.325 crore to states of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Lakshadweep besides the funds available under SDRF and
NDRF mechanism.
6.0 The Committee was also informed that the Government of India would provide assistance of ` l.5
Lakh for reconstruction of the houses fully damaged by cyclone Ockhi from the Prime Minister’s Awas
Yojana. Ex-gratia assistance of ` 2 lakh to the next of the kin of deceased and ` 50,000 to each of those
seriously injured was sanctioned from the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund. It was also stated that the
Ministry had constituted an inter-Ministerial Central Team to go to Kerala and Tamil Nadu and would visit
the states after getting memoranda from these states.
7.0 Following issues were raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee:
(i) mismatch of data relating to death, causalities and devastation caused by the cyclone provided
by the Ministry and as reported by different Media. The Ministry was asked to provide the
updated and accurate information on this account;
(ii) Odisha has faced many of the severe Cyclones over the past many years and based on its
experiences it has developed SOPs which are implemented within the first 48 hours to 72
hours. This has brought down casualties to single digit. These inputs about improving standard
operating procedure can be taken by the Ministry to improvise upon for disaster management;
(iii) for strengthening of disaster related infrastructure 20,000 walkie-talkies were procured for
`45 crore by the Tamil Nadu Government from the World Bank funding. But due to non
installation of the towers required for operating them they remained dumped in godown;
(iv) Member from Lakshadweep raised the issue of urgent financial assistance to fisherman whose
boats were damaged beyond repair and for farmers whose coconut trees were uprooted by the
cyclone;
(v) the Chairman expressed concern about the casualties at sea by the cyclone and asked whether
radio or wireless communication could be established with the fishermen who were in deep
sea. The Indian Coast Guard informed that the fishermen in deep sea were equipped with

38
Distress Alert Transmitter (DAT) developed by ISRO for giving SOS/distress message in case
of any eventuality on any of the vessels at high sea. The alert from vessel is sent as one way
communication through satellite, to the Coast Guard Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre
(MRCC) at Chennai for rescue operations. About 1700 DAT were provided by the Indian
Coast Guard and 1000 by the State Governments. The Chairman then directed NORF/ NOMA
to explore a mechanism by which warning about Cyclone etc. can be issued from land into
deep sea, 200 nautical miles away or beyond;
(vi) the issue of non release/ disbursal of ` 14,000 crores by the Central Government to the State
of West Bengal, where 152 flood related deaths and other damage had occurred, was also
broached up;
(vii) Some Members stated that disaster affected States either did not get assistance according to
their demands or got very meager amount even after announcement of big financial help by the
PM. Details in writing were sought from the Ministry on the financial assistance announced by
the Prime Minister in the last 4-5 years when he visited disaster affected States and the amount
that had actually reached the concerned State Governments; and
(viii) the issue of discrimination or differentiation in deployment of NDRF teams in different States
that were affected by the Cyclone Ockhi with different intensity, was raised by the Members.
They also sought other details like date, time and number of NDRF units deployed in affected
states.
8. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 5.24 
P.M.

39
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Monday, the 2nd April, 2018 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
3. Shri R.K. Sinha
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
5. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
6. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
7. Shrimati Kirron Kher
8. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
9. Shri Kaushal Kishore
10. Shri P. Nagarajan
11. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
12. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
3. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
5. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following two draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) * * *
(ii) 21 1th Report on the Cyclone Ockhi - Its Impact on Fishermen and Damage Caused by it.
3.1 * * *
3.2 The Committee, then, took up the draft 211th Report for consideration and adopted the same without
any change.
3.3 The Committee authorised the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if necessary
and also decided for preseptation of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament in the current session
itself.
*** Relate to other matters.

40
4.1 * * *
4.2 * * *
4.3 * * *
4.4 * * *
5.0 A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.53 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.