Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO. 
190
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the One Hundred Eighty 
Second Report on Rescue, Rehabilitation and 
Reconstruction in The Aftermath of The 
Floods and Landslides in J&K
   ONE HUNDRED NINETIETH REPORT
December, 2015/Pausa, 1937 (Saka)

Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.)-372
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED NINETIETH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on The Recommendations/
Observations contained in The One Hundred Eighty
Second Report on Rescue, Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction in The Aftermath of The
Floods and Landslides in J&K
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/ Pausha, 1937 (Saka)

C O N T E N T S
1. C OMPOSITION  OF T HE C OMMITTEE  .................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .................................................................................................... ( IV)
4. R EPORT  ....................................................................................................... 1 - 19
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government............................................................................ 2 - 6
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply....... 7 - 8
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee................ 9 - 16
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observation in respect of which final reply of the
Government have not been received........................................... 17 - 19
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  — AT A G LANCE ............................................ 20 - 22
6. M INUTES  ..................................................................................................... 23 - 26

COMPOSTION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2015)
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Goel
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
 *16. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar
21. Shri Harish Meena
22. Shri P. Nagarajan
23. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
24. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
25. Shri Dilip Patel
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
* Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 9 th September, 2015 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of
Shri Chandrakant Khaire, MP, Lok Sabha  to Committee on Finance  w.e.f. 9 th September, 2015
(i)

28. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil
29. Shri Bishnupada Ray
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Ninetieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty Second Report on the Rescue,
Rehabilitation and reconstruction in the aftermath of the floods and landslides in J&K.
2. The One Hundred and Eighty Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22
nd  December, 2014
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha 22 nd  December, 2014.  After presentation of the Report,
the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action
Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry
furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee on 10
th August, 2015.
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24th Septem-
ber 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Ninetieth Report and adopted the same
at its meeting held on 2
nd December, 2015.
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
 P.BHA TTACHARYA
NEW D ELHI;         Chairman
2nd December, 2015               Department–Related Parliamentary
Pausha,21, 1937 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Home Affairs
         Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
A TM : Automated Teller Machine
A TF : Aviation Turbine Fuel
BRO : Border Road Organisation
DM : Disaster Management
FCI : Food Corporation of India
I&FCD : Irrigation and Flood Control Department
IMCT : Inter-Ministerial Central Team
IAF : Indian Air Force
LPG : Liquefied Petroleum Gas
LIC : Life Insurance Corporation of India
MARCOS : Marine Commando Force
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
NEC : National Executive Council
ORS : Oral Rehydration Sachets
PDS : Public Distribution System
PPE : Personal Protective Equipment
RO : Reverse Osmosis
SDRF : State Disaster Response Force
(iv)

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty Second Report of
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on Rescue, Rehabilita-
tion and Reconstruction in the aftermath of the flood and landslides in J&K.  The Report was
presented to the Parliament on 22
nd December, 2014.
2. Action Taken Notes (A TNs) as updated was received from the Ministry of  Home Affairs
in respect of the observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty Second
Report which  have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Paras:  2.21, 2.25, 2.26, 2.27, 2.28, 2.47 and 2.50  (of the One Hundred and Eighty Second
Report) Total recommendations- 07
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted seven of its recommen-
dations as mentioned in Chapter – I of the Report.
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s reply: - Paras: 2.29, 2.37 and 2.49 (ibid) Total recommendations-03
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and, therefore,
does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: Paras: 2.19, 2.22, 2.24, 2.30, 2.31, 2.39, 2.42, 2.46 and 2.48
(ibid) Total recommendations- 09
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of nine of its recom-
mendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should take further necessary
action and furnish convincing replies in respect of those recommendations within a time frame of
three months after presentation of the Report.
Chapter-IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received:  Para: 2.33, 2.38 and 2.41 (ibid) Total recommendations- 03
In respect of the three recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Committee feels that the
Ministry has either furnished interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. The Commit-
tee desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of
the recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee within three months.
The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation indicated
above, in the succeeding Chapters. CHAPTER- I
1

2
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 EARLY WARNING SYSTEM
Recommendation
1.1.1 The Committee would like to convey its gratitude to the many personnel and the
agencies of Central Government particularly, the Ministry of Defence who had done a
splendid work even at the risk of their own lives in this J&K flood. Over the last fifteen
years, the country has seen quantitative and qualitative development in national capabilities
in the matter of dealing with natural calamities viz., handling Phailin, wherein the death
toll was limited. In the past, in a similar calamity in 1999 in Odisha, the country had lost
almost 11,000 lives-but in these last 15 years, in various parts of the country, both at the
national level and at the State level, the capabilities have improved a lot which include early
warning systems and efficient systems and procedures of early mobilization. The Committee
is quite confident that the Disaster Management apparatus could have done a much better
job in the recent calamities in J&K, had there been an early warning followed by resilient
set-up of systems and procedures and smooth co-ordination and communication in place in
the State of J&K enabling the NDRF and the State Rapid Action Force to perform their
entrusted task in time. The Committee feels that it is not just about early warning systems,
evacuation system is also of paramount importance because, even if the state has an early
warning, evacuating people becomes very difficult in the absence of effective and efficient
evacuation system. In view of the heavy toll of human lives coupled with number of missing
persons, the Committee believes that there have been some lapses in this regard on the
part of the State Government. The committee in this regard notes with appreciation that
except some hiccups initially, the delivery system after the devastation was put in motion.
The committee here would like to caution that the duty of the Government does not end
here, as there is huge task of rehabilitation and reconstruction before it.  (Para 2.21)
Action Taken
1.1.2    The Committee has rightly pointed out that evacuation is an important part of rescue and
relief measures. The State Governments, based on the advance warnings received from the
designated forecasting agencies, are generally carrying out evacuation of population in the likely
affected areas in accordance with the magnitude of the ground situation through their administrative
machinery. On the basis of recommendations of the Committee, State Governments/ UTs have been
advised to carry out advance evacuation to save precious lives of likely affected population, where
ever possible, vide this Ministry’s letter dated 18.06.2015.
1.1.3  Central Water Commission (CWC) has informed that they had taken measures for opening
of flood forecasting station at Rammunsibag (near Srinagar) on river Jhelum. In addition, 5
numbers of forecasting stations in J &K State has already proposed by the CWC during Twelfth
Plan.

3
1.2 2011 CENSUS AS THE BASIS FOR LONG TERM REHABILITATION PLAN
Recommendation
1.2.1 The Committee would like to point out discrepancies between the reported feedback
and the relief mechanism engaged in distribution of relief packages by the Government
agencies. The Committee has been given to understand that the food packages were being
distributed to the people of J&K on the basis of the 2001 census. It is worthwhile to
mention here that since 2001, the population has increased at a considerable rate. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should take into account the
concern of the people and 2011 Census be made as the basis for executing the long term
rehabilitation plan. (Para 2.25 of 182
nd Report)
Action Taken
1.2.2 The concern raised by the Committee is noted. It is informed that 2011 census is the basis
for providing relief to the State. However, keeping in view our federal polity, distribution of relief
on ground level is done by the concerned State administration. Regarding the issue of distribution
of food ration to the state, the Ministry of Food and Public distribution was requested to ensure
adequate allocation of food ration to the people of J&K as per 2011 census.
Moreover, Government of India has announced a subsidy of R59.37 crores for lifting of
food grains at APL rates. The period of lifting is also being increased to 30
th September 2015. The
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public distribution, Department of Food and Distribution
has moved a CCEA note for allocation of food grains to the Jammu & Kashmir Government for
floods at APL rates instead of MSP rates. The differential liability of R59.37 crore would be borne
by Government of India.
1.3 COMPENSATION FOR BUILDINGS IN DILAPIDATED CONDITIONS
Recommendation
1.3.1 The Committee also desires to highlight the apprehension of affected people of the
Jammu & Kashmir regarding compensation against damages to buildings during the flood.
The Committee was given to understand that compensation was being given to people whose
buildings were completely damaged, whether it was concrete house or mud house. It was
brought to the notice of the committee that there were a number of buildings which were
severely damaged and either started shattering or are on the verge of collapse and the
owners of such buildings apprehend that they would not get compensation. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government should take into account the concern of people
whose buildings are in dilapidated conditions caused due to floods.  (Para 2.26)
ACTION TAKEN
1.3.2 The concern raised by the Committee has been noted. The State Government has projected
2,54,727 damaged houses and relief assistance of R194.63 cr. has been provided to the State for
SDRF/ NDRF for repair of all claimed damaged houses as per prevailing norms.

4
1.3.3 Further, a relief of R570 crore would be  provided from PMNRF over and above the SDRF
norms for housing as per the following rates:
Sl Category Rate of Relief under Rate of Relief under
No. NDRF norms PMNRF norms
1 Fully damaged Pucca houses 75,000 1,00,000
2. Fully damaged Kucha houses 17,600 50,000
3. Severely damaged Pucca Houses 12,600 50,000
4. Severely damaged Kutcha houses 3,800 10,000
5. Partially damaged Pucca Houses 3,800 25,000
6. Partially damaged Kutcha houses 2,300 5000
1.3.4 On 16 .06.2015, the Government of India announced an additional ex-gratia  payment (esti-
mated at R551 crore) to 73000 completely damaged/ severely damaged/ partially damaged Kutcha
houses over and above the relief provided through SDRF/ NDRF/ PMNRF etc,. For completely
damaged Kutcha houses, R1.5 lac shall be provided, whereas for severely damaged Kutha houses R1.0
lakh and for partially damaged Kutcha houses, R50,000/-  shall be given
1.4 MEDIUM AND LONG TERM REHABILITATION PLAN
Recommendation
1.4.1 The Committee observes that the presentation of the Ministry of Home Affairs and
State Government contained the assessment of land loss but none of the Government took
into account the loss of cattle. The Committee understands that the main source of the
means of livelihood of the people of J&K is cattle, therefore, the State Government should
take into account loss of cattle during the flood. The Committee recommends that the
rehabilitation policy and plan must also take into account compensation for loss of cattle so
that the economy of affected people must return to support their livelihood.  (Para 2.27)
Action Taken
1.4.2 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. In this regard, it may be noted that Central
Team of GOI had inter-alia  assessed the loss of cattle and approved an amount of R35.71 crore
from SDRF/ NDRF for replacement of lost animals during flood 2014. Further, the State Govern-
ment has been advised to take up with concerned line Ministry for medium and long term
rehabilitation work.
Further Observation
1.4.3 The Committee desires to be apprised medium and long term rehabilitation plan
finalised.
1.5 DE-SILTING OF AGRICULTURAL LAND
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee also takes into account the loss of land and the standing crops which

5
were totally washed away, which the Government would take into account but siltation due
to accumulation of mud, sand and stones on the land made the land uncultivable. The
Committee feels that such land may not be cultivable for a long time unless the Govern-
ment takes timely intervention for making such land cultivable. The committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should prepare Action Plan in this regard too in order
to enable the farmers to sow the crops without losing the cropping cycle.  (Para 2.28)
Action T aken
1.5.2 As per norms of SDRF/NDRF, an assistance of R33.94 was provided from SDRF/ NDRF
for loss of agriculture land. Further, an amount of R3.99 crore was provided from SDRF/NDRF
for desilting of agriculture land and R1.96 crore was given for removal of debris from agriculture
land.
1.5.3 The State Government was advised to take up the proposal for further assistance for
medium and long terms works with the concerned Central Ministry.
Further Obeservation
1.5.4 The Committee hopes that the earmarked amount i.e. RRRRR3.99 crore from SDRF /NDRF
would be sufficient for de-silting of agricultural land and a further sanctioned amount of
RRRRR1.96 crore would be sufficient for removal of debris from agricultural land. The State
Government may prepare proposal for further assistance for medium and long term work.
1.6 EXPERT GROUP STUDY OF FACTORS CAUSING LANDSLIDE AND FLOODS
Recommendation
1.6.1 The Committee would further like to stress that the Government must examine
the situation arising in the Jammu region of the State where there have been severe
landslides and it is reported that villages have been washed away. The Committee feels
that in addition to excess rainfall, such immense landslide may have been triggered by
some other factors. The Committee, therefore, desires the Government to examine other
factors, particularly, seismic factors that could be involved in the unfortunate incident.
The Committee recommends that the Government should set up an expert group of
scientists and geologists for detailed study about the factors/reasons which could contribute
in major landslides with the instruction to submit the report within stipulated timeframe.
(Para 2.47)
Action Taken
1.6.2 GSI, being the nodal department of landslide studies, has already initiated work on this
aspect. A report titled “Post-Disaster preliminary landslide investigations in Jammu, Poonch and
Udhampur Districts, Jammu & Kashmir” is being generated by Engineering Geology and Landslide
Division, GSI, SU: Jammu and Kashmir, Jammu for Field Season 2014-15 on request from District
Administration and State Govt. which is expected by October 2015.
1.6.3 Further, during Field Season 2015-16, two items of investigations under the national
landslide susceptibility mapping programme are presently under progress in J&K State. In this
context, it is mentioned here that if required, J&K Government can approach GSI through State
Geological Programming Board (SGPB) / Central Geological Programming Board (CGPB) in taking

6
up further areas based on their priority from FS 2016-17 onwards, which will be considered for
taking up by GSI.
1.7 LONG TERM RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
Recommendation
1.7.1 Jammu & Kashmir has a special position in our national policy and also in external policy.
Therefore, the Committee feels that there should be a comprehensive plan with sufficient funds
to rebuild the State, rebuild its economy, its infrastructure. The Committee understands that
rebuilding the economy of J&K is a great challenge for both the State and the Central
Governments and both the Governments should give sufficient attention to the programme of
rebuilding the economy of the State within a set time frame.  (Para 2.50)
Action Taken
1.7.2 In the wake of severe unprecedented floods and landslides in Jammu and Kashmir in
September 2014, the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir submitted a memorandum for a
financial assistance of R44000 crore, out of which R2926.11 crore was sought for immediate relief
from National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF). The High Level Committee (HLC) under the
Chairmanship of Union Home Minister approved an assistance of R1602.56 cr. to the State from
NDRF, subject to adjustment of 90% balance in State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF).
1.7.3 An amount of R770 crore was announced from the PM National Relief Fund (PMNRF).
Of this, an amount of R570 crore were earmarked for fully and partially damaged houses, R175
crore for medical equipments and R25 crore for text books.
1.7.4 An amount of R1000 crore was released as Additional Special Plan Assistance. Further,
Border Road Organisation has also been given directions to immediately repair the National highway
from Jammu & Srinagar.
1.7.5 A package of R1667 crore was announced on 16.06.2015 which includes R838 crore on
account of pending liabilities of the Prime Minister’s Reconstruction Plan 2004, R551 crore
additional ex-gratia  relief for repair/reconstruction of damaged kutcha houses. R172 crore for the
tourism sector, R59 crore as subsidy for providing additional food grains and R47 crore for repair
of damaged roads. A total of R5039 crore has thus been provided for short term relief/reconstruc-
tion measures for the flood affected State of Jammu & Kashmir.
1.7.6 The Government of India is also considering the request of the State Government for
undertaking long term measures to improve the infrastructure in the State. The Government will
examine specific sectors like Power, Health, Roads and Highways, Tourism, Textile, Food processing,
HRD and Water resources etc. for the long term measures. A team of Central Government officers led
by Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance, Government of India visited the State on 24.06.2015
to explore the possibilities of further assistance taking into account the requirements of the State.
Further Observation
1.7.7 The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of long term plan for
reconstruction of State of J&K in the aftermath the severe floods and as and when  the same
is prepared.

CHAPTER- II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
2.1 ARRANGING SATTELITE PHONES AS BACK UP COMMUNICATION
Recommendation
2.1.1 The Committee notes that even when the State of J&K had an early warning, the State
had not enough satellite phones available which resulted into break down of communication
system and there was no way to contact the officials at district level. Secondly, even with an
early warning, the personnel available with the State Government were not trained making
them therefore incapable to mobilize resources sufficiently in advance.  (Para 2.29)
Action Taken
2.1.2 All States/UTs have been advised during the Relief Commissioner’s conference to take
adequate preparedness measures including arranging satellite phones as back up communication.
2.1.3 The Central Government facilitates training of State Disaster Response Force personnel
through National Disaster Response Force.
2.2 SUPERVISION AND MONITORING OF FUNDS RELEASED
Recommendation
2.2.1 The Committee takes into account the funds provided to the State Government of
J&K by the Central Government. The Committee feels that funds so released by the
Central Government must be utilized for the purpose and its utilization must be under
close supervision and monitoring. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Gov-
ernment should constitute Joint Team consisting of the representative of State Govern-
ment and the Central Government for better administration and implementation of
programmes with fair deal of justice and equitable distribution.  (Para 2.37)
Action Taken
2.2.2 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. Distribution of relief at ground level is
done by the concerned State Administration. As our constitution has federal provision, the role of
Central Government in distributing the relief directly to affected people is limited. However, the
representatives of Central Governments are frequently visiting the State to review the post disaster
relief and rehabilitation works.
2.3 PREPAREDNESS OF RESCUE AND THE RELIEF MACHINARY
Recommendation
2.3.1 The Committee is not quite satisfied with the preparedness of rescue and relief
machinery and disaster Management set up in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Despite
all disaster management set up in the State as well as the national level, the Committee
7

8
does not understand as to how there was not enough preparedness. The Committee is of the
opinion that there is no use of referring to the provisions of National Disaster Management
Act 2005 and to reiterate that Disaster management Activities fall within the jurisdiction of
the State Government and Central Government only provides logistic support to the State
Government. Therefore, the moot issue is the actual implementation of the provision of the
Act. The Committee therefore, recommends that necessary steps may be taken to
strengthen the National Disaster Management mechanism. The Committee has already
given its one Hundred and Seventy Eight Report on Disaster management in the Country.
The Committee is of the considered view that actual implementation of the
recommendations contained in that report would definitely lead to better functioning of
disaster management machinery at the national and State level. (Para 2.49)
Action Taken
2.3.2 There are institutional mechanisms at the National and State level for effective management
of natural disasters. The rescue and relief at the ground level is done by the concerned State
Administration. However, there is always scope for strengthening of the disaster management
system which is a continuing process of the governance.
2.3.3 In this regard, it may be noted that as per Ministry of Finance, the World Bank has
sanctioned a loan amount of US $ 250 million for J&K Flood Recovery Project.  One component
of the scheme is imparting training and skills for better Disaster Management response at a cost
of 25 million US dollar.

CHAPTER- III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 HEA VY CASUALTIES OF HUMAN LOSS AND PROPERTIES
Recommendation
3.1.1 The Committee is concerned to observe that the State Government of Jammu &
Kashmir received forewarning that State would receive heavier rainfall than the normal
rain but the kind of preemptive measures taken by State Government were not sufficient
to withstand the fury of the nature and the result was heavy casualties in terms of human
loss and properties including public infrastructure in the State. The Committee notes that
in the previous year when Phailin struck Odisha, the State Government of Odisha had
done a commendable job in terms of evacuation and other facilities that were provided but
comparatively, Jammu and Kashmir had more death toll.  (Para 2.19)
Action Taken
3.1.2 All State Governments/ UTs are required to take requisite preparatory measures based on
the warning issued by the different forecasting Agencies. In this regard, the Ministry of Home
Affairs organizes Annual Conference of the Relief Commissioners/ Secretary (Disaster Management)
of the States and Union Territories to sensitise the States/UTs about the requisite preparedness
measures to deal with disasters. In this year conference was held on 16.05.2015. The Union Home
Secretary has advised all the State Governments/ UTs to take each and every warning seriously and
take requisite preparedness measures for dealing with the disasters. It was also decided to organize
the conference twice a year, so that preparedness of the State Governments/ UTs can be reviewed
more frequently. It may also be noted that response time for slow developing weather phenomena
like cyclone is more compared to response time for disaster, like landslides, flash flood/floods,
avalanche, earthquake etc. The strengthening of the disaster management mechanism is a continu-
ing process of the governance.  However, on the basis of the recommendation of the Committee,
the State Governments/ UTs have been advised to immediately act upon the warnings of early
warning agencies vide MHA letter dated 18.06.2015.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3 The Committee observes that the Central Government is furnishing routine reply,
and in fact, is shrugging off its responsibility in guiding the State Government to combat
the Disaster by just pleading that Union Ministry of Home Affairs had issued Advisory to
all State/UTs Government to strengthen the Disaster Management set-up. The Committee is
not satisfied with the steps taken even after the disaster had taken place. This shows the
lack of preparedness. The Committee, therefore, strongly, recommends that the Central
Government must guide the State/UTs Government to re-orient the disaster management
set-up in consonance with region specific geographical features, climate and keeping in view
the frequency and possibility of striking of the Disaster in the region.
3.2 RELIEF AND REHABILITATION WORK
Recommendation
3.2.1 The Committee would like the Government to ensure that the relief has reached the
9

10
needy on the ground level and the rehabilitation work has taken off. Since J&K is a
strategic and a sensitive State, it needs to be rebuilt without any procrastination. The
committee would like to be apprised of the planning and the concrete steps to rebuild the
State. The Committee is of the considered view that the Central Government should not
shrug off its responsibility in re-building the state by taking the plea that activities
concerning the long term rehabilitation programme fall within the jurisdiction of the State
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government should
extend all support to the State Government at the time of unprecedented crisis.  In the
effort for rebuilding that State, Central Government should extend the requisite financial
assistance to the State Government and in fact both the Governments should work in-
tandem in rebuilding the State. The Committee therefore recommends that rehabilitation of
affected people and reconstruction of the infrastructure along with the revival of economy
in the State should be taken up on utmost priority.  (Para 2.22)
Action Taken
3.2.2 The Central Government is extending all necessary support to the State Government of
Jammu and Kashmir in the rehabilitation and reconstruction works in the post disaster phase.
3.2.3 The State Government of J&K in their memorandum had projected assistance of R44000
crore. Out of that the State Government claimed R2827 crore from SDRF/NDRF and the balance
as special package. The High Level Committee in its meeting held on 30.01.2015 approved
R1602.56 crore from NDRF subject to adjustment of 90% balance in SDRF. The assistance
includes R500 crore for air bill, as per actual, based on the bills raised by the Ministry of Defence.
The air bill is yet to be received from the Ministry of Defence.  The SDRF balance was R1176.71
crore and after adjustment 90% of that R43.53 crore was released to the State from NDRF on
13.02.2015.  Further, the HLC also approved assistance of R20 crore from special component of
National Rural Drinking Water Program for repair of damaged drinking water supply works.
3.2.4 The first instalment of Central share of SDRF for 2015-16 amounting to R114.50 crore
was released to the State on 16.04.2015.
3.2.5 R1000 crore was approved by the Ministry of Finance on 22.10.14 to the State of J&K
during 2014-15 under SPA (Special Project Assistance) for restoration and rehabilitation work
announced by the Hon’ble Prime Minister as Special project linked grant.
3.2.6 R770 crore was sanctioned from the Prime Minister National Relief Fund under the
following heads:
(i) R570 crore for reconstruction of damaged houses
(ii) R175 crore for repair of hospitals and adding new medical equipment
(iii) R25 crore for replacing the books to all 10 lakh children in Primary and upper
Primary School in the State.
3.2.7 Looking at the necessity of the State Government for further assistance, Central Govt. has
announced on 16.06.15 an additional assistance of R1667.71 crore for the State of J&K towards
short term relief and reconstruction measures. This includes R838 crore on account of pending
liabilities of the Prime Minister’s Reconstruction Plan 2004, R551 crore additional ex-gratia  relief for
repair/reconstruction of damaged houses, R172.34 crore for tourism  sector, R59.37 crore as subsidy
for providing additional food grains and R47 crore for repair and maintenance of damaged roads.

11
3.2.8 The long term assistance for the Jammu & Kashmir flood is being handled by the Ministry
of Finance in consultation with NITI Aayog, through centrally sponsored schemes and special plan
assistance. The Department of Economic Affairs helps in coordinating with external and financing
agencies like World Bank and Asian Development Bank.
3.2.9 A joint team led by the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) and the World Bank carried
out Rapid Damage and Need Assessment in February 2015 and finalized the following component
as part of J&K Flood Recovery Project.
3.2.10  The World Bank would provide USD 250 million as loan.  Of this 90 % will be repaid by
Central Government and 10% by the State Government.
3.2.11  Further, considering the request of the State Government for undertaking long term
measures to improve the infrastructure in the State in specific sectors like Power, Health, Roads
and Highways, Tourism, Textile, Food processing, HRD and Water resources etc., a team of
Central Government officers led by Secretary (Expenditure) visited the State on 24.06.15 to explore
the possibilities after taking into account the requirements of the State.
Further Recommendation
3.2.12  The Committee notes the details of the financial assistance extended to the State
Government of J&K for rescue & relief operation from SDRF/NDRF and as special package,
restoration and rehabilitation under PM’s Special Project Assistance and long term assis-
tance for reconstruction plan being monitored by Ministry of Finance in consultation with
the NITI Ayog. Against the projected assistance of RRRRR44000 crore by the State Government
(RRRRR2827 crore claimed from SDRF/NDRF and balance as special package) HLC approved
RRRRR1602.56 crore from NDRF, that too, subject to adjustment of 90% balance in SDRF and
book adjustment to the tune of RRRRR500 crore as air bill and after all adjustment the financial
assistance from Central Government under NDRF is merely RRRRR43.53 crore.  The Ministry of
Finance, however, also approved RRRRR1000 crore under SPA for restoration and rehabilitation.
3.2.13  The Committee further wishes to point out that out of an additional Central assis-
tance of RRRRR1667.71 crore, an amount of RRRRR834 crore has been earmarked for short term relief
and reconstruction measures but to the utmost surprise an amount of RRRRR838 crore has been
posted on account of pending liabilities of Prime Minister’s Reconstruction Plan 2004 at the
time when the people of the State are shocked due to unprecedented flood and landslide.
Against this backdrop, the Committee strongly recommends that the Central Government
must first ameliorate the State from the shock of flood through relief and restoration and
infuse sufficient fund to State’s kitty for rehabilitation and long term reconstruction plan.
The Committee recommends that all the financial packages must get a kick-start with
sufficient fund.
3.2.14  The Committee, however, cautions the Central as well as the State Government that
concerted efforts must be made to ensure that all announced packages and
reconstruction project plan are implemented within set time frame for putting State
economy back on rail.
3.3 SUSTAINABLE COMPENSATION AMOUNT
RECOMMENDATION
3.3.1 The Committee feels that the compensation amount given to victims is very low

12
because the guidelines regarding compensation amount, etc. were framed in 2001. The
Committee observes that the unprecedented flood situation in Jammu & Kashmir led to
collapse of the entire economy of J&K and immediate steps are required to help the people who
have lost their businesses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should
undertake assessment of loss of assets and prepare comprehensive rehabilitation and recon-
struction plan. Concerted efforts must be taken to do early rehabilitation and put the economy
on the right path to get back the confidence of the people of J&K. (Para 2.24)
Action Taken
3.3.2 The assistance provided from SDRF and NDRF are for immediate relief and not for
compensation of losses as suffered/ claimed. The revision of norms is a continuous process. The
norms have been recently revised on 8
th April 2015. These norms are available on this Ministry’s
website (www.ndmindia.nic.in) .  The Central Government is providing all necessary support to the
State of J & K in their recovery programme.
                                                                   (in US $)
(i) Reconstruction and strengthening of  critical infra structure 60 million
(ii) Reconstruction of road and bridges 80 million
(iii) Restoration of urban flood management infrastructure 50 million
(iv) Restoration and strengthening of livelihoods 15 million
(v) Strengthening of disaster risk management capacity 25 million
(vi) Implementation support 20 million
                                      T OTAL 250 million
Further Recommendation
3.3.3 The Committee understands that the assistance provided from SDRF and NDRF is
for immediate relief and not for compensation of losses. The Committee notes that the
Government has come forward with revised norms with effect from 8
th April, 2015 on relief,
rescue and rehabilitation scheme in the aftermath of disaster.  The Committee, however,
observes that relief amount is not sufficient enough even for providing immediate relief,
therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that compensation amount must be substan-
tial for the affected persons.
3.4 BETTER DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
3.4.1 The Committee is therefore of the view that in order to combat the natural
calamities/furies, the Central Government needs comprehensive National Planning with
resilient system for better disaster management throughout the country, irrespective of the
frequency of disasters in a particular area/region. For combating the possible onslaught of
natural fury, there is urgent need for better coordination between national and State
agencies. The Committee, therefore, feels that at the national level, the country should
have a much better pre-emptive action from the Central authorities, particularly for the
States which are not used to this kind of disaster frequently. The Central Government
should apprise the State Governments some kind of advanced planning and mechanism that

13
the State Governments must put in place invariably without any failure. The Committee
believes that the State Government must realize the consequences of nature fury and
should not be complacent at any time and must have comprehensive planning for enhancing
capabilities at the time of natural calamities.  (Para 2.30)
Action Taken
3.4.2 In order to strengthen the existing disaster management system, the Disaster Management
Act, 2005 was enacted and notified on December 26, 2005. The Act provides for institutional
mechanisms for drawing up and monitoring the implementation of the disaster management plans,
which includes holistic, coordinated, and prompt response to any calamity situation in the country
and ensures measures by various wings of Government for prevention, mitigation and for mini-
mizing the effects of calamities. Further, the strengthening of the disaster management is a
continuing process of the governance.
3.4.3 There are institutional mechanisms at the National and State level for effective management
of natural disasters. The Government of India extends all the possible logistics and financial
assistance to the States to supplement their efforts to meet the situation effectively.
3.4.4 In this regard it may be noted that there is already a National Disaster Management Plan
prepared by the Central Government. The Plan elaborates various phases of disaster management
like preparedness, response, capacity building and mitigation.
Further Recommendation
3.4.5 The Committee notes the provisions for institutional mechanism under DM Act, 2005
for implementation of Disaster Management Plan. Though strengthening of the Disaster
Management is a continuous process but the resilience of existing disaster apparatus gets
exposed at and unfortunate time when a disaster strikes.  The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that MHA should review all aspects of Disaster Management and
accordingly pursue State/UTs Government to take appropriate action on the ground level to
combat the fury of any disaster.
1.5 STRENGTHING OF DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
1.5.1 The Committee feels that States like J&K are not well prepared to combat natural
disasters and such States should not be caught on sleeping mode at the time of disaster. The
Committee, therefore, desires that training and updating of State Government machinery
should be on continuous basis and it should always be on alert mode.  (Para 2.31)
Action Taken
1.5.2 There are institutional mechanisms at the National and State level for effective management
of natural disasters. However, the strengthening of the disaster management is a continuing process
of the governance.
1.5.3 MHA is regularly interacting with the disaster prone States. The meeting of the Relief
Commissioners and Resident Commissioners are being held more frequently. The States are being
advised to remain on alert mode and all possible assistance projected by the State Governments
are being provided by the Central Government.

14
1.5.4 As per Ministry of Finance, the World Bank has sanctioned a loan amount of US $ 250
million for  J&K Flood recovery project. The scheme has one component for strengthening of
disaster risk management capacity at a cost of 25 million US dollars.
Further Recommendation
1.5.5 The Committee observes that World Bank has sanctioned a loan amount of US$ 250
million for J&K flood Reconstruction Project and out of that US$ 25 is earmarked for
strengthening of Disaster Risk Management, therefore, the Committee strongly recom-
mends that all out efforts must be made towards the objective of strengthening of Disaster
Risk Management capacity in J&K.
3.6 DEFORESTATION CAUSING FLOODS
Recommendation
3.5.1 Another aspect which drew the attention of the Committee relates to the role of
deforestation in inviting floods. It was given to understand that a lot of deforestation has taken
place in Jammu & Kashmir, and the successive Governments have not addressed this. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that as a long-term measure, the Government must ensure
that deforestation does not take place. The Committee feels that State Government should also
consider whether the natural disaster had been preceded by any ecological disaster because we
have experienced the most gruesome situation in Uttarakhand very recently.  (Para 2.39)
Action Taken
3.6.2 The State Government of Jammu and Kashmir have been requested to furnish action taken
report on the same vide letter dated 16
th June 2015, 26 th June 2015 and 24 th July 2015. The
information is awaited.
Further Recommendation
3.6.3 The Committee, taking into account that deforestation in the State invited
unprecedented flood, recommends that the Central Government may follow up with State
Government in the matter for report and as and when the same is received may be sent to
this Committee.
3.7 CLEARING OF DRAINS AND RIVERS
Recommendation
3.7.1 The Committee was given to understand the Central Government grants RRRRR60 crores to the
Government of Jammu & Kashmir to clean drains and rivers by removing silt and sand but the
related work had reportedly not been carried out. The Committee, therefore, desires that Central
Government should regularly monitor the works under the sanctioned money.  (Para 2.42)
Action Taken
3.7.2 The State Government of Jammu and Kashmir has been requested to furnish action taken
report on the same vide letter dated 16
th June 2015, 26 th June 2015 and 24 th July 2015.
Further Recommendation
3.7.3 The Committee reiterates it's observation made in Para 2.42 of 182
nd Report and

15
further recommends that Central Government must pursue with the State Government
about the utilization of funds to the tune of RRRRR60 crore sanctioned to the State Government
for clearing drains and rivers by removing silts and sand from the agricultural lands to
make it cultivable.
3.8 COMPREHENSIVE FLOOD MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
3.8.1 The Committee notes that siltation and encroachments have been identified as one
of the causes of flood in the State. The Committee also notes that the Group has also
recommended measures viz. non structural measures like flood forecasting and disaster
management as well as structural measures as channel improvement and construction of
additional supplementary flood spill channel. The Committee desires that lessons should be
learnt from this disaster to avoid recurrence. The Committee hopes that the Government
would examine the recommendations of the study group and would come forward with
resilient disaster management mechanism. The structural measures as recommended
should also be addressed without any delay.  (Para 2.46)
Action Taken
3.8.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been conveyed to the State Government of
Jammu and Kashmir and Ministry of Water Resources, GoI.
3.8.3 However, it may be mentioned that State Government of J&K has sent a comprehensive
proposal for R2013 crore for flood management of River Jhelum. Of this an amount of R400 crore
is for immediate dredging and desilting of river Jhelum. This was to be a part of overall project.
This amount has been cleared by the TAC of Ministry of Water Resources and has been sent to
Ministry of Finance for funding.
Further Recommendation
3.8.4 The Committee takes note that a comprehensive proposals of State Government of
J&K involving an expenditure of RRRRR2013 for flood management of river Jhelum is under
consideration of Government of India.  Out of the said proposal, RRRRR400 crore, which has got
approval of Ministry of Water Resources, is pending under consideration of Ministry of
Finance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance must
examine and consider the proposal of J&K Government expeditiously so that the State does
not face unfortunate flood situation again.
3.9 TOURISM AS MAINSTAY OF J&K ECONOMY
Recommendation
3.9.1 The Committee understands that the economy in Kashmir is mainly based on tourism
and the rains and floods have destroyed the entire tourism industry there. The Committee
wishes to point out that the paradise on earth has collapsed due to the flood and the
Government has to rebuild the paradise in order to attract tourists not only from the country
but also from abroad. The committee, therefore, strongly recommends that a special Action
plan or a project should be prepared both by the State Government and the Central
Government, covering all the aspects of tourism while rebuilding the State.  (Para 2.48)

16
Action Taken
3.9.2 To boost the economic activity in the State, the Government of India has decided to focus
on improvement of infrastructure relating to tourism projects. Government of India shall provide
additional assistance of R100 crore for construction of Government tourist assets in lieu  of
damaged/destroyed tourist assets. The pending grants of R72.34 crore to 12 Tourism development
authorities in the State shall also be released. In addition, money shall also be provided for
Completion of Tourist circuits in the State.
Further Recommendation
3.9.3 The Committee hopes that the earmarked Central assistance amount to the tune of
RRRRR100 crore for rebuilding of tourist infrastructure would be sufficient for intended purpose.
In nutshell, the Committee desires that concerted efforts be undertaken by the State
Government to ensure that the tourism sector is developed to fullest potential.  The
Committee further recommends that the Central Government may release the requisite
funds at the earliest.

CHAPTER- IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
4.1 RELIEF NOT REACHING THE EFFECTED PEOPLE IN J&K
Recommendation
4.1.1 While appreciating the feelings of the Home Secretary, the Committee feels that
resource reach was not there in the interior valley, particularly in those villages which are
known to have extremism problem. It was pointed out to the committee that apart from all
the issues of preventive planning, the reach of relief to the people and other things was
grossly inadequate despite the claim of both the Central Government and the State
Government that there was no dearth of resources. It was also pointed out that there was
increased feeling among the affected people that relief was not reaching to them in spite
of generous help from all quarters/countries. The Committee in this background is of the
opinion that both the Central Government and the State Government should understand the
complexities involved in the matter as it is not merely a question of providing relief to the
people who are victims of natural disaster but of winning hearts with relief service in their
distress. The Committee feels that if there is any truth in the allegation that relief is not
reaching the affected people in J&K, the Government should ensure that all the loopholes
should be plugged.  (Para 2.33)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The feeling of the Committee is noted. The distribution of relief at the ground level is done
by the concerned State Administration. However, whenever any inadequacy was noticed by this
Ministry, the State Government has been advised to look into the matter and take corrective
measures.
4.1.3 Further the State Government of J&K has been requested to provide Action Taken Report
on the recommendation of the Committee. The information is awaited.
4.2 RAMPANT ENCROACHMENT ON RIVER BANKS AND NATURAL DRAINS
Recommendation
4.2.1 The Committee desired to highlight that so far as Srinagar is concerned, it was
patently obvious that flood pathways that have been in existence since Moghul times have
all been heavily populated, The Committee notes the submission of the representative of
the State Government that the colonies like Badami Bagh Cantt., where the Army Corps
headquarter is located, Rajbagh, Mahjong Nagar are basically flood plains which were meant
to serve as flood plains. The Committee was given to understand that there was rampant
encroachment on river banks and natural drains, for instance, in Poonch near Sher-e-
Kashmir bridge there was reportedly a colony of 250 buildings and in another area there
was brick kiln which were washed away by the floods. It has also been alleged that the real
estate in Jammu and Kashmir, especially, the Srinagar Valley, has been rampantly violating
the established norms and modalities. Needless to say it is well established fact that fiddling
with natural courses of rivers and drains by constructing buildings, etc. whether legal or
illegal, will, not only, have adverse impact on the ecology and environment  but will also

18
invite natural disasters. Knowing fully well that these are the traditional pathways for the
outflow of water, the Committee wonders as to how the State Government and the
administration permitted constructions in such areas.
4.2.2 The Committee observes that on both the banks of Jhelum River where the disaster has
taken place and in the major areas of Srinagar city, there was water for three weeks. The
Committee believes that the accumulated water was not just allowed to flow through its normal
and natural route, as the same was blocked,. The Committee is constrained to express its
displeasure as to why the local authorities allowed such encroachments on a large scale which led
to such disaster. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that the Government should
bring into force building bye laws keeping in view the topology of the State so that encroachments
on river banks are avoided. (Para 2.38)
Action Taken
4.2.3 The State Government of Jammu and Kashmir and the Ministry of Water Resources have
been requested to furnish action taken report on the same vide letter dated 16
th June 2015, 26 th June
2015 and 24 th July 2015. The information is awaited.
Further Recommendation
4.2.4 The Committee desires to be informed of the Action Taken Report received from the
Ministry of Water Resources and then State Government.
4.3 DREDGING ASPECT OF THE WATER BODIES
Recommendation
4.3.1 The Committee notes that it has become normal to ignore dredging aspect of the
water bodies be it sea or rivers and the projects for deepening and dredging hang fire for
long, gathering dust in the shelfs. The Committee takes serious note of this and desires
that dredging proposals of the rivers submitted by the State Government particularly flood
prone States should be cleared at the earliest so that the work on this is finished before
next monsoon. The Committee also desires that the State Governments should be asked to
adhere to the time limit.  (Para 2.41)
Action Taken
4.3.2 The State Government of Jammu and Kashmir has been requested to furnish action taken
report on the same vide letter dated 16
th June 2015, 26 th June 2015 and 24 th July 2015. The
information is awaited.
4.3.3 However, CWC has informed that a project report for flood management of river Jhelum was
prepared by the State Government in 2009 at an estimated cost of R2083.90 cr. The proposal was
examined by the CWC and offered some comments. However, no compliance was made by the State
Government. After the Jammu and Kashmir flood in 2014, a three member group was constituted by
the Ministry of Water Resources to conduct an in depth study and analysis of the recent unprecedented
floods in J&K for preventing such floods in future. The Committee submitted its report and recom-
mended different measures to be adopted for immediate, short term, and long term. Accordingly, the
State Government is formulating a comprehensive flood management programme of river Jhelum and
its tributaries to manage 1 in 100 years flood of 3260 cumec at Sangam in two phases.

19
4.3.4 Further, it is informed by CWC that meanwhile, the State Government has prepared a
project report to address the immediate problems of existing flood spill channel and main river
Jhelum at an estimated cost of R399.29 cr.  The proposed work will partially mitigate the flood
problems of Srinagar, Budgam, Baramulla, Anantnag, Pulwama and Bandipora on emergent basis.
The project would be implemented in 2 years. The scheme is expected to benefit more than 1.35
lakh people. The scheme after concurrence of State Governments has been cleared by the Advisory
on Irrigation, Flood Control and Multipurpose projects of Ministry of Water Resources on 25.05.15.
4.3.5 In the past, 4 flood management schemes with an estimated cost of R128.75 cr. has
already been taken up on river Jhelum in Jammu and Kashmir by the State Government and an
amount of R114.64 cr. as Central Assistance has been released to the State by the Ministry of
Water Resources, RD&GR.

20
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS — AT A GLANCE
MEDIUM AND LONG TERM REHABILITATION PLAN
The Committee desires to be apprised medium and long term rehabilitation plan
finalized. (Para 1.4.3)
DE-SILTING OF AGRICULTURAL LAND
The Committee hopes that the earmarked amount i.e. RRRRR3.99 crore from SDRF/NDRF
would be sufficient for de-silting of agricultural land and a further sanctioned amount of
RRRRR1.96 crore would be sufficient for removal of debris from agricultural land. The State
Government may prepare proposal for further assistance for medium and long term work.
(Para 1.5.4)
LONG TERM RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of long term plan for
reconstruction of State of J&K in the aftermath the severe floods and as and when the
same is prepared. (Para 1.7.7)
HEA VY CASUALTIES OF HUMAN LOSS AND PROPERTIES
The Committee observes that the Central Government is furnishing routine reply,
and in fact, is shrugging off its responsibility in guiding the State Government to combat
the Disaster by just pleading that Union Ministry of Home Affairs had issued Advisory to all
State/UTs Government to strengthen the Disaster Management set-up. The Committee is
not satisfied with the steps taken even after the disaster had taken place. This shows the
lack of preparedness. The Committee, therefore, strongly, recommends that the Central
Government must guide the State/UTs government to re-orient the disaster management
set-up in consonance with region specific geographical features, climate and keeping in view
the frequency and possibility of striking of the Disaster in the region. (Para 3.1.3)
RELIEF AND REHABILITATION WORK
The Committee notes the details of the financial assistance extended to the State
Government of J&K for rescue & relief operation from SDRF/NDRF and as special package,
restoration and rehabilitation under PM’s Special Project Assistance and long term
assistance for reconstruction plan being monitored by Ministry of Finance in consultation
with the .N.ITI Ayog. Against the projected assistance of RRRRR44000 crore by the State
Government ( RRRRR2827 crore claimed from SDRF/NDRF and balance as special package) HLC
approved RRRRR1602.56 crore from NDRF, that too, subject to adjustment of 90°,10 balance in
SDRF and book adjustment to the tune of RRRRR500 crore as air bill and after all adjustment the
financial assistance from Central Government under NDRF is merely RRRRR43.53 crore. The
Ministry of Finance, however, also approved RRRRR1000 crore under SPA for restoration and
rehabilitation.        (Para 3.2.12)
The Committee further wishes to point out that out of an additional central
assistance of RRRRR1667.71 crore, an amount of RRRRR834 crore has been earmarked for short term

21
relief and reconstruction measures but to the utmost surprise an amount of RRRRR838 crore has
been posted on account of pending liabilities of Prime Minister’s Reconstruction Plan 2004
at the time when the people of the State are shocked due to unprecedented flood and
landslide. Against this backdrop, the Committee strongly recommends that the Central
Government must first ameliorate the State from the shock ofpood through relief and
restoration and infuse sufficient fund to State’s kitty for rehabilitation and long term
reconstruction plan. The Committee recommends that all the financial packages must get
a kick-start with sufficient fund.       (Para 3.2.13)
The Committee, however, cautions the Central as well as the State Government that
concerted efforts must be made to ensure that all announced packages and reconstruction
project plan are implemented within set time frame for putting State economy back on rail.
(Para3.2.14)
SUSTAINABLE COMPENSATION AMOUNT
The Committee understands that the assistance provided from SDRF and NDRF is for
immediate relief and not for compensation of losses. The Committee notes that the
Government has come forward with revised norms with effect from 8th April, 2015 on relief,
rescue and rehabilitation scheme in the aftermath of disaster. The Committee, however,
observes that relief amount is not sufficient enough even for providing immediate relief,
therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that compensation amount must be
substantial for the affected persons. (Para 3.3.3)
BETTER DISASTER MANAGEMENT
The Committee notes the provisions for institutional mechanism under DM Act, 2005
for implementation of Disaster Management Plan. Though strengthening of the Disaster
Management is a continuous process but the resilience of existing disaster apparatus gets
exposed at and unfortunate time when a disaster strikes. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that MHA should review all aspects of Disaster Management and
accordingly pursue State/UTs Government to take appropriate action on the ground level to
combat the fury of any disaster. (Para 3.4.5)
STRENGTHING OF DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT
The Committee observes that World Bank has sanctioned a loan amount of US$ 250
million for J&K flood Reconstruction Project and out oJ that US$ 25 is earmarked for
strengthening of Disaster Risk Management, therefore, the Committee strongly
recommends that all out efforts must be made towards the objective of strengthening of
Disaster Risk Management capacity in J&K. (Para 1.5.5)
DEFORSTATION CAUSING FLOODS
The Committee, taking into account that deforestation in the State invited
unprecedented flood, recommends that the Central Government may follow up with state
government in the matter for report and as and when the same is received may be sent
to this Committee. (Para 3.6.3)

22
LEARING OF DRAINS AND RIVERS
The Committee reiterates its observation made in Para 2.42 of 182nd Report and
further recommends that Central Government must pursue with the State Government
about the utilization of funds to the tune of RRRRR60 crore sanctioned to the State
Government for clearing drains and rivers by removing silts and sand from the agricultural
lands to make it cultivable. (Para 3.7.3)
COMPREHENSIVE FLOOD MANAGEMENT
The Committee takes note that a comprehensive proposals of State Government of
J&K involving an expenditure of RRRRR2013 for flood management of river Jhelum is under
consideration of Government of India. Out of the said proposal, RRRRR400 crore, which has got
approval of Ministry of Water Resources, is pending under consideration of Ministry of
Finance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance must
examine and consider the proposal of J&K Government expeditiously so that the State does
not face unfortunate flood situation again. (Para 3.8.4)
TOURISM AS MAINSTAY OF J&K ECONOMY
The Committee hopes that the earmarked central assistance amount to the tune of
R100 crore for rebuilding of tourist infrastructure would be sufficient for intended purpose.
In nutshell, the Committee desires tliat concerted efforts be undertaken by the State
Government to ensure that the tourism sector is developed to fullest potential. The
Committee further recommends that the Central Government may release the requisite
funds at the earliest. (Para 3.9.3)
RAMPANT ENCROACHMENT ON RIVER BANKS AND NATURAL DRAINS
The Committee desires to be informed of the Action Taken Report received from the
Ministry of Water Resources and then State Government. (Para 4.2.4)

MINUTES

25
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 2nd  December, 2015 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Rahman Khan
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Derek O’ Brien
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
7. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
8. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
9. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
10. Shrimati Kirron Kher
11. Shri P. Nagarajan
12. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
13. Shri Baijayant “jay” Panda
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
15. Shri B. Sreeramulu
SECRETARIAT
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
  Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
  Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
  Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
apprised them of the agenda of the meeting which was to  consider and adopt the following four
draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) *                            *                          *
(ii) Draft 190 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 182 nd Report on Rescue, Rehabilitation and
reconstruction in the aftermath of the floods and landslides in J&K.
*** Relates to other matter.

26
(iii) *                            *                             *
(iv) *                            *                             *
3.0  The Committee then took up the above draft Reports one by one for consideration and
adoption.   After a brief discussion, the four reports were adopted.
4.0 The Committee also authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors
and if necessary further vetting in the Reports.
5.0 The Chairman and Committee Members then appreciated the work done by Committee
Secretariat in terms of drafting comprehensive and quality reports within stipulated timeframe.
6.0     The Committee then nominated its Chairman and in his absence Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
M.P. Rajya Sabha and Shri D. Raja, M.P . Rajya Sabha to present the 189 th, 190 th, 191 st and 192 nd
Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Kirron Kher, MP, Lok Sabha and in her absence Shri Adhir
Ranjan Chaudhury, MP , Lok Sabha to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha the same day.
7.0 Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 3.20 
P.M.
_______________________________________________________________________________________
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at: Bengal Offset Works, 16/335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi