PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 93
DEPARTMENT  RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
NINETY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE COMPETITION BILL, 2001
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2002/SRAVANA, 1924 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2002/SRAVANA, 1924 (SAKA)
RD
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23  AUGUST, 2002)
RD
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23  AUGUST, 2002)
RD
(PRESENTED TO CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23  AUGUST, 2002)
RD
(FORWARDED TO LOK SABHA ON 23  AUGUST, 2002)
HON’BLE
HON’BLE SPEAKER, 
 
ST
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 21  NOVEMBER, 2002)
ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21  NOVEMBER, 2002)
ST
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 21  NOVEMBER, 2002)
ST
(LAID ON THE LOK SABHA ON 21  NOVEMBER, 2002) TABLE OF 

149
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

C.S.(H.A.)-177
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
NINETY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE COMPETITION BILL, 2001
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD AUGUST, 2002)
(FORW ARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23 RD AUGUST, 2002)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST NOVEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21 ST NOVEMBER, 2002)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2002/SRAV ANA, 1924 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (v)-(vii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—24
4. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE C OMMITTEE  —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 25—27
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES O F T HE M EETINGS O F T HE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 29—80
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................ 81— 148

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE (2001)
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Hiphei
4. Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
5. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
6. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8. Shri K.M. Saifullah
9. Shri C.M. Ibrahim
φ10. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
11. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain
13. Shri Kuldip Nayyar
14. Dr.(Shrimati) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
15. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
LOK SABHA
16. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
♠ 18. Shrimati Nisha Chaudhary
19. Shri Samar Chaudhary
20. Shri M.O.H. Farook
£21. Shri Vijay Goel
22. Shri Rajen Gohain
23. Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
24. Shri Vinay Katiyar
25. Shri Arun Kumar
26. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
27. Shri P.H. Pandian
28. Shri Dayabhai Vallabhai Patel
29. Shri Shriniwas Patil
*30. Shri Jitendra Prasada
(i)
φ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 1st March, 2001.
♠ Expired on 30th January, 2001.
£ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 1st September, 2001 on being appointed as Minister of State in the Union Council of Ministers.
* Expired on 16th January, 2001.

(ii)
31. Shri Subodh Ray
32. Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
33. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
34. Shri Anadi Charan Sahu
35. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
36. Shri Manabendra Shah
37. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
#38. Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma
39. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
40. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
41. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
φ42. Dr. S. Venugopal
43. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
44. Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
♦ 45. Shri Harin Pathak
♥ 46. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
# Expired on 27th November, 2001.
φ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19th March, 2001 on being nominated to Committee on Human Resource Development.
♦ Nominated w.e.f. 20th February, 2001.
♥ Nominated w.e.f. 8th March, 2001.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE (2002)
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shrimati Basanti Sarma
3. Shri Kapil Sibal
4. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
5. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
6. Shri Kalraj Mishra
7. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
*9. Shri K.M. Saifullah
10. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
11. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain
*13. Shri C.M. Ibrahim
14. Shri Swaraj Kaushal
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani
♣ 16. Shri Lalu Prasad
♣ 17. Shri Motilal V ora
ϑ 18. Shrimati Ambika Soni
LOK SABHA
19. Shri Rajen Gohain
20. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
21. Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
22. Shri Anadi Sahu
23. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
24. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
25. Shri Vinay Katiyar
26. Shri Manabendra Shah
27. Sardar Buta Singh
28. Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
29. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
30. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
(iii)
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 9th April, 2002 on expiry of term as Member of Rajya Sabha.
♣ Nominated w.e.f. 22nd April, 2002.
ϑ Nominated w.e.f. 20th July, 2002.

31. Shri K. Karunakaran
32. Begum Noor Bano
33. Shri M.O.H. Farooq
34. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
35. Shri Subodh Ray
36. Shri B.V.N. Reddy
37. Shri Ramji Lal Suman
38. Shri Rammurti Singh Verma
∅ 39. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
40. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
41. Shri Adhi Sankar
42. Shri P.H. Pandian
43. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
44. Shri Holkhomang Haokip
45. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
46. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
α 47. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
β48. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
¥49. Shri Suresh Chandel
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
(iv)
∅ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 18th July, 2002.
α Nominated w.e.f. 25th February, 2002.
β Nominated w.e.f. 19th April, 2002.
¥ Nominated w.e.f. 2nd September, 2002.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Ninety-third Report on the Competition Bill, 2001
•.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred ♦♦  the
Competition Bill, 2001, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2001 and pending therein,
to the Committee on 21st August, 2001 for examination and report.
3.0. The Committee considered the Bill in twelve sittings held on 27th August, 14th September,
5th and 18th October, 5th and 6th November, 2001 and 24th January, 5th February, 6th June,
17th July, 1st and 12th August, 2002.
3.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 27th August, 2001 decided to issue a Press
Communique inviting suggestions/comments on the Bill from individuals/institutions/organisations
interested in the subject matter of the Bill within 15 days of its publication. The Press Communique
appeared in the leading newspapers on 10th September, 2001.
3.2 The Committee heard oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Company Affairs in its
sitting held on 14th September, 2001.
3.3 In its sitting held on 5th October, 2001, the Committee heard the views of Secretary,
Department of Consumer Affairs on the Bill.
3.4 The Committee undertook a study tour on 5th and 6th November, 2001, to Mumbai to seek
the views of Mumbai based major Chambers of Commerce and Industry and the Captains of
Industry on the Bill.
3.5. In its sitting held on 24th January, 2002, the Committee heard a detailed presentation by
Dr. S. Chakravarthy, Consultant in Department of Company Affairs.
3.6 The Chairman, along with some members of the Committee had informal interaction with
Mr. Evan R. Cox, Partner Covington and Burling, a leading Washington based Law Firm, on the
Bill on 15th February, 2002.
3.7 The Committee held further deliberations in its sittings held on 5th February and 6th June, 2002.
3.8 Consequent upon the transfer*** of Department of Company Affairs from the Ministry of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs to the Ministry of Finance, the Union Finance Minister wrote
a latter dated 9th July, 2002 to the Chairman of the Committee, requesting inter alia for the
expeditious disposal of the Bill and presentation of Report thereon by this Committee in view of
the significant impact of the legislation on the efficiency and productivity of the country’s
economy. The request was considered by the Committee in its sitting held on 17th July, 2002 and
the same was acceded to. Besides on a request received from the Secretary, Department of
Company Affairs, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha have in
• Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part-II, Section 2, dated 6th August, 2001.
♦♦ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, No. 39102. dated 21st August, 2001.
*** Vide Cabinet Secretariat circular No. 1/22/1/2002-Cab.(i) dated 2nd July, 2002.

consultation with each other have also agreed to defer the amendment to the Third Schedule to
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States so as to enable the
Committee to dispose the Bill.
3.9 In its sitting held on 1st August, 2002, the Committee,  accordingly, took up clause-
by-clause consideration of the Bill.
3.10 In its sitting held on 12th August, 2002, the Committee considered the draft Report on the
Bill and adopted the same.
3.11 In the sitting held on 12th August, 2002, the Committee also decided that the evidence
tendered before the Committee may be laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament.
4.0 The Committee invited suggestions/views of the major Chambers of Commerce and
Industry, such as Associated Chamber of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), PHD
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and
Industry (FICCI), Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BCCI) and Indian Merchant
Chamber (IMC); Non-Governmental Organisations like, Consumer Unity and Trust Society (CUTS),
Consumer Coordination Council (CCC), V oluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer Education
(VOICE), Professional bodies like, Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI); Institute of
Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) and Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India
(ICWAI); Financial Institutions such as Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) and Industrial
Credit and Investment Corporation of India (ICICI); Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI), National Stock Exchange (NSE) and Captains of Industry.
4.1. The Committee heard the views of the following seventeen organisations/associations as per
the schedule indicated below:
Organisation/Association Date
FICCI 5 October 2001
PHD CCI 5 October 2001
ASSOCHAM 5 October 2001
ICAI 18 October 2001
ICWAI 18 October 2001
ICSI 18 October 2001
CCC 18 October 2001
CUTS 18 October 2001
VOICE 18 October 2001
Bajaj Auto Ltd. 5 November 2001
Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. 5 November 2001
ICICI 5 November 2001
IDBI 5 November 2001
BCCI 6 November 2001
IMC 6 November 2001
SEBI 6 November 2001
NSE 6 November 2001
5.0 In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background note on
the Bill received form the Department of Company Affairs (Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
(vi)

Affairs), replies of the Department of Company Affairs to the queries raised by the Members in
the sittings of the Committee and comments of Department of Company Affairs on memoranda
received from individuals/organisations. The list of individuals/organisations is placed at
Annexure-II.
5.1 The Committee also relied on the following documents/papers while preparing the report:
(i) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969.
(ii) The Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
(iii) Report of the High Level Committee on Competition Policy and Law (2002)
(V olume I).
(iv) New Indian Competition Law on the Anvil by Dr S. Chakravarthy, Consultant in DCA.
(v) Extract from Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
Journal of Competition Law and Policy on Leniency Programme to Fight Hardcore
Cartels.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
12 August, 2002 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(vii)

1
REPORT
The Competition Bill, 2001 ( See Annexure-I) seeks to ensure fair competition in India by
prohibiting trade practices which cause appreciable adverse effect on competition in markets within
India.
1.1.0 For that purpose, the Bill seeks to put in place a body corporate called Competition
Commission of India  (hereinafter referred to as CCI) to undertake competition advocacy for
creating awareness on competition issues, in addition to its primary job of ensuring fair competition
in the country by enforcing competition law.
1.1.1 The Bill also creates a fund known as Competition Fund  (hereinafter referred to as CF)
for meeting the costs realised by CCI.
1.1.2 The Bill, accordingly, proposes to repeal Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as MRTP Act) as well as dissolve the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission (MRTPC).
2.0 The intent of enacting a new law on competition policy was announced by the Union
Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
1  (1999-2000) on 27 February, 1999, following which a High
Level Committee 2 consisting of experts under the Chairmanship of Shri S.V.S. Raghavan was set
up to examine the provisions of MRTP Act, 1969, and propose modem competition law in view
of liberalisation of Indian economy.
2.1 Before the High Level Committee, the Union Ministry of Commerce had set up an Expert
Group
3 headed by Dr. S. Chakravarthy, former Member, MRTPC, to study the interaction between
trade and competition, which had also suggested enactment of competition law on the basis of its
recommendations.
2.2 A concept Bill was drafted by the Department of Company Affairs and was put on the web-
site of Department of Company Affairs (.www.nic.in/dca) on 13 November, 2000 to elicit public
opinion thereon. After inter-ministerial consultations and consultations with Planning Commission
and major chambers (ASSOCHAM, CII, FICCI, PHDCII) and a few regulators, the Bill was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 6 August, 2001.
3.0 ‘Competition’ is an evasive term and is understood differently in different context. Further,
the Bill does not contain definition of the term ‘competition’. However, in the corporate world, the
1 Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act has become obsolete in certain areas in the light of international
economic developments relating to competition laws. We need to shift our focus from curbing monopolies to
promoting competition. Government has decided to appoint a committee to examine this range of issues and propose
a modem competition law suitable to our conditions. (Extracts from FM’s Budget Speech dated 27 February, 1999)
2 Nine member High Level Committee constituted on 25 October, 1999, submitted its Report on 22 May, 2000.
V olume-I of the Report is on Competition Policy and Law; V olume-II contains the concept Bill on Competition
policy christened as ‘Indian Competition Act -Draft Bill’.
3 The Expert Group was constituted as all off-shoot of the first WTO Ministerial Conference held at Singapore in
December 1996 for implementation of WTO agreement which submitted its Report in January, 1999. The Group
addressed issues related to competition: viz. (i) Mergers, Amalgamations, Acquisitions and Take-overs (ii) Intellectual
Property Rights (iii) Foreign Investment (iv) Anti-Dumping Measures, Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and
Safeguard Measures (v) State Monopolies, Exclusive Rights and Regulator Policies (vi) Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures (vii) Technical Barriers to Trade (viii) Professional Services (ix) Government Procurement (x) WTO
Provisions.

2
term is generally understood as a process whereby the economic enterprises compete with each
other to secure customers for their product. In the process the enterprises compete to outsmart
their competitors, sometimes to eliminate the rivals.
3.1 Competition is basically an economic rivalry amongst economic enterprises to control
greater market power. The competition is a situation where the market remains open to potential
new enterprises and that enterprises operate under the pressure of competition. Competition in the
sense of economic rivalry is unstable and has a natural tendency to give way to a monopoly. Thus
competition kills competition.
3.2 Competition amongst enterprises is divided into following two categories: -
➢ Price competition
4
➢ Non-price competition 5
3.3 The economic enterprises adopt two ways to outcompete other competitors i.e. (i) fair and
(ii) unfair. The competition is fair where two enterprises adopt fair means such as production of
fair goods/services, investment in research and development, etc. The competition is unfair where
an enterprise adopt Restrictive T rade Practices (RTPS)
6 such as predatory pricing, exclusive
dealing, resale-price maintenance and forming a cartel because RTPs have an appreciable adverse
effect on competition.
4.0 The objective of economic policy is to sustain competition culture in the country for
economic efficiency and maximization of public/consumer interest. Sustenance of competition
culture could be ensured by free and fair competition amongst economic enterprises. The Bill has
provision for ensuring fair competition by regulating/monitoring of behaviour of economic
enterprises.
Salient features of the Bill
4.1 Broadly the Bill has following main features:
➢ Prohibition of anti-competitive agreements;
➢ Prohibition of abuse of dominance;
➢ Regulation of Combinations (acquisitions, mergers and amalgamations of certain size);
➢ Establishment and composition of Competition Commission of India (CCI);
➢ Duties, Functions and Powers of CCI; and
➢ Formation of Competition Fund.
4 A process wherein the economic firms try to win over the customer by offering a product at a lower price than
the competitors thereby increasing its market share. (Monographs on Investment and Competition Policy (Vol. 6),
All about competition policy and law by CUTS, Jaipur, P.l).
5 A process wherein the economic firm adopts methods of sales promotion, advertisement, after sales service, etc.
The product differentiation is the main form of non-price competition. The product is basically the same but the
customer is persuaded to believe that the product is different by advertisement, promotional sale, difference in
packaging/design, etc. (ibid, p. 2)
6 RTP is a set of unfair means used by enterprises to distort or eliminate competition in order to acquire and abuse
monopoly power.

3
4.2 The Bill has a total of sixty-four clauses divided into seven chapters. Chapter-II of the Bill
(clauses 3-6) exclusively deals with the prohibition/regulation of RTPs.
4.3.0 The Bill prohibits the following broad RTPs which cause/likely to cause an appreciable
adverse effect on competition within India:—
➢ Anti-competitive agreements (clause 3);
➢ Abuse of Dominance (clause 4); and
➢ Combinations (clause 5).
Anti-competitive Agreement
4.3.1 Anti-competitive agreements amongst enterprises are of two types
• Horizontal7; and
• Vertical8.
4.3.2 The Bill enumerates the following kinds of horizontal agreements which are presumed to be
anti-competitive:—
➢ Agreements regarding prices: agreement that directly/indirectly fix purchase/sale price
(Sub-clause (3)(a) of clause 3);
➢ Agreements regarding quantities: agreement aimed at limiting/controlling production,
supply, markets, technical development and investment (Sub-clause (3)(b) of clause 3);
➢ Agreements regarding market sharing: agreements for sharing of markets by
geographical area, types of goods/services and number of customers (Sub-clause (3)(c)
of clause 3); and
➢ Agreements regarding bids (collusive tendering and bid rigging): tenders submitted as a
result of joint activity or agreement (Sub-clause (3)(d) of clause 3).
4.3.3 Such agreements may lead to cartel 9  which is pernicious. Further the aforesaid agreements
are considered to be illegal per se and do not require any test of “rule of reason” 10. Barring these
agreements all other would be subject to the ‘rule of reason’ test. The MRTP Act enlists 14 types
of agreements per se illegal under section 33 as compared to four in the Bill.
7 Agreement between two or more enterprises that are at the same stage of production chain and in the same market
and engaged in identical trade of goods or provision of service. It is between wholesalers or retailers or suppliers
dealing in same product Ex-suppliers of same products, agreed not to compete with each other.
8 Agreement between enterprises that are at different stages/levels of production chain in different market Ex-
agreement between producer and distributors.
9 Agreement (written, oral or even tacit) amongst competitors to stop competing with each other by controlling
production, distribution, sale, price of trade of goods or provision of services for the purpose of eliminating others.
Cartels can be domestic cartels (designed to control national market), or international cartels (aimed at capturing
international market), import cartels (aimed at restricting imports often obtaining lowest prices for imported raw
materials) or export cartels (directed at extracting highest possible prices from exports). But export cartels are
outside the purview of competition law in the interest of Balance of Trade and/or Balance of Payment although it
is against the concept of free competition.
10 Provision of per se  illegality rooted in the provisions of US Law and has parallel in most legislations on the
subject.

4
4.3.4 R TPs in the form of vertical agreements can also have appreciable anti-competitive effect
on competition. Following are the varieties of vertical agreements enumerated in sub-clause (4) of
clause 3:—
➢ Tie in arrangement
11
➢ Exclusive supply agreement 12;
➢ Exclusive distribution agreement 13;
➢ Refusal to deal 14; and
➢ Resale price maintenance 15
4.3.5 These agreements generally are not treated as anti-competitive per se as in the case of
horizontal agreements. These agreements have to be judged under the rule of reason test deciding
the matter on the basis of law, facts, etc. on the basis of any of six factors enlisted under clause
19(3) of the Bill. Such agreements often have to perform pro-competitive-function and considered
anti-competitive when one or more firm which are party to agreement have market power.
4.3.6 The High Level Committee had recommended that the provisions relating to anti-competitive
agreements would not apply to Intellectual Property.
Abuse of Dominance
4.3.7 The Abuse of Dominance has been detailed in clause 4 of the Bill. It is interesting to note
that the definition clause does not have the word ‘dominance’
16. But explanation to clause 4 has
defined the ‘dominant position’ 17  in the subjective term. It has been done in accordance with the
recommendations of High Level Committee. The Committee was of the view 18 that specifying a
threshold or arithmetical figure ( i.e. market share) for defining dominance may either allow the
offenders to escape or result in unnecessary litigation.
11 “tie-in arrangement” includes any agreement requiring a purchaser of goods, as a condition of such purchase, to
purchase some other goods;
12 “exclusive supply agreement” includes any agreement restricting in any manner the purchaser in the course of his
trade from acquiring or otherwise dealing in any goods other than those of the seller or any other person.
13 “exclusive distribution agreement” includes any agreement to limit, restrict or withhold the output or supply of
any goods or allocate any area or market for the disposal or sale of the goods.
14 “refusal to deal” includes any agreement which restricts, or is likely to restrict, by any method the persons or
classes of persons to whom goods are sold or from whom goods are bought;
15 “resale price maintenance” includes any agreement to sell goods on condition that the prices to be charged on the
resale by the purchaser shall be the prices stipulated by the seller unless it is clearly stated that prices lower than
those prices may be charged.
16 A dominant undertaking is one which is in a position of such economic strength that it can behave to an
appreciable extent, independently of its competitors and customers. ‘Dominance is determined by taking into
account one or more of the factors i.e. market share of the enterprise, size and resources of the enterprise, size and
importance of the competitors, Economic power of the enterprise with reference to patents, copyright, know-how
etc., dependence of consumers, monopoly status or dominance acquired as a result of any statute (like public sector
undertakings), entry barriers, countervailing buying powers and market structure and size of the market.
17 “dominant position” means a position of strength, enjoyed by an enterprise, in the relevant market, whether in
India or outside India, which enables it to-(i) operate independently of competitive forces prevailing in the relevant
market; or (ii) affect its competitiors or consumers or the relevant market in its favour.
18 High level Committee Report on Competition Policy and Law, p. 37.

5
4.3.8 Dominance can be determined in the context of relevant market 19 and on the basis of any
of the thirteen factors enlisted under clause 19 (4) of the Bill. A manual on ‘Abuse of Dominance’
will be prepared which would act as guidelines to the CCI.
4.3.9 The Bill does not consider dominance as RTP but its abuse. But there lies a thin difference
between the dominance and its abuse because dominance has the tendency to be abused. Abuse
of dominance occurs when an enterprise:
• Directly or indirectly imposes unfair purchase or selling prices including predatory
prices;
• Limits production, markets or technical development to the prejudice of the consumers;
• Indulges in action resulting in denial of market access;
• Makes contracts with obligations which have no connection with the subject of such
contracts; and
• Uses dominance in one market to move into or protect other markets.
Combinations
4.3.10 The Bill narrates two type of combinations:
• Acquisitions
• Mergers/Amalgamations
Further, the acquisition can be effected by enterprise or individual.
4.3.11 Mergers/Amalgamations
20 are of three types
• Horizontal
• Vertical
• Conglomerate
Horizontal and vertical mergers are based on the principles of horizontal and vertical agreements.
But conglomerate merger between enterprises is on/in diversified and unrelated business/market.
19 Relevant market to be determined by the Competition Authority (CCl) with reference to its dimensions i.e. (i)
relevant product market (ii) relevant geographical market. “Relevant geographic market” means a market comprising
the area in which the conditions of competition for supply of goods or provision of services or demand or goods or
services are distinctly homogenous and can be distinguished from the conditions prevailing in the neighbouring areas.
“Relevant product market” means a market comprising all those products or services which are regarded as
interchangeable or substitutable by the consumer, by reason of characteristic of the products or services their prices
and intended use;
The Commission shall while determining the “relevant geographic market”, have due regard to all or any of the
following factors namely:- (a) regulatory trade barriers (b) local specification requirements (c)national procurement
policies (d) adequate distribution facilities (e) transport costs (f) language (g) consumer preterences (h) need for
secure, regular supplies or rapid after-sales services.
The Commission shall, while determining the “relevant product market”, have due regard to all or any of the
following factors, namely, (a) physical characteristics or end-use of goods (b) price of goods or service (c) consumer
preferences (d) exclusion of in-house production (e) existence of specialized producers (f) classification of industrial
products.
20 Merger/Amalgamation is a fusion between two or more enterprises where identity of one or more is lost and
results in single enterprise.

6
4.3.11 The Bill has provisions of threshold requirement in terms of assets 21/turnover rather than on
market share of enterprises.
4.3.12 The proposed law is not against every acquisition, merger or amalgamation, but it refers
only to those acquisitions, mergers and amalgamations, which are of a certain prescribed size i.e.,
size in terms of (a) assets or (b) turnover. Acquisition, merger or amalgamation would become
‘combination’ when it crosses a certain threshold limit which is presented in the accompanying
table.
TABLE-I
Nature of Group Criterion V alue
Combination Status
(a) Acquisition by No Group Assets In India Rs.l,000 cr
enterprises W orld over US$500 million
(b) Acquisition by Turnover In India Rs.3,000 cr.
individuals W orld over US$1500 million
(c) Mergers/ Group Assets In India Rs.4,000 cr.
amalgamation W orld over US$ 2 billion
Turnover In India Rs.12,000 cr.
World over $6 billion
The threshold limit of asset would be revised every two years on the basis of Wholesale Price
Index (WPI).
4.3.13 The proposed law narrates the requirement of prior notification
22 to the CCI by the
enterprises crossing the laid down threshold limit for the combination although it is not mandatory.
The Bill has also prescribed time-frame of ninety working days for approval of such combinations
by CCI in the case of prior notification. If the Commission does not take any action thereon it
is deemed to be approved by the CCI.
4.3.14 The CCI on the basis of any of the thirteen factors enlisted under clause 20(4) will
determine whether any combination has appreciable adverse effect on competition, through its
Merger Benches.
4.3.15 The Bill also lays down a time frame for the CCI to investigate into combinations having
adverse effect on competition suo moto or on any complaint. The time frame of ninety working
days is counted from the date of publication of such combination under the direction of CCI by
the party.
21 The value of assets shall be determined by taking the book value of the assets as shown, in the audited books of
account of the enterprise, in the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which the date of
proposed merger falls, as reduced by any depreciation, and the value of assets shall include the brand value, value
of goodwill, or value of copyright. patent, permitted use, collective mark, registered proprietor, registered trade
mark, registered user, homonymous geographical indication, geographical indications, design or layout-design or
similar other commercial rights, if any referred to in sub-section (5) of section 3.
22 US and European Union (EU) laws require prior approval for mergers above certain threshold limits. The extant
UK law does not prescribe any such prior notification.

7
Competition Commission of India (CCI)
4.4.0 The Bill provides for setting up of a competition law authority christened as Competition
Commission of India (CCI) for the administration and enforcement of competition law in India.
4.4.1 Out of a total of sixty four clauses, fifty-six clauses (clauses 7 to 52) deal with the matters
relating to composition, duties, powers and functions of the CCI.
4.4.2 The CCI will have perpetual succession. It would comprise of a whole time Chairperson
and not less than two and not more than ten whole time members 23. The qualifications 24 for both
Chairperson and Members are same [clause 8 (2)] whereas their age, salary and status are different
[clauses 10(1) and 14] in the Bill. The age of Chairperson is seventy years and the salary of that
of a Judge of the Supreme Court whereas the age of the Members of CCI is sixty-five years and
salary of that of a Judge of a High Court.
4.4.3 The Chairman and Members of the CCI would be selected through a collegium [clause 9
(1)] consisting of–
(a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee;
(b) the Union Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Finance;
(c) the Union Minister in-charge of the Ministry or Department dealing with this Act;
(d) the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India; and
(e) The Cabinet Secretary.
4.4.4 As enumerated in chapter IV (clauses 18-40) of the Bill, the CCI will have the following
powers:
• to issue “Cease and Desist” Orders.
• to giant such interim relief as would be necessary in each case.
• to award compensation
• to impose fines on the guilty
• to order division of dominant undertaking to order de-merger.
• to order costs for frivolous complaints
In addition to the adjudicatory function, the CCI will have the roles of advocacy, investigation,
prosecution and merger control.
4.4.5 Unlike the MRTPC, which is a unitary Tribunal, the CCI would have Benches for
distribution of its powers amongst those (clause 23). The Chairperson of the CCI is empowered
to constitute Benches (Additional/Merger) consisting of two members of CCI (one of them being
judicial member). Principal Bench and each Additional Bench will deal with the competition matters
whereas the Merger Benches will exclusively handle merger/amalgamation cases discussed under
23 In the first year of establishment of CCI, only one member will be appointed.
24 The Chairperson and every other Member shall be the persons of ability, integrity and standing, who-(a) are, or
have been, or are qualified to be, Judge of High Court; or (b) have special knowledge of, and professional experience
in, not less than fifteen years, international trade, economics, business, commerce, law, finance, accountancy,
management, industry, public affairs, administration or III any other matter which, in the opinion of the Central
Government. be useful to the Commission.

8
clauses 5 and 6 of the Bill. The Principal Bench will be presided over by the Chairperson of the
CCI. The Additional Benches will have independent character vis-a-vis Principal Bench. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Principal Bench as well as Additional Benches can appeal to the
Supreme Court.
4.4.6 The CCI would be assisted by a Director-General (DG) and host of Additional, Joint,
Deputy and Assistant Directors-General in conducting inquiry into any contravention of provisions
of the Act, who would be appointed by the Union Government.
4.4.7 The DG would not have suo moto power of investigation as in the case of DGIR of
MRTPC. The DG in the present scheme would conduct investigation into the cases referred to it
by the CCI and would report its findings to the CCI.
4.4.8 The CCI would also be assisted by a Registrar and other officers and staff who would be
appointed by the CCI itself.
4.4.9 The CCI would conduct inquiry into alleged contravention of Competition Law on its own
or on receipt of complaint from any person/consumer/association or on a reference made by
Central/State Governments or a statutory Authority and adjudicate upon the same through its
Benches. In addition to investigation and adjudicatory functions, the CCI will also have the function
of prosecution and competition advocacy.
4.4.10 The CCI is required to take suitable measures for the promotion of Competition Advocacy
through training and creating awareness under clause 47. Further, the Union Government while
formulating policy may make a reference to the CCI for its opinion on possible effects of the
policy on the competition. The CCI is required to give its opinion thereon within sixty days.
4.4.11 The orders of the CCI is appealable to the Supreme Court within 60 days from the date
of communication of the decision/order of the CCI. (clause 40)
4.4.12 Accounts of the CCI would be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General and its
reports would be laid every year on the Tables of both Houses of Parliament.
4.5.0 A Competition Fund would be constituted under clause 49 of the Bill to meet various
expenses of CCI including payments of salaries to Chairperson, Members, Director-General,
Additional, Joint; Deputy and Assistant Directors-General, Registrar and other staff of the CCI. The
Competition Fund would have two sources i.e. grant of money
25 from Consolidated Fund of India
duly voted by Parliament and costs/fees received from parties. The idea behind the composition of
the Competition Fund is to ensure certain measure of autonomy to the CCI in its functioning. The
flexibility available for receiving costs and fees is another reason for constituting a separate Fund
instead of making the expenses directly chargeable on the Consolidated Fund of India.
5.0 The history of Competition Law dates back to the 1860’s and 1870’s when American States
(USA) enacted “anti-trust”
26 laws. These culminated in the Sherman Act of 1890. This was
followed by the enactment of the Clayton Act and the Federal Trade Commission Act in 1915.
Subsequent to this, the Robinson Patman Act, 1936 and the Celler Kefauver Act, 1950 were
enacted.
25 Similar type of fund getting grants from the CFI duly voted by Parliament exist in the Acts viz. (a) The Jute
Manufacturers Development Council Act, 1983 (Section 10) (b) The Agriculture and Processed Food Products
Export Development Authority Act, 1985 (Section 16) (c) The Spices Board Act. 1986 (Section 21) (d) The
National Oilseeds and V egetable Oils Development Board Act, 1983 (Section 12)
26 The use of the word ‘trust’ to denote a monopoly is peculiar to the U.S. and has persisted for historical reasons.

9
5.1 In 1980, less than forty countries had Competition Law, currently one hundred countries
have Competition Law. One of the most recent enactments is the UK law — the Competition
Act, 1998 — which came into force on 1 March, 2000. The new Act is more closely in tune with
the Competition Law of the European Commission. Nearly all laws deal with horizontal/vertical
agreement, monopoly, abuse of dominance and regulated by Competition Authority
27.
6.0 The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (MRTP Act) is regarded as the
extant Competition Law of India. It derived its mandate from the Directive Principles of State
Policy (Arts.38 and 39) of the Indian Constitution.
6.1 The High Level Committee has observed that the MRTP is limited in its sweep and in the
present competitive milieu it fails to fulfil the need of competition law.
6.2 The major differences between the MRTP Act, 1969, and proposed competition law are
given in the accompanying Table.
TABLE–II
MRTP ACT, 1969 NEW DRAFT COMPETITION LAW
1. Based on the pre-reforms scenario Based on the post-reforms scenario
2. Based on size as a factor Based on structure as a factor
3. Competition offences implicit of not Competition offences explicit and defined
defined
4. Complex in arrangement and language Simple in arrangement and language and
easily comprehensible
5. 14 per se  offences negating the principles 4 per se  offences. All the rest subjected
natural justice to rule of reason.
6. Frowns upon dominance Frowns upon abuse of dominance
7. Registration of agreements compulsory No requirement of registration of
agreements
8. No regulation on combinations Combinations regulated beyond a high
threshold limit.
9. MRTPC appointed by the Government CCI selected by a Collegium
10. V ery little administrative and financial Relatively more autonomy for the CCI
autonomy for the MRTPC
11. No competition advocacy role for the CCI has competition advocacy role
MRTPC
12. No penalties for offences Penalties for offences
13. Reactive and rigid Proactive and flexible
14. Unfair trade practices covered Unfair trade practices omitted (consumer
fora will deal with them)
27 Korea, and Sri Lanka (Fair Trading Commission) in poland (Anti-monopoly Office).

10
6.3 The Ministry has submitted that in view of the policy shift from curbing monopolies to
promoting competition, there was a need to repeal the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act. Hence, the present competition law proposed to be brought in, aims at doing away with the
rigidly structured MRTP Act and given following reasons for the repeal of MRTP Act. All pending
cases
28 relating to Unfair Trade Practices (UTP) would be transferred to National Consumer Forum
and cases relating to Restrictive Trade Practices (RTPs) and Monopolistic Trade Practices (MTPs)
would be transferred to the CCI.
6.4 Pending cases pertaining to Unfair Trade Practices other than those relating to tie-in sales,
purchases or cases falling under clause (x) of sub-section (1) of Section 36A, of the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1969 shall stand transferred to the National Commission
constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
7.0 The Bill describes the CCI as a body corporate {(clause 7(2)}, and a quasi-judicial body
(Statement of Objects and Reasons) whereas it has pre-requisites of a full fledged judicial body
{clause 36(2)}. The Committee wanted to know the exact status of the CCI.
7.1 The Ministry in their written submission has clarified that the Bill describes the CCI as a
body corporate for certain specific purposes like having perpetual succession, a common seal and
power to acquire, hold and dispose of movable and immovable properties, although normally body
corporate connotes a company.
7.2 As to the status of the CCI being a quasi-judicial or judicial body, the four prerequisites of
a judicial body as enumerated in a decision laid down by King’s Bench in Copper vs. Wilson {(l937)
2KB, 309}, were brought to the notice of the Department for their comments. The Ministry has
admitted in their written submission that the Bill (clauses 36
29 read with clause 40 30) makes it closer
to a full-fledged judicial body. The CCI has specific adjudicatory function in relation to abuse of
dominance and anti-competitive agreement and on combinations under clause 27 and 31,
respectively. The decision of CCI has extra-territorial reach under clause 32. Clause 36(3) says that
the proceedings before the CCI would be judicial proceedings. The CCI can detain a person in civil
prison for specific purposes. Thus the Ministry is of the opinion that it is a judicial body.
7.3 In contradistinction to the Statement of Objects and Reasons which describes CCI as’
a quasi-judicial body, the Department has now submitted that it is a judicial body. Besides,
the Department, having admitted the apparent contradiction, has also submitted that CCI
can sue or be sued. Here, the Committee wishes to point out that a judicial body never
needs to sue anybody but it can issue orders for compliance. Suing means filing litigation
against an opposite party before another judicial body to ventilate grievances. CCI
admittedly a judicial body shall not require to sue anyone because that is not permissible
in law. Hence, it can also not be sued.
7.4 The Committee notes that there is a difference between the Chairperson and Members of
the CCI insofar as their status and remuneration are concerned whereas there is no difference
28 As on 31.05.2002, 3946 cases are pending with MRTPC. Cases at complaint stage with MRTPC would be
abated.
29 Clause 36(2) confers power on the CCI, as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure in
respect of (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the
discovery and production of documents; (c) receiving evidence on affidavits; (d) issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses or documents; (e) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or document from any office; (t)
dismissing an application in default or deciding it ex parte.
30 Any person aggrieved by the decision/order of the CCI can appeal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the
grounds specified in Section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code. 1908.

11
between them in relation to their qualifications. In this context, the Committee wanted to know
why the age cap of 70 years and status of a Supreme Court Judge is stipulated for Chairperson
in the Bill in the light of the fact that the age of retirement of Supreme Court Judge including the
Chief Justice of India is 65 years.
7.5 The Ministry has submitted in their written submission that conferment of status of a
Supreme Court Judge on the Chairperson is designed to attract eminent persons including from
sitting/retired Judges from Supreme Court/High Court. Further the age cap of 70 years for
Chairperson and 65 years for Members is in. line with some other extant Tribunals like the National
Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
(NCDRC) although MRTP Act has the age cap of 65 years for the Chairman and Members. The
higher age cap is meant for inviting eminent persons with experience to the CCI. The Competition
Law is a socio-economic legislation and it may not be necessary to have the Chairperson, only
from the judiciary. In U.K. for instance, an industrialist is the Chairperson of the Competition Law
Authority. The higher judiciary, namely, the Supreme Court and the High Courts may be expected
to countenance a Chairperson, not from the judiciary, as the Selection Committee for selecting the
Chairperson consists of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court or his/her nominee.
7.6 Having noted the logic submitted for the higher age cap for the Chairperson, the
Committee points out that the MRTP Act lays down different qualifications for both the
Chairperson as well as Members. The Chairperson of the MRTPC can-be exclusively from
the Judiciary whereas its Members can be from any other prescribed fields. However, in
sharp contrast to this, same set of qualifications is proposed to be laid down both for the
Chairperson as well as Members of the Competition Commission of India (CCI). Here, the
Committee would like to emphasize that the Chairperson of CCI should be exclusive from
its Members not just in respect of age, status and salary but also in that of qualifications.
CCI being a judicial body, should be headed by a Judicial Member. Insofar as Members are
concerned, they may be appointed from amongst persons having special knowledge in the
prescribed fields as proposed in the Bill. Therefore, the Committee is of the considered view
that the Chairperson of the CCI should be from amongst the serving or retired Judges of
the High Courts.
7.7 The Committee wanted to know about the fate of the Chairman and Members, Officers and
Staff of the MRTPC.
7.8 The Department has stated that Clause 64 extensively deals with the fate of the employees
of the MRTPC after the coming into force of the CCI The Chairman and Members of the MRTPC
shall stand terminated with compensation not exceeding three months’ pay and allowances. The
Director General of investigation and Registration; Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee who has been,
immediately before the dissolution of the MRTPC, employed on regular basis by the MRTPC, shall
become, on and from such dissolution, the officer and employees, respectively, of the Central
Government with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like matters as
would have been admissible to him if the rights in relation to such MRTPC had not been
transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government and shall continue to do so unless and until
his employment in the Central Government is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and
conditions of employment are duly altered by that Government. The officer on deputation basis
should be reverted to his parent cadre. Deputationists include both the incumbents recruited on the
basis of All India level selection by UPSC or otherwise.
7.8.1 While taking note of the reply of the Department of Company Affairs regarding the
fate of the officers and staff of the MRTPC after its dissolution and the assurance given
by the Secretary, Department of Company Affairs vis-a-vis  safeguarding the services of

12
these employees, the Committee is strongly of the view that interests of the employees of
MRTPC should be fully protected. Similarly, the Committee is also of the view that
deputationists with MRTPC recruited by the UPSC should be retained in the CCI keeping
in view their qualifications, experience and the expertise gained by them over a period of
time through their association with MRTPC. It is of the opinion that services of these
personnel selected by the apex recruitment body of the country may be of immense help
to the CCI especially during its infancy.
7.9 A view was expressed in the Committee that Competition Law may wait till the pre-requisite
in the form of reforms in other areas come in place.
7.10 The Department has stated that in the Budget Speech of the Finance Minister in the
year 2001, a slew of policy measures relating to some of the areas mentioned above was
announced. Many of them are under process and will take a little more time before they are
finalised and implemented. But the enactment of Competition Law cannot wait till all the reforms
are in place. A regulator is required to deal with anti-competitive practices that often prevail in the
market place. It is, therefore, felt that the wide ranging economic reforms and the enactment of
the Competition Law must be in tandem and proceed hand-in-hand. .
7.11 The Committee wanted to know whether the price preference and purchase preference
given to Public Enterprises would be in harmony with the Competition Bill.
7.12 The Department has submitted that price preference as practised earlier has been largely
given up by the Government. In so far as purchase preference is concerned, Government gives
an opportunity to the public enterprises to match their prices with the lowest private party’s offer.
Strictly speaking, it is an anti-competitive practice to give purchase or price preferences. But the
purchase preference system, presently in vogue is only for a limited period (two years or so ending
in 2003).
7.13 The Committee pointed out that clauses 53 and 54 of the Bill gave enormous powers to the
Government, in terms of giving directions on policies to the CCI and of superseding the CCI in
special circumstances. The Committee felt that such sweeping powers of the Government would
undermine the independence of the CCI.
7.14 The Department has replied that the independence of the Commission is not likely to be
undermined as the Central Government under section 53 can give directions on the question of
policy only, that too, as far as practicable, after giving an opportunity to the Commission to
express its views. The provisions of section 54 are to ensure that the Commission performs the
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of the Act. The Government may have security
concerns or reason of public interest, on account of which intervention/direction becomes
necessary. Similar provisions exists in the following acts:—
(i) National Highway Authority of India Act, 1988, (Section 33).
(ii) “T elecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, (Section 25).
(iii) National T rust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral, Palsy, Mental
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999, (Section 28).
(iv) Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 (Section 40).
It may be mentioned that Government rarely resorts to such extraordinary powers, and if it does,
its decisions are subject to examination in the media, Parliamentary scrutiny and judicial review.
7.15 Clause 52 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to exempt a class of enterprises
from the application of the Competition Law in public interest. The Committee regards it to be too
wider.

13
7.16 The Department has stated that public interest and consumer interest are not synonymous.
The Competition Bill, in most of its provisions, gives consumer interest primacy and place of pride.
But there could be occasions and circumstances, when public interest may have a larger relevance
than consumer interest. For instance, global competition may extinguish the domestic industries in
a particular sector, for various reasons. In such a circumstance, in terms of cost benefit analysis,
if the damage to public interest, namely, the larger society, is very significant, Government should
have the power to exempt that sector (a class of enterprises) from the operation of Competition
Law. Such protection will normally be for a limited period, to enable the particular sector to accept
the challenge of competition, become competitive and compete domestically and globally. Hence,
the expression “public interest” in Clause 52 of the Bill Clause 52 provides for the Government to
exempt any class of enterprises, in public interest, for such period as it may specify. Small-scale
industries can be given protection under this Clause. The Government will be free to determine the
period of exemption as the circumstances warrant.
7.17 A view was expressed that extra-territorial jurisdiction of the Competition Law may hinder
foreign investment.
7.18 The Department has replied that extra-territorial jurisdiction is provided in many competition
jurisdictions. Extra-territorial reach of the Competition Law is essentially to curb foreign companies
from indulging in anti-competitive practices, if such practices have an appreciable adverse effect
on competition in the relevant market in India. This provision is not likely to hinder foreign
investment.
7.19 A view was also expressed that 10 Members for the CCI were too less. Clause 8 may be
amended to provide for a maximum of 30 members. Regional Benches should also be specified in
the Bill.
7.20 The Department has stated that for the present, as the law is new and some of its features
are to be enforced for the first time, it is a learning process. The cap of 10 members provided
in Clause 8 is adequate for the time being. Depending upon the experience of the CCI, the cap
can be increased later.
7.21 A Member has pointed out that the present Bill under Clause 64 (4) proposes to transfer
cases relating to Unfair Trade Practices pending before the MRTPC to National Commission
constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. All cases relating to Restrictive Trade
Practices and Monopolistic Trade Practices pending before MRTPC will be transferred to the CCI
after the commencement of the Competition Act. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 as well as
Consumer Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2002, presently pending before the Rajya Sabha for
approval of the amendment made by the Lok Sabha therein, have the definition of RTP implying
thereby that the Consumer Fora will also adjudicate cases relating to RTPs along with UTPs. After
the enactment of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2002 and the Competition Bill, 2001,
the RTPs will be decided by two forums i.e. CCI and Consumer Fora which will be an overlapping
of jurisdiction.
7.22 The Committee desires that the Department of Company Affairs may in consultation
with Department of Consumer. Affairs bring harmony between Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 and the Competition Bill to avoid overlapping of jurisdiction between the CCI and
Consumer fora.
7.23 Broadly two different views emerged in the Committee on the basic philosophy of the
Bill. A shade of opinion in the Committee contends that by enacting the Bill at this stage,
India would lose its bargaining power at the WTO negotiations. In that context it is
suggested that the Bill should not be enacted till 1 January, 2005 by which time decisions
on issues like competition policy, trade and investment and related matters would be

14
decided. Another point of view against the Bill was that Indian Industry, both private and
public sectors, need certain safeguards and protection for a certain period. The present Bill
takes away all such safeguards and protection. This Bill would allow MNCs to capture Indian
industry and services sector . Therefore, it is s uggested that there is no hurry in passing the
Bill and that MRTP Act may be suitably amended to meet the requirements of the present
time.
7.24 The other shade of opinion favours the passage of the Bill. It is of the view that
MRTP Act is based on old economic theory which is no longer efficacious-enough to check
the onslaught of foreign companies against Indian companies. Besides, being a signatory to
WTO agreements, India has to keep pace with the changing global economic environment.
This apart, public sector and Government Departments engaged in the activities enumerated
in Clause 2(g) should be exposed to competition as it will be in the larger interest of the
consumers. Similarly, small-scale sector is also not proving beneficial to the consumers
because of high cost of its products which is largely due to poor economy of scale as well
as technological obsolescence. Therefore, small-scale sector, too, should be exposed to
competition. This exposure of Indian industry to competition will herald the transition of an
old economy to a new economy based on the new economic doctrine being pursued in the
country for over last one decade. This transition will not only help Indian economy to adapt
itself to changing environment but will also produce wealth and employment.
8.0 Substantive points from the suggestions* made by the witnesses and organisations/
individuals in response to Press Communique and while deposing before the Committee, are enlisted
as under:—
(i) Major Chambers such as ASSOCHAM, BCCI stressed the need for the cooling period
of at least 15 to 18 months after the enactment of new law;
(ii) FIC CI, Bajaj Auto Ltd. and Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. opposed the enactment of
new law and suggested amendments to MRTP Act, 1969;
(iii) Reliance Industries Limited was of the view that a simple Competition Law should
be introduced at this stage. A stricter competition and merger control laws, as
proposed, may be adopted much later after the economy and companies have
reached a position where it could sustain such restrictions imposed by the
Competition Law. It would be advisable to appropriately time the implementation of
provisions relating to regulation of combinations so as to provide adequate time to
Indian Companies to grow/develop and to compete with the foreign multinational
companies in Indian market as well as in global market.
(iv) BCCI, T ata Sons Ltd., IMC, CCC and CUTS welcomed the introduction of new law;
(v) Tata Sons Ltd. opined that the Government should initiate signing MoUs with WTO
member countries to regulate cross border mergers and acquisition and which the
Government has agreed to enact in due course;
(vi) Government activities except the sovereign functions of the State would fall under
the ambit of the CCl. Sovereign functions of the State in relation to CCI may be
properly defined;
(vii) Reference to predatory pricing may be the deleted as it could be the source of
confusion when applied by the regulator;
* Reliance Industries Ltd. and Tata Sons Ltd. submitted only written memoranda which are placed at Annexure III.

15
(viii) Desired modification in the definition of dominant position, abuse of dominance and
predatory price;
(ix) Fixing of assets and turnover thresholds for determining combination need relook in
view of global competitiveness;
(x) Since Banks and FIs are regulated, governed and supervised by regulators such as
RBI, SEBI and Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRDA), mergers of Banks FIs and
mutual funds may not be provided in the Bill so as to keep the issue of combinations
of Banks and FIs with the respective regulators;
(xi) Medical and Legal profession to be covered under the scope of definition of service;
(xii) Acquisitions, mergers, takeovers should be out of the Bill;
(xiii) Unfair pricing concept as discussed in clause 4(2) (a) of the Bill is non-workable
and may be deleted as practised by European Commission and the United States of
America;
(xiv) The dominant position outside India may deter MNCs to tie with Indian firms and
thus the explanation (a) to Clause 4 may be amended;
(xv) Standard of assessing combination is flawed. Therefore, opposed the concept of
combination. Asset tests to determine combination, has no significance for market
analysis;
(xvi) In the consideration of group exercising voting right, not less than 50% of the
voting should be considered instead of 26% or more;
(xvii) V alue of Intellectual Property needs to be excluded from assets as the valuation of
these assets is complex;
(xviii) Suggested certificate of valuation of assets by a Chartered Accountant;
(xix) Size of enterprise cannot be sole criterion for determining a combination, other
factors such as market share in the relevant product and geographic market are
equally relevant;
(xx) Mandatory prenotification of merger;
(xxi) Exemption of mergers and amalgamations carried out under sections 391-396 of the
Companies Act;
(xxii) Nomination of President of one of the Chambers (FICCI/ICAI/ICSI/ICWAI/Bar
Council of India) as the member of Selection Committee;
(xxiii) Permanent Advisory Council to the Commission;
(xxiv) Establishment of Research Institution to study various aspects of Competition Law;
(xxv) Professionals such as Chartered Accountant, Company Secretary, Advocate to be
appointed to the posts of Director General and Additional, Joint, Deputy, Assistant
Directors General instead of relying on deputationist from Government Departments;
(xxvi) It is practically impossible to unscramble the merger once approved by the High
Court as huge stamp duty required to be paid on court orders approving mergers
and amalgamation;
(xxvii) The Director-General’s suo moto powers to investigate cases as in MRTPC may be
brought back;

16
(xxviii) Publication of Director-General’s report only when the CCI agrees with the
conclusions;
(xxix) Exemption to the nominee director from punitive provisions of the Bill; and
(xxx) Effective check on dumping by the Competition law to protect consumer interest.
8.1.0 The Department has responded to all the suggestions listed above.
8.1.1 In response to suggestion listed at (i) the Ministry in their written submission has outlined
the phases for the implementation of the said law after enactment which as follows:
First year – Competition advocacy and training for officers and staff of CCI
Second year – Provisions relating to anti competitive practice and abuse of
dominance to be brought into force
Third year – provisions relating to combination to be brought into force.
8.1.2 In response to suggestion listed at (v), the Department has stated that the sovereign
function occuring in clauses 2 (g) and 52 generally relate to atomic energy, defence, army etc.
Moreover the test for determining sovereign function of Government laid down by the Supreme
Court
31 is bindings on the CCI.
8.1.3 As to the suggestions at (xxii) and (xxiii), the Department has replied that they would
examine than in due course. In response to the suggestions at (xxiv), the Department has agreed
to appoint professionals to the post of Director General from the Government Departments on
deputation
9.0 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in the presence of
Secretary, Department of Company Affairs and officers of Legislative Department and Department
of Legal Affairs. The Committee considered amendments proposed by the Department in the
clauses in the light of suggestions received from witnesses and others and accepted those
without any modifications. Further, the Committee also recommended amendments of its
own in two clauses. Those clauses where amendments have been accepted/proposed by the
Committee are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
Clause 2
9.1.0 The clause defines various expressions used in the Bill.
9.1.1 A suggestion has been received that the words “is proposed to be, engaged in any activity”
in the definition of ‘enterprise’ in sub clause (g) of the clause appears to be confusing and thus
may be deleted. The Department has agreed to delete those words appearing in second line of the
Sub-clause.
9.1.2 Another suggestion received from a witness and agreed to by the Government pertains to
sub-clause (t). In the sub-clause defining service, only one professional service i.e. accounting has
been included whereas medical and legal services are excluded. As per the amendment proposed
by the Department of Company Affairs, the expression “accounting” would be deleted.
9.1.3 The Committee agrees to the proposed amendments.
31 Agriculture Produce Market Committee vs. Ashok Harikuj (2002) 8 SCC 61 and Nagendra Rao and CO. vs. State
of Andhra Pradesh (1994) 6 SCC., 205

17
9.1.4 The clause is adopted as amended.
Clause 3
9.2.0 The clause, inter alia, provides for prohibition of entering into anti-competitive agreements.
Any enterprise or association of enterprises or person or association of persons to enter into an
agreement in respect of production, supply, storage, distribution, acquisition or control of goods
or provision of services which causes or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on
competition within India, shall be void. The clause also specifies certain activities which shall be
presumed to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition and also specifies certain
agreements which shall be in contravention of sub-clause (1) of the said clause if such agreement
causes appreciable adverse effect on competition. The provisions of this clause shall not apply to
certain rights specified in sub-clause (5) of this clause.
9.2.1 A suggestion has been received that any of the four per se offences may have negative
effect on desirable joint venture. Thus a proviso may be added to exempt such joint ventures from
per se offences.
9.2.2 The Department of Company Affairs has agreed to add proviso to sub-clause (3) of the
clause to the effect that the genuine joint venture would be exempted from per se offence but
would be examined on the basis of rule of reason.
9.2.3 Another suggestion has been received to add the words “in India” after the words “adverse
effect on competition” in sub clause (4) of the clause.
9.2.4 The Department of Company Affairs has agreed to the suggestion and proposed to bring
an amendment to that effect.
9.2.5 Another suggestion has been received to give blanket exemption to Intellectual Property
Rights (IPRs).
9.2.6 The Department of Company Affairs after examining the suggestion has felt that clause 4(6)
of the Concept Bill which permits the application of competition law to examine any unreasonable
conditions that may be imposed by the right holder while exploiting his/her rights, may be
incorporated in the present Bill.
9.2.7 The Committee agrees to the proposed amendments in the clause.
9.2.8 Subject to the amendments proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 4
9.3.0 The clause prohibits abuse of dominant position by any enterprise. Such abuse of dominant
position, inter alia, includes imposition, either directly or indirectly, of unfair or discriminatory
purchase or selling prices or conditions, including predatory prices of goods or service, limiting
production or restricting of goods or provision of services, indulging in practices resulting in denial
of market access, making the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by other parties of
supplementary obligations and using dominant position in one market to enter into or protect other
market.
9.3.1 Clause 4(2) states that discriminatory pricing shall be an abuse of a dominant position. The
clause introduces the term ‘discrimination’ without any additional guidance. A suggestion was made
to add a proviso to make the expression clear.
9.3.2 The Department has agreed to add a proviso to clarify that it shall not be violation of this
sub-section if an enterprise applies dissimilar prices or conditions for objectively justifiable reasons
unrelated to maintaining or extending a dominant position, but related to meeting competition.

18
9.3.3 Another suggestion has been received for deleting the words “or outside India” in
Explanation (a) to clause 4(2) (e) not to discourage an Indian company having a position/strength
outside India by the competition law of India.
9.3.4 The Department has agreed for the deletion of such words in Explanation (a) to clause
4(2)(e).
9.3.5 The Committee agrees to the proposed amendment.
9.3.6 Subject to the amendments proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 8
9.4.0 The clause states that the Commission shall consist of the Chairperson and not less than
two and not more than ten other Members as may be specified by the Central Government. The
clause also delineates qualifications of Chairperson/Members of the CCI under which a person who
is or has been or is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court or is having special knowledge of,
and professional experience in, not less than fifteen years in international trade, economics,
business, commerce, law finance, accountancy, management, industry, public affairs, administration
or in any other matter which, in the opinion of the Central Government, be useful to the
Commission, shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairperson or as a Member.
9.4.1 The Committee desires that the Chairperson of the CCI should be a person from
Judiciary i.e. a serving/retired Judge of a High Court. Thus qualifications for the office of
Chairperson should be different from Members of the CCI.
9.4.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clause 9
9.5.0 The clause, inter alia, provides that the appointment of the Chairperson and Members of
the Commission, shall be made by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Selection
Committee consisting of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee, the Union Minister in-charge
of the Ministry of Finance, the Union Minister in-charge of the Ministry or Department of the
Central Government dealing with the proposed legislation, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of
India and the Cabinet Secretary.
9.5.1 The Committee is of the view that keeping the Minister-in-charge of Ministries in
the Selection Committee may lead to executive interference.
9.5.2 The Department has, accordingly, proposed change in the composition of the Selection
Committee as below:
Provision in the Bill Proposed Changes
Chairperson – Chief Justice of India or his CJI or his nominee
nominee
Member – Union Minister-in-charge of the Secretary, Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Finance
Member – Union Minister-in-charge of the Secretary, Department
Ministry/Department dealing with the Act of Company Affairs
Member – The Governor, Reserve Secretary, Ministry of Labour
Bank of India.
Member – The Cabinet Secretary Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs/ Legislative Department.

19
9.5.3 The Committee approves the suggested changes in the Selection Committee for
proposing the names of Chairperson and members of the CCI to Union Government.
9.5.4 Subject to the amendments proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 10
9.6.0 This clause, inter alia, provides for the term of office of the Chairperson and other
Members. No Chairperson shall hold office after he attains the age of seventy years and no other
Member shall hold office after he attains the age of sixty-five years.
9.6.1 The Department has proposed to lower the age cap of the Chairperson of the CCl from 70
to 67 years as has been done in the case of the proposed National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT)
under the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001.
9.6.2 The Committee notes the proposal of the Department.
9.6.3 Subject to the amendment proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 11
9.7.0 The clause, inter alia, contains provisions relating to resignation, removal and suspension
of the Chairperson and other Members. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Chairperson or a Member
shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by the Central Government on the
ground of proved misbehaviour after an inquiry made by the Supreme Court in accordance with
the procedure prescribed in this behalf by it. Sub-clause (3) confers power upon the Central
Government to suspend the Chairperson or a Member in respect of whom a reference has been
made to the Supreme Court. Sub-clause (4) provides for other circumstances under which the
Chairperson or any Member can be removed from office by the Central Government.
9.7.1 A witness before the Committee has opposed the reference to the Supreme Court as a pre-
requisite for removal of Chairperson/Members of the CCI.
9.7.2 The Department has responded to the aforesaid suggestion as follows:
Clauses 11(2) and 11 (4) empower the Government to remove a Member on the grounds
of proven misbehaviour, insolvency, conviction of an offence involving moral turpitude,
physical/mental incapacity, abuse of position, engaging in any paid employment during
tenure in the CCI, and acquisition of financial or other interest affecting prejudicially in
functioning as Member. But this power is subject to the Supreme Court holding, after,
enquiry, that the Member ought to be removed in respect of grounds of proven
misbehaviour, abuse of position or acquisition of financial or other interest likely to affect
prejudicially functioning as a Member. Thus, in respect of serious misconduct or
misbehaviour there is a check/balance of the Supreme Court’s concurrence before
Government can order removal of a member. However, a particular aspect merits mention
here. Clause 11(2) of the Bill provides for the removal of a Member by the Government
on the ground of proven misbehaviour after enquiry by the Supreme Court and its
concurrence. This appears to be unnecessary, as proven misbehaviour, is a very wide
expression and is capable of being abused. Clause 11(4) in any case provides for removal
of the Chairperson or the Member on different grounds. What is provided therein appears
adequate. Clause 11(2) may be deleted along with Clause 11(3) {being an adjunct of Clause
11(2)}.
9.7.3 The Committee approves the amendment proposed by the Department.
9.7.4 Subject to above, the clause is adopted.

20
Clause 12
9.8.0 The clause provides that the Chairperson or a Member shall not, for a period of six months
from the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any employment in or connected with
the management or administration of any enterprise which has been a party to a proceeding before
the Commission. However, such a restriction of employment shall not apply in case of any
employment under the Central Government or State Government or a local authority or a statutory
authority or corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act, or in a Government
company.
9.8.1 One witness suggested that Chairperson/Members of CCI should be debarred for a period
of 12 months after retirement from accepting any employment instead of 6 months.
9.8.2 The Department has accepted the suggestion and agreed to bring an amendment in the
clause to that effect.
9.8.3 The Committee notes the proposal of the Department.
9.8.4 Subject to the amendment proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 16
9.9.0 The clause provides for the appointment of Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy and
Assistant Directors General for the purpose of assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry into
the contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation, for conduct of cases before the
Commission and performing such other functions as are or may be provided by or under the
proposed legislation. It also empowers the Central Government to specify, by rules, their
qualifications, the salary and allowances payable to them and the other conditions of their service.
9.9.1 W ith regard to investigation under clause 16(4), a witness has suggested that the experience
for the post of Director-General and Additional/Joint/Deputy and Assistant Directors General in the
CCI should be in economics, trade or industry, not in CBI or police investigation.
9.9.2 The Department, in its reply to the suggestion, has stated that the suggestion may be
accepted and will be provided for in the Rules. Further, investigation will be defined in the Rules
to exclude police investigation.
9.9.3 A member was, however, of the view that officers from CBI should not be excluded for
the above mentioned posts.
9.9.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Government.
9.9.5 The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 19
9.10.0 The clause empowers the Commission to inquire into violation of provisions of
anti-competitive agreement and abuse of dominance either on its own motion or on receipt of a
complaint from any person, consumer or their association or trade association or on a reference
made to it by the Central Government or a State Government or a statutory authority alleging
violation of any of those provisions. The clause further lays down the factors, which shall be
considered by the Commission for the purpose of determining whether an agreement has an
appreciable adverse effect on competition, whether an enterprise enjoys the dominant position, or
whether a market constitutes a relevant market for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
9.10.1 A suggestion has been made that since Clause 19(4)(d) already allows for consideration of
“commercial advantages” in determining dominance and since IP rights should be found relevant

21
to dominance only where they give commercial advantage deleting Clause 19(4)(f) would seem
prudent to avoid giving undue weight to the mere ownership of IP rights. Where IP rights do in
fact confer commercial advantage in a given relevant market, then they are cognizable under Clause
19(4)(d).
9.10.2 The Department has agreed to delete sub-clause 4(f) in consultation with the Ministry of
Law as IPRs would not be given blanket power to exert their dominance in relevant markets.
9.10.3 Another suggestion has been placed before the Committee by one of the witnesses is that
while considering the relevant market, the CCI should consider both relevant geographic market and
relevant product market.
9.10.4 The Department accordingly, has proposed amendment in sub-clause (5) to substitute the
word ‘or’ between the words “relevant geographic market” and “relevant product market” by
‘and’.
9.10.5 The Committee approves both the proposed amendments.
9.10.6 Subject to the amendments proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 21
9.11.0 The clause contains provisions relating to the circumstances under which a reference can
be made to the Commission by statutory authorities. It provides that if in the course of a
proceeding before any statutory authority, entrusted with the responsibility of regulating any goods
or service or market therefore, a party has raised an issue that the decision taken by the statutory
authority would be contrary to the provisions of the Bill, then, the statutory authority shall be
bound to make a reference to the Commission. The Commission, after hearing the parties to the
proceedings, shall, give to the statutory authority its opinion and the statutory authority shall
thereafter pass its orders.
9.11.1 The clause makes it mandatory for the statutory body to make a reference to the CCI when
any party to the proceeding raise that the issue is contrary to the competition law. A witness
objected to such mandatory provision in the clause.
9.11.2 The Department has proposed to substitute the word ‘shall’ in the last line of sub-clause
(1) of the clause with ‘may’.
9.11.3 One of the witnesses has suggested that a time frame may be provided in the clause within
which the CCI should dispose the reference made to it by statutory body.
9.11.4 The Department has proposed a time limit of sixty days for the purpose under sub-clause (2).
9.11.5 The Committee approves the proposed amendments.
9.11.6 Subject to the amendments proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 23
9.12.0 The clause deals with the distribution of business of the Commission amongst its Benches.
It also empowers the Chairperson to transfer a Member from one Bench to another and also to
authorise a Member of one Bench to discharge the functions as a Member of any other Bench with
the prior approval of the Central Government.
9.12.1 A suggestion was received from a witness to dispense with the requirement of prior
approval of Union Government in case of a transfer of a member by the Chairperson of the CCI.

22
9.12.2 The Department has not agreed to the suggestion in toto . The amendment proposed by the
Department is to the effect that prior approval of the Central Government is required when there
is transfer of a member from one city to another.
9.12.3 The Committee notes the proposed amendments.
9.12.4 Subject to above, the clause is adopted.
Clause 27
9.13.0 The clause deals with various orders which the Commission is competent to pass after an
inquiry. If, on inquiry, the Commission finds that the agreements or the actions of an enterprise
in a dominant position are in contravention of the provisions of clauses 3 and 4, it may pass any
order which may, inter alia, include an order directing any enterprise or association of enterprises
or person or association of persons involved in the agreement or abuse of dominant position to
discontinue and riot to re-enter into any such agreement or abuse, as the case may be, imposing
such penalty as the Commission deems fit which shall not be more than ten per cent of the average
of the turnover for the last three years upon each such person or enterprise which is a party to
the agreement or abuse of dominant position, awarding compensation to the parties, directing
modification of the agreement, recommending to the Central Government the division of any such
enterprise enjoying dominant position or complying with its directions including a direction to pay
costs.
9.13.1 One of the witnesses has pointed out typographical error in first line of the clause.
9.13.2 The Department has agreed to rectify the expression ‘of an enterprise’ occurring in the first
line of the clause by ‘or an enterprise’.
9.13.3 The same witness has suggested that it is extremely important to include in the Bill explicit
authority for the Commission to provide protection to the whistleblower and to set up a leniency
programme.
9.13.4 The Department has agreed to incorporate appropriate leniency/amnesty provision.
9.13.5 The same witness has also suggested that in order to be an effective deterrent for hardcore
cartels, fines should be much higher than the gains. Consideration should be given to increasing
the possible fines/damage by a multiple of three times the proved loss or damage.
9.13.6 The Department has agreed to amend sub-clause (b) to the effect that a penalty of three
times of the proven gain to the cartel may be levied subject to at least 10% of the average turnover
for the last three preceding financial years.
9.13.7 The Committee approves the proposed amendments.
9.13.8 Subject to the amendments proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 31
9.14.0 The clause empowers the Commission to issue orders on certain combinations. Sub-clause
(1) of the said clause provides that if the Commission is of the opinion that a combination does
not or is not likely to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall, by order, approve
the combination including a combination in respect of which a notice has been given under sub-
clause (2) of clause 6. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause empowers the Commission to direct that
a combination shall not take effect, if it is of the opinion that the combination has or is likely to
have an appreciable adverse effect on competition. Sub-clause (3) empowers the Commission to
propose suitable modifications in the combinations in case the adverse effect could be eliminated.

23
Sub-clauses (4) to (12) contain provisions relating to acceptance of the modifications suggested by
the Commission, amendments to such modifications proposed by the parties to the combination,
within the time specified in those clauses and effect of acceptance or non-acceptance of such
modifications and amendments by the Commission and the parties to the combinations.
9.14.1 The said witness has suggested that the CCI should be conferred with powers to cooperate
with competition authorities in other countries.
9.14.2 The D epartment has clarified that such power should be with the Government rather than
with the CCI. The Department has agreed to incorporate a provision in the Bill to provide power
to Government in this regard.
9.14.3 The Committee notes the clarifications and the proposed new provisions in the Bill.
9.14.4 Subject to amendment proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 32
9.15.0 The clause empowers the Commission to inquire into an agreement or abuse of dominant
position or combination if such agreement or dominant position or combination has, or is likely to
have, an appreciable adverse effect on competition in India even if such agreement or abuse of
dominant position or combination as specified in sub clauses (a) to (g) of the said clause take place
outside India.
9.15.1 Deletion of sub-clause (c) has been suggested by the same witness who has suggested
deletion of some words ‘or outside India’ in Explanation (a) to clause 4(2)(e). This is a
consequential to amendments to clause 4(2)(e).
9.15.2 The Department has accepted the suggestion
9.15.3 The Committee approves the proposed deletion.
9.15.4 Subject to amendment proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 38
9.16.0 The clause provides for amendment of its orders by the CCI to rectify mistakes apparent
from the record.
9.16.1 The Committee has pointed out that under sub-clause 2(a) of the Clause, the CCI
can amend any order passed by it suo moto.
9.16.2 The Committee recommends that the Government should make the clause specific to
the extent that the amendment of its own order for rectification of mistakes, by the
Commission should not touch the substantive part of its order.
9.16.3 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clause 47
9.17.0 The clause contains provisions for competition advocacy by the Commission. In formulating
policy, the Central Government may make a reference to the Commission for its opinion on
possible effects of such policy on competition. The Commission is required to give its opinion to
the Central Government within sixty days from the date of such reference. Such opinion shall not
be binding upon the Central Government. The Commission is also required to take suitable
measures for the promotion of competition advocacy, creating awareness and imparting training
about the competition issues, as may be prescribed.

24
9.17.1 A w itness has suggested that the Commission should be bestowed with the power to
recommend to the Central or State Governments after examining from competition angle
(competition audit) any existing or proposed law or policy on its own.
9.17.2 The Department has communicated to the Committee that this suggestion may be accepted
in the context that if there are restraints on competition in any existing law or policy, it could be
removed after securing CCI’s views. As CCI’s views are not binding on the Government in terms
of Clause 47(2), the suggestion may be accepted, subject to the requirement that it is the
Government, which will make the reference in its discretion.
9.17.3 The Committee notes the views of the Department.
9.17.4 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
Clause 52
9.18.0 The clause empowers the Central Government, by notification, to exempt any class of
enterprises from all or any of the provisions of the proposed legislation for such period as may
be specified in that notification if such exemption is necessary in the interest of security of the
State or public interest or any practice or agreement arising out of and in accordance with any
obligation assumed by India under any treaty or international agreement or convention. This
exemption may also be given to any enterprise which performs a sovereign function on behalf of
the Central or a State Government.
9.18.1 A witness has pointed out that an enterprise may be performing sovereign and
non-sovereign functions. Any exemption of the enterprise from the application of competition law
would mean exemption relating to non-sovereign function also. Therefore, the provision under sub-
clause (c) of the clause should lay emphasis on function rather than enterprise. He suggested re-
wording of the sub-clause.
9.18.2 The Department welcomed the suggestion and proposed rewording of the sub-clause as:
“any sovereign function including functions incidental thereto performed by an enterprise on behalf
of the Central Government or a State Government”.
9.18.3 The Committee approved the proposed amendment.
9.18.4 Subject to amendment proposed, the clause is adopted.
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title
9.19 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential nature, namely, ‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’ to be substituted by ‘2002’
and ‘Fifty-third’, respectively.
9.20.0 Out of sixty-four clauses, the Committee recommends amendments in nineteen
clauses and adopts the remaining forty-five clauses without any change.
10.1 The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating
amendments approved by it and giving due consideration to the other observations of the
Committee.

25
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
• In contradistinction to the Statement of Objects and Reasons which describes CCI as
a quasi-judicial body, the Department has now submitted that it is a Judicial body.
Besides, the Department, having admitted the apparent contradiction, has also
submitted that CCI can sue or be sued. Here, the Committee wishes to point out
that a judicial body never needs to sue anybody but it can issue orders for
compliance. Suing means filing litigation against an opposite party before another
judicial body to ventilate grievances. CCI admittedly a judicial body shall not require
to sue anyone because that is not permissible in law. Hence, it can also not be sued.
(Para 7.3)
• Having noted the logic submitted for the higher age cap for the Chairperson, the
Committee points out that the MRTP Act lays down different qualifications for both
the Chairperson as well as Members. The Chairperson of the MRTPC can be
exclusively from the Judiciary whereas its Members can be from any other prescribed
fields. However, in sharp contrast to this, same set of qualifications is proposed to
be laid down both for the Chairperson as well as Members of the Competition
Commission of India (CCl). Here, the Committee would like to emphasize that the
Chairperson of CCI should be exclusive from its Members not just in respect of age,
status and salary but also in that of qualifications. CCI being a judicial body, should
be headed by a Judicial Member. Insofar as Members are concerned, they may be
appointed from amongst persons having special knowledge in the prescribed fields as
proposed in the Bill. Therefore, the Committee is of the considered view that the
Chairperson of the CCI should be from amongst the serving or retired Judges of the
High Courts. (Para 7.6)
• While taking note of the reply of the Department of Company Affairs regarding the
fate of the officers and staff of the MRTPC after its dissolution and the assurance
given by the Secretary, Department of Company Affairs vis-a-vis  safeguarding the
services of these employees, the Committee is strongly of the view that interests of
the employees of MRTPC should be fully protected. Similarly, the Committee is also
of the view that deputationists with MRTPC recruited by the UPSC should be
retained in the CCI keeping in view their qualifications, experience and the expertise
gained by them over a period of time through their association with MRTPC. It is
of the opinion that services of these personnel selected by the apex recruitment body
of the country may be of immense help to the CCI especially during its infancy.
(Para 7.8.1)
• The Committee desires that the Department of Company Affairs may in consultation
with Department of Consumer Affairs bring harmony between Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 and the Competition Bill to avoid overlapping of jurisdiction between the
CCI and Consumer fora.
• Broadly two different views emerged in the Committee on the basic philosophy of the
Bill. A shade of opinion in the Committee contends that by enacting the Bill at this
stage, India would lose its bargaining power at the WTO negotiations. In that context
25

26
it is suggested that the Bill should not be enacted till 1 January, 2005 by which time
decisions on issues like competition policy, trade and investment and related matters
would be decided. Another point of view against the Bill was that Indian Industry,
both private and public sectors, need certain safeguards and protection for a certain
period. The present Bill takes away all such safeguards and protection. This Bill
would allow MNCs to capture Indian industry and services sector. Ther efore, it is
suggested that there is no hurry in passing the Bill and that MRTP Act may be
suitably amended to meet the requirements of the present time.
• The other shade of opinion favours the passage of the Bill. It is of the view that
MRTP Act is based on old economic theory which is no longer efficacious enough to
check the onslaught of foreign companies against Indian companies. Besides, being
a signatory to WTO agreements, India has to keep pace with the changing global
economic environment. This apart, public sector and Government Departments
engaged in the activities enumerated in Clause 2(g) should be exposed to competition
as it will be in the larger interest of the consumers. Similarly, small-scale sector is
also not proving beneficial to the consumers because of high cost of its products
which is largely due to poor economy of scale as well as technological obsolescence.
Therefore, small-scale sector, too, should be exposed to competition. This exposure of
Indian industry to competition will herald the transition of an old economy to a new
economy based on the new economic doctrine being pursued in the country for over
last one decade. This transition will not only help Indian economy to adapt itself to
changing environment but will also produce wealth and employment.
(Paras 7.22, 7.23 and 7.24)
• The Committee considered amendments proposed by the Department in the clauses
in the light of suggestions received from witnesses and others and accepted those
without any modifications. Further, the Committee also recommended amendments
of its own in two clauses. (Para 9.0)
• The Committee desires that the Chairperson of the CCI should be a person from
Judiciary i.e. a serving/retired Judge of a High Court. Thus qualifications for the
office of Chairperson should be different from Members of the CCI. (Para 9.4.1)
• The Committee is of the view that keeping the Minister-in-charge of Ministries in
the Selection Committee may lead to executive interference. (Para 9.5.1)
• The Committee approves the suggested changes in the Selection Committee for
proposing the names of Chairperson and members of the CCI to Union Government.
(Para 9.5.3)
• The Committee has pointed out that under sub-clause 2(a) of the Clause, the CCI
can amend any order passed by it suo moto.
• The Committee recommends that the Government should make the clause specific to
the extent that the amendment of its own order for rectification of mistakes, by  the
Commission should not touch the substantive part of its order.
(Paras 9.16.1 and 9.16.2)
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title
• Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential nature, namely, ‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’ to be substituted by
‘2002’ and ‘Fifty-third’, respectively.

27
• Out of sixty-four clauses, the Committee recommends amendments in nineteen
clauses and adopts the remaining forty-five clauses without any change.
• The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating
amendments approved by it and giving due consideration to the other observations of
the Committee. (Paras 9.19, 9.20.0 and 10.1)

MINUTES

30

31
XXIX
TWENTY-NINETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 27 August, 2001 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
3. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain
6. Shri Kuldip Nayyar
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
8. Shri Vijay Goel
9. Shri Vinay Katiyar
10. Shri Arun Kumar
11. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
12. Shri Anadi Sahu
13. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
14. Shri Manabendra Shah
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
2.0 * * *
2.1 The Chairman announced the reference of two Bills namely, North-Eastern Council
(Amendment) Bill, 1999 and Competition Bill, 2001 to the Committee by Hon’ble Chairman.
3.0 * * *
3.1 The Committee decided to issue Press Release on the Competition Bill, 2001 to invite public
opinion thereon.
4* * *
5. The Committee then briefly discussed various general issues and adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
31
*** Relates to other matters.

32
XXXII
THIRTY-SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 14 September, 2001 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Hiphei
4. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
6. Shri K.M. Saifullah
7. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
8. Shri Drupad Borgohain
9. Shri Kuldip Nayyar
LOK SABHA
10. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
11. Shri M.O.H. Farook
12. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
13. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
14. Shri Shriniwas Patil
15. Shri Subodh Ray
16. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
17. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
18. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
19. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
20. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
21. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
22. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
32

33
Representatives of Department of Company Af fairs (Ministry of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs)
Shri V .K. Dhall, Secretary,
Shri R.D. Joshi, Director-General, Investigation and Registration
Shri R. Vasudevan, Director
Shri K.C. Ganjwal, Secretary, MRTPC
Dr. S. Chakravarthy, Consultant
Shri G.P. Prabhu, Chief Commissioner, Income Tax
2.0 The Chairman welcomed the members and informed them about the revised schedule of
next series of meetings for consideration of Bills pending consideration of the Committee. The
Chairman felt that the Committee would be able to complete its work on Lokpal Bill, Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Bill and North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill by November and
thereafter Companies (Amendment) Bill and the Competition Bill could be taken up.
2.1 * * *
2.2 * * *
3.0 The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Department of Company Affairs for
a presentation on the Competition Bill, 2001. The Chairman then asked the Secretary to apprise the
Committee the background of the Bill; recommendations of the Expert Committee on the subject;
how it was going to help competition and how it would bring the Indian Companies at par with
others. Besides he also wanted to know the institutional mechanism to check the abuse of
dominance. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the Secretary to make his presentation on the
Competition Bill.
3.1 The Secretary, Department of Company Affairs at the outset offered his condolence for the
sad demise of late Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma, a Member of the Committee and a Member of Lok
Sabha. He then began his audio-visual presentation on the Bill. He mentioned the various elements
of competition and how it was influenced by measures undertaken by the Government, how it was
related to investment
3.2 Thereafter he discussed the change in the economic scenario after liberalisation which
affected the competitive environment within the country. He further elaborated the objective and
need for a new competition law. He added that earlier the mechanisms adopted by the Government
to keep controlled demand and supply had since been dismantled. Hence a new competition law
was the need of the hour to provide the players a more liberal environment. He felt that a law
substituting the MRTP Act and fulfilling the requirements of the time was a must.
3.3 He submitted that these developments led to the setting up of a high level Committee in
October, 1999 under the Chairmanship of Shri S.V .S. Raghavan. The report was submitted in
May, 2001. It suggested a new Competition law in place of the MRTP Act. This report was
followed by a series of meetings and consultations with the main Chambers of Commerce and
Industries, State Governments, Ministries of the Central Government and representatives of the
trade and business, besides Inter-Ministerial meetings on the basis of which a concept Bill was
prepared.
3.4 He dwelt upon the three important areas which the Bill sought to regulate, as provided in
its clause 3. These areas were prohibition of anti-competitive agreements of horizontal and vertical
*** Relates to other matters.

34
types; prohibition of abuse of dominance; and thirdly, acquisition, mergers and amalgamation.
He further stated that the Bill provided for establishment of a new Competition Commission of
India.
3.5 At that point, the Chairman enquired about the tie-in agreements. Replying to that the
Secretary explained the types of tie-in agreements service arrangements and exclusive supply
agreements. Thereafter, he touched upon the dominant position and abuse of dominance. Then he
touched upon regulation of combinations in which he said that the Act sought to regulate large
combination above the threshold limit. The Bill provided for combination, mergers, acquisition
without permission but for the larger combinations voluntary intimation to the Commission was
required and even for such notification a time limit of 90 days existed after which it would be
deemed as approved.
4.0 Thereafter, the Secretary dwelt upon of the Competition Commission. He stated that it
would consist of a Chairman and members numbering between two to ten, having specialization
in their respective fields. He said that it would have a number of principal benches and also other
benches along with a special merger bench located at Headquarters. Besides it would also have a
Director-General and a team of officials. Thereafter he explained the various functions to be
performed by the Commission and the powers it would enjoy. Among others, he said,
Director-General would be responsible for carrying out investigation and prosecution and advocacy
of competition would be one of the key roles of the Commission. The Secretary then moved on
to state that if the Commission was of the opinion that a merger was anti-competitive, then it could
issue an order disallowing the merger.
4.1 The Secretary offered justifications for replacing MRTP Act by the proposed legislation. He
said that the MRTP Act was designed not to promote competition but to curb monopoly. In spite
of the changes brought about in this Act in 1991 and 1994 it did not fulfill the need of the hour.
He then covered the concerns expressed during the proceedings of the high level Committee and
subsequent consultative process and stated that the view which emerged was that the Act should
be introduced gradually i.e. in the first year, advocacy process should take place so that market
players began to understand what was competition, what was good competitive behaviour. Then
the next year anti-competitive agreements and abuse of autonomy should be introduced. On the
issue of pending cases in the MRTPC he said that as all unfair trade practices really related to
consumers, those would go to the Consumer Courts and the monopolistic and as restricted trade
practices fell within the mischief of anti-competition practices, those would come over to the new
Commission.
4.2 The Chairman then, invited other witnesses to add to the Secretary’s presentation. The other
witness inter alia mentioned about the need of a new competition law when MRTP Act was already
there. He mentioned that MRTP Act did not define certain offences like cartels, predatory-pricing,
price rigging etc. at all. He said that the MRTP Commission wanted to bring the ‘cartel’ to book,
hence there was a need for a new law, a specific one. Here he mentioned about the pre-reform
and post reform scenario. Earlier while for Rs.l00 crores a new approval was required to be taken
whereas in the competition law this requirement has been waived. Lastly he stated that we all are
consumers hence a competition driven market would help a movement in favour of the consumer.
5.0 The Chairman then sought certain clarification from the witnesses. He wanted to know the
rationale of making the Department of Company Affairs as the nodal Department for piloting the
legislation. Secondly he wanted to know the rationale for keeping the Minister-in-charge as the
member of Selection Committee for appointing the Competition Chairperson and members. Lastly
pointing out the infirmities in the MRTP Act and the consequent need for a new law to meet the
needs of the changing economic scenario, the Chairman wanted to know as to how many
recommendations of the Expert Committee were agreed to.

35
5.1 One member, inter alia, observed that MRTPC was of late dealing with restrictive trade
practices instead of monopolistic practices. He was apprehensive that the competition law may
create many problems in a poor country like ours. He felt that the Indian corporate houses had
no strength to compete with the multinationals. In this context, he appreciated a decision by the
Department of Company Affairs on the caustic soda case where American was dumping their stuff
in India. He also felt that while complying with the WTO, Indian Parliament would have to
safeguard the interests of the people. He also expressed reservations about the selection process
of Chairperson and members of CCl.
5.2 One member raised the point whether the dissenting notes of the three members of the high
level Committee were taken care of in the Bill. He desired that all the memoranda/views of persons/
organisations, on the Bill sent to the Department of Company Affairs should be made available to
the Committee, along with action taken by Government on each memorandum/suggestion.
5.3 One more member touched upon the issue of difference between the existing MRTP Act and
the mooted Competition Bill. In that context he felt that there a law has needed which enlivened
the indigenous industries and fulfiled the employment requirements. He also wanted reservations for
public and small-scale sectors rather than a clear demarcation for these. He felt a need to take
together rule of law and rule of reason to check the foreign companies from acting in a non-
competitive manner. Most of the members felt the need for a law to suit the country’s requirement
and not in consonance with the obligations of WTO or in line with the position in certain developed
countries.
6.0 The Chairman directed the witnesses to send their written responses to all the questions and
queries and the witness agreed to send it within two weeks. He then informed the Committee that
in due course he would invite other experts and others for evidence.
7.0 A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
8.0 The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 3 October, 2001.

36
XXXV
THIRTY-FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, 5 October, 2001 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
4. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
6. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
7. Shri C.M. Ibrahim
8. Shri Kuldip Nayyar
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
10. Shri M.O.H. Farook
11. Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar
13. Shri Arun Kumar
14. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15. Shri Subodh Ray
16. Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
17. Shri Anadi Sahu
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
19. Shri Manabendra Shah
20. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
21. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
22. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
23. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
24. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
36

37
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Consumer Affairs
1. Shri S. Bandopadhyay, Secretary
2. Shir Santosh Nautiyal, Additional Secretary
3. Shri P. Venkatesan, Deputy Secretary
4. Shri N.S. Pangtey, Deputy Director
Representatives of PHD, Chamber of Commerce and Industry
1. Shri Vinod Chandiok, Chairman, Corporate Affairs Committee
2. Shri Sri Nath, Senior Member, Managing Committee
3. Shri Suman Khaitan, Member, Managing Committee
4. Mrs. Shalini Mathur, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of Indian Industries (CII)
1. Shri Subodh Bhargava, Past President, CII and Adviser, Eicher Group
2. Shri Anand Pathak, Partner, Pathak and Associates
3. Shri K. Suresh, Solicitor, ITC Ltd.
4. Shri S. Sen, Deputy Director General
5. Shir Ajay Khanna, Deputy Director General
6. Dr. D.C. Ravi, Director
7. Shri N.B. Mathur, Advisor
Representatives of FICCI
1. Shri R.S. Lodha, President-Elect
2. Shri M.K. Sharma, Vice Chairman, Hindustan Lever Ltd.
3. Dr. S.M. Dugar, Former Member, Company Law Board and Advocate
4. Shri Shailender Swarup, Advocate
2. The Chairman informed the members that in course of examination of the Competition
Bill, 2001 it would be necessary to hear the views of the Captains of Industry and some other
Mumbai based organizations like the Bombay Chamber of Commerce, Indian merchant chamber,
ICICI etc. on the various aspects of the Bill and its possible implications on trade and industry in
the country. Accordingly, the Committee proposed to visit Mumbai from 4th to 7th November, 2001
for the purpose.
2.1 The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman to obtain permission of Hon’ble
Chairman to undertake the proposed visit.
2.2 At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs to the
meeting outlining the import of the Competition Bill, 2001 and invited him to give his views before
the Committee.
3. The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs, thanked the Chairman for giving him the
opportunity to appear before the Committee and said there was no objection to the objectives of
the Competition Bill, 2001, and as a matter of fact this law was necessary. He said that National
Consumers Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) has 10,000 cases pending and unless the
infrastructure of the NCDRC is augmented, any additional responsibility will infringe upon the
efficiency of the Commission.

38
3.01 The Secretary further said that NCDRC does not have investigative agency like MRTPC. He
informed the Committee that the Consumer Protection Bill has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha
with composite amendment proposals after 3-4 years of continuous interactions with States/UTs,
NGOs Consumer Forum etc.
3.02 But the Secretary was apprehensive whether NCDRC with its present composition, its
benches would be fully appreciative of the Complicated legal issues, nuances of the transferred
cases from MRTPC where each and every member is without judicial knowledge. He also said that
both Bills i.e. Consumer Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2001 and the Competition Bill, 2001 should
be complementary and harmonious and not conflicting.
4. The Chairman wanted to know whether by making adequate provisions in the Competition
Commission, will it be able to handle consumer disputes cases, sought to be transferred to
NCDRC.
4.1 A member suggested that MRTP cases should not be transferred to already burdened
consumer courts. Rather a transitory provision should be made in the Bill that till all pending cases
are cleared, staff will continue and existing infrastructure can take care of the pending cases of
MRTPC.
4.2 The Chairman thanked the Secretary and requested him to send the written responses to
the queries made by the members to the Secretariat within 10 days.
(The Secretary then withdrew)
5.0 The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the PHD Chamber of Commerce and
Industry to the meeting and requested them to give their opinion on the Competition Bill, 2001.
6.0 The witness said that various clauses of the Bill may adversely affect Competition and
expressed apprehension on the implementation of the provisions of the Bill. They pointed out that
the salary to the staff of the CCI (Cl.49) should be given from the Consolidated Fund of India
and not from Competition Fund of India. It was further suggested that ‘appreciable adverse effect’
of the Bill on trade and industry needs to be looked into.
7. The Chairman asked the witnesses whether they can send an alternative draft of the clauses
which they feel, are not properly drafted or have missed out important points. A member wanted to
know what was the witnesses’ proposal for substitute expression of “appreciable adverse effect”.
(The representatives of PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry then withdraw)
(The Committee adjourned at 1.35 
P.M. for lunch and reassembled after lunch at 3.30 P.M.)
8. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII)
to the meeting.
9. The witnesses said that the provisions in the Bills are not in-tune with the current thinking
or new mindset. The assurances, given during the preliminary stages of discussion on the proposed
Bill, have not been kept, they felt. They also felt that the Bill was too micro and too detailed. They
suggested that assets and turnovers in relation to acquisitions and mergers should be deleted.
10. It was further suggested that overreaching powers of proposed Competition Commission of
India (CCI) would give it the position of a super regulator. Commenting on the composition of the
Chairman and Members of the proposed CCI, the witnesses said that it should not become a
parking place for old and retired people. Rather CCI must have experts in economics, corporate
finance and accounts, corporate law, professional industry manager and a consumer representative.

39
Besides, extensive training and exposure, both abroad and within the country must be given to the
CCI staff.
11. The witness pointed out that the Preamble of the Bill should focus only on consumers and
consumers’ protection.
12. The witness sought the attention of the Committee to the inclusion of dealing in share
markets in the Bill. They said this was a very novel concept, and no where in the world, do the
anti-trust laws regulate the share markets. A question was posed by them “if tomorrow they enter
into a right of first refusal agreement with a company for the purchase of shares, will that be
anti-competitive? Will that be regulated under the anti-trust rules?”
13. The witness pointed out that the Bill basically focuses on three primary areas. The first
substantive provision (Clause 3) is the prohibition concerted practices, a prohibition that attacks the
cartels, be it horizontal cartels or vertical cartels. The second substantive provision attacks the
abuse of dominant position and the third regulates mergers and combination.
14. The Chairman thanked the representatives of CII and asked them to send alternative
suggestions in concrete terms though in draft form to various clauses, which the Committee would
consider while taking up the Bill, Clause-by-clause. The Chairman further asked the witnesses
whether there should be some specific time period between the actual passage of the Bill and the
implementation of the Act.
15. The Chairman further wanted to know whether there is a need for regulations for
combinations and mergers in respect of Indian industries. Then he asked the witnesses to send
their written responses and alternative formulations to various clauses of the Bill, to the Secretariat.
(The representatives of CII then withdrew)
16. The Chairman welcomed the representative of FICCI to the meeting and invited their
opinion/views on the Bill.
17. The witness thanked the Chairman and the Committee for the opportunity given to them to
express their views on the Bill. They wondered whether timing was right and the atmosphere
conducive for this kind of legislation. They opined that we should understand our priorities and
what subserved our national interest the best should be the foremost thing, and we must have a
competition law best suited to our needs and ethos.
18. The witness said that consolidation of Indian industries must be allowed to happen and there
should be nothing to prevent it. Size of an industry per se  is not the cause of concern and even
Supreme Court Judgment (1994) in Tomco Hindustan Liver Merger case has rule that it is the
misuse or abuse of that size which has to be monitored.
19. The representatives pointed out that in the new Bill, quantitative criteria is sought to be
substituted by qualitative criteria. They further said that CCl should have an advisory role rather
than regulatory role. They were of the view that time was not ripe for changing the status quo
and provisions of MRTP Act are more relevant even today.
20. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the FlCCl and asked them to send their written
memoranda to the Secretariat, with alternative suggestions. He also requested them to suggest in
writing as to what amendment are required in MRTP Act, in case the Bill is dropped and also let
the Committee know whether CCl is a tribunal or a regulatory body? He again told them to submit
a detailed memoranda so that the same can be circulated to members for comprehensive
amendments to MRTP Act.
(The witness then withdrew)
21. The Committee then adjourned at 6.10 
P.M.

40
XXXIX
THIRTY-NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 18th October, 2001 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Hiphei
4. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
6. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
7. Shri Drupad Borgohain
8. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
10. Shri Vinay Katiyar
11. Shri P.H. Pandian
12. Shri Subodh Ray
13. Shri Anadi Sahu
14. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
15. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
16. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
17. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Non-Governmental Organisations
Consumer Coordination Council (CCC)
1. Ms. Mala Banerjee, Chairperson
2. Ms. Sunita Roy, Executive Secretary
40

41
Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer Education (VOICE)
1. Dr. Sri Ram Khanna, Managing Trustee
2. Shri Bijon Mishra, Advisor
3. Dr. Roopa Vajpayee, Editor
4. Ms. Zasmin Zafar, Legal Co-ordinator
Consumer Unity T rust and Society (CUTS)
1. Shri Ujjwal Kumar, Advisor
2. Shri Sanjay Verma, Member
REPRESENTATIVES OF PROFESSIONAL ORGANISATIONS
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (lCAl)
1. Shri Amarjit Chopra, Chairman, Corporate Laws Committee
2. Shri Sunil Goyal, Central Council Member
3. Shri K.B. Sharma, Central Council Member
Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI)
1. Shri V .V. Deodhar, President
2. Shri H.R. Subramanya, Central Council Member
3. Shri D. Chandra, Deputy Director
Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI)
1. Dr. P.V .S. Jagan Mohan Rao, President
2. Shri R. Krishnan, Past President
3. Shri Girish Ahuja, Council Member
4. Shri G. Gehani, Council Member
5. Ms. Pallavi Shroff, Council Member
6. Shri Harish K. Vaid, Council Member
7. Shri Pawan Kumar Vijay, Council Member
2.0 At the outset Chairman welcomed the representatives of NGOs, – Consumer Coordination
Council, V oluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer Education and Consumer Unity Trust and
Society. He shared with them the history of Competition Bill, 2001. He then invited them to
introduce themselves and then to present their views one after another.
2.1 The Chairperson of the Consumer Coordination Council initiated the presentation by
introducing the Council and made a mention that it had received many suggestions regarding the
Bill.
2.2 She referred to clause 8 of the Bill and termed it confusing, as it provided for the
appointment of Chairman and one member by the Central Government which contradicted the
provision that the Competition Commission would comprise of Chairman and not less than two
members. Next, she mentioned that Clause 19 which dealt with filing of complaint by consumer
organizations, had not been properly defined. She wanted the clause to be more elaborately
explained so as to do away with the problems already existing in the consumer courts, which
applied discretionary powers in accepting complaint from consumer organizations. Referring to
Clause 22 she wanted that the provision for additional member be spelt out properly. She demanded
clear demarcation of jurisdiction of the benches and additional benches for bulk complaints. Then

42
about clause 27 she suggested that to implement the penalty clause effectively it must be specified
in detail.
2.3 Among others, she found flaw in Clause 39 too, which dealt with the provision of the
execution of orders of the Commission. She felt that the execution system needed to be amended
otherwise the purpose of the Bill would be defeated. Mentioning Clause 47, she viewed that this
clause should not be encouraged. She said that the Commission should not be required to take up
competition advocacy as provided in this Clause which might result in delay in pronouncement of
judgement by it.
2.4 Dealing with Clause 49 which provided for Competition Fund, she said that the Competition
Commission should be allowed to create an awareness and training by NGOs working in this field.
Lastly, she suggested about a time limit to complete the proceedings.
3.0 The Chairman then invited the Members to seek clarifications on the issues arising out of
the presentation of CCC.
3.1 Another member raised the issue of the aspects in the MRTP Act which marred the
consumer interests and hindered competition. He also pointed out the discrepancy regarding
qualification for the Chairpersons of MRTP Commission and CC, as in the case of MRTP Act the
Chairperson was to be qualified to be a Supreme Court Judge whereas for Competition Commission
he should be qualified to be only a High Court Judge. He also enquired if the High Level Committee
received any suggestion for amending MRTP Act in place of the proposed legislation.
3.2 The Chairman wanted the considered opinion of the witness on Clause 8(2) of the Bill,
regarding the qualification for Chairperson and Members of the Commission. He requested the
Chairperson of CCC to send the written responses to the queries to the Secretariat at the earliest.
4.0 Thereafter, the Managing Trustee of V oluntary Organisation in the Interest of Consumer
Education drew the attention of the Committee to the fact that being a part of the consumer
movement they were not happy with the Bill. Further he said that foreign companies Coca-cola,
Gillette and Unilever came to India and took over the domestic manufacturer in their respective
areas whereas the same could not have occurred in America as the Federal Trade Commission
would have disallowed it. He then made certain observations with regard to the composition of the
High Level Committee and also on the working of the MRTP Act.
5. The Chairman interrupted the witness and requested him to focus his presentation on the
Competition Bill rather than on other issues.
6.0 The witness thereupon suggested for a strong Competition Commission on the lines of the
Federal Trade Commission of US to provide anti-competitive protection.
6.1 Thereafter he pointed out the flaws in the Bill viz. in its adjudication procedure.
6.2 The witness then stated that the definition of ‘Competition’ was not clearly spelt. He
suggested for the retention of the definition of ‘group’ as provided under section 2 (of) of the
MRTP Act. Regarding ‘inter-connected’ enterprises, he suggested for substitution of Clause 5 (b)
by section 2(8) of the MRTP Act. On the definition of ‘ownership’ too he was in favour of section
2(8) of the MRTP Act or for adoption of the definition from the Consumer Protection Act,
vis-a-vis the meaning of the word ‘consumer association’. He also suggested that definitions of
‘retailer’, trade association’ ‘wholesaler’, should be adopted from sections 9(b), 2(t) and 2(x) of
the MRTP Act. Further he wanted clause 3 to be more comprehensive and to include both formal
and informal agreements, covering inter-brand competition, competition from paralled imports. He
also suggested for inclusion of the concept of relevance of circumstantial evidence in the case of
commercial conspiracies, in the Bill.

43
6.3 He also found fault with the provision under clause 4 regarding dominant position. He felt
that the only way to make the definition of dominant position more concrete it would be
appropriate to define dominance by market share. He appreciated one aspect of the Bill which
provided for individual turnover assets of a group. He further mentioned that the heart of the Bill
relates to appointments. He suggested for reversing of the recommendations of the high level
committee and for providing the competition authority the power to divide companies. He also
suggested for regulation of production, storage, supply, distribution or control of any goods. On
the question of transfer of cases relating to, unfair trade practices, to Consumer Courts he said
that they were well equipped to deal with such behaviour. He also felt that in the qualification for
the members of CCI, the words consumer affairs should be included and the selection process
should also be transparent. So far as the repealing laws were concerned he said that there were
ambiguities regarding the transfer of cases relating to unfair trade practices which would stand
transferred to Consumer Protection Act.
7.0 The representative of the Consumer Unity Trust and Society began by making certain
observations on the purpose of the Bill and its preamble. He suggested for inclusion of temporal
and functional dimensions in defining ‘relevant market’. He also felt that the absence of preventive
steps to prevent cartels should be taken care of. Besides there should be encouragement for those
who provide information. He suggested for criminal penalty for individual Directors involved in the
cartel, particularly in price fixing, output restriction etc. Referring to the intellectual property rights
he stated that parallel imports or inter brand competition should be allowed. He expressed
reservation at the high retirement age of Chairperson/Members. He also advocated for the
curtailment of the blanket power given to the Government to intervene. He referred to the
ambiguity in the jurisdiction of Competition Commission and other statutory authorities. Referring
to competition advocacy, he suggested that it should also refer to past law and policy. He also
stated that the constitution of the Competition Fund should be transparent.
7.1 Further with regard to clause 52, i.e. the power to exempt, he suggested for an Advisory
Council to suggest as to what should be exempted. He also suggested for incorporation of a clause
in the Bill empowering the Department of Company Affairs or others to list out the laws and
policies which affect the Competition Law.
8.0 The Chairman thanked the witness for his presentation and asked him to send the written
replies to the queries to be raised by members to the Secretariat. He invited members to seek
queries/clarification from the witness.
8.1 One member wanted to know as to how consumer’s interest could be protected by this
Bill? Another member referring to sub-clause (6) of clause 19 wanted to know whether the witness
felt that amendment was required in the clause. Further regarding clause 22, he asked for a
clarification whether each Bench should have a Judicial Member or not.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
(The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 
P.M. and reassembled at 3.00 P.M.)
9. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the ICAI to the meeting. He apprised them
about the history of Competition Bill.
10.0 The Chairman of Corporate Laws Committee of ICAI thanked the Chairman and Members
for giving him opportunity to appear before the Committee. He welcomed the Bill terming it to be
a watershed and said that the MRTP Act had become obsolete. He stated that the Bill aimed at
providing provisions to see to it that the interests of consumers are paramount. He suggested for
section 108 to be taken back to the Companies Act rather than keeping it in the Competition Bill.

44
Referring to the amalgamation and mergers he viewed that these could be taken care of under
Companies Act. He later said that bringing any kind of a limit in respect of turnover was not right.
He wanted an ascertained limit to the definition of dominant position. Regarding clause 12, he felt
that the Chairperson and other members should be barred for at least a year. Lastly he suggested
that CAs should be considered for the purpose of appointment in the CCI as well as for
investigation on behalf of the Director-General.
10.1 One member wanted to know whether the threshold limit for dominant position should be
included in the clause itself or prescribed in the rules to be framed later on.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11.0 On being invited by the Chairman to present their views on Competition Bill, 2001, the
President, ICWAI gave a brief overview of the Institute. He welcomed the Bill and said that the
definition of competition could have been more clear. Dealing with clause 4, regarding the dominant
position he viewed that the ICWAI has a very significant role to play. He felt that the definition
needed to be a little more elaborate. He gave his considered opinion that dominant enterprises which
were the source of profiteering transactions leads to abuse of dominant position. He suggested for
registration of such enterprises.
11.1 The other representatives of the ICWAI added on to the President’s presentation and
expressed his views bout the precise definition of “competition”. However he too felt that this
definition should be elaborate. In the context of the Indian Competition Law, the International
Patent Rights Act should be synergised with the Bill. Referring to clause 21(1) of the Bill, he stated
that instead of a reference to the statutory authority, a reference to a responsible office should be
made.
11.2 The Chairman, enquired whether the enacting formula where the word ‘Competition’ had
been defined was adequate. Besides, he also wanted to know whether they felt that comprehensive
amendments of the MRTP Act could have achieved the objective of the Competition Bill? Lastly he
raised the issue of dominance and wanted to know whether provisions in the Bill to prevent the
abuse of dominance were adequate.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
12.0 The Chairman then welcomed the President and Members of the ICSI.
12.1 The founder President of  the Institute made the presentation on behalf of ICSI. He briefly
referred to the various provisions of MRTP Act, then welcomed the Bill. Thereafter he drew
attention of the Committee to clause 3 of the Bill dealing with appreciable adverse effect on
Competition. He suggested that it would be worthwhile to reproduce in the section 33 together with
section 2(O) of the MRTP Act.
12.2 Thereafter the representative of the Institute referred to clause 4 where he stated that the
definition of dominant position was vague and which should be specific. He suggested that clause
6(1) should clearly define as to what was going to constitute appreciable adverse effect on
competition on the issue of appointment he suggested that it should be made transparent. He
wanted the Company Secretaries to the considered members of the CCI. Besides he advocated for
a cadre of personnel drawn from different professions for the Competition Commission and wanted
the age limit to be aligned with that of High Court Judge. Regarding the removal of members, he
felt that the Supreme Court should not come into picture and the Government should be at liberty
in case inefficiency or misbehaviour was proved.
12.3 Regarding the qualification for appointment of  the Director-General and other officials under
clause 16(7) he suggested that it should be specified as experience in investigation in economise

45
trade or industry. He suggested that clause 19 (3) should be read with clause 20(4) and specifically
spelt out. Dealing with clause 23 he suggested that the authority for  transfer should be vested in
the Chairman. He suggested minor amendments in clauses 28 and 38. So far as clause 40 was
concerned, he suggested the Committee to reconsider whether the clause was appropriate.
Regarding clause 43 (b) dealing with penalty he mentioned that the imposition thereof should be
left to the Commission. On Clauses 58 and 60 he termed them as contradictory and suggested for
their harmonization. Lastly about clause 64 he was of the view that the technical personnel should
be transferred to the Commission.
12.4 Another representative of ICSI made suggestions on clause 3. Secondly she said that
whereas by virtue of clauses 48 and 49, certain amount of financial autonomy was proposed to
be given to the Competitive Commission, on the other hand clauses 53 and 54 empowered the
Government to give directions on matters of policy in respect of the functioning of the
Commission. She also referred to the issues of conflict between the Convergence Bill and the
Competition Bill. Lastly he suggested for deferment of its implementation.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
14. The Committee then adjourned at 4.24 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 19 October, 2001.

46
XLV
FORTY-FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, 5 November, 2001 in Regal Room, The
Oberoi Towers, Mumbai.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
6. Shri Kuldip Nayyar
7. Shri Pritish Nandy
8. Shri B.S. Gnandisekan
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
10. Shri Vinay Katiyar
11. Shri Arun Kumar
12. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
13. Shri P.H. Pandian
14. Shri Subodh Ray
15. Shri Anadi Sahu
16. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
17. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
18. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Shri Rahul Bajaj, CMD, Bajaj Auto Ltd.
2. Shri Keshub Mahindra, Chairman, Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd.
3. Shri K.V . Kamath, MD and CEO, ICICI Ltd.
4. Shrimati Kalpana Morporia, Executive Director, ICICI Ltd.
5. Shri P.P. V ora, CMD, IDBI
46

47
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members including a new Member of the
Committee. He then briefly told them about the purpose of the visit of the Committee to Mumbai
and its schedule. The Chairman then invited the CMD of Bajaj Auto Limited and Chairman of
Mahindra and Mahindra Limited and apprised them of the genesis of the Competition Bill. He
thanked them for responding to the invitation of the Committee. He told them that the Committee
wanted their opinion on various provisions of the Bill including the provisions which might prove
detrimental to the growth and development of the Indian industry. Thereafter, the Chairman
acquainted both the witnesses with the procedure to be followed during the meeting and gave them
seven days time for sending their written replies on those queries of the Members on which
information was not readily available with them.
3. The Chairman, Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. thanked the Committee for providing him the
opportunity to appear before it and began his presentation by saying that he considered the Bill to
be of paramount importance as it would affect the shape of economic development of the country
in the years ahead. He believed that the MRTP Act with its draconian laws had stifled the economic
development of the country for the last 20 years. He felt that it was primarily concerned with
consumer interests. However, he hastened to say that the Consumer Protection Act was more than
adequate to protect the consumer’s interests. He added that he had serious reservations against the
Bill and believed in creating an environment which would attract capital and technology. He felt that
the present size of Indian economy was very small and putting any restrictions on the growth of
Indian companies would affect the growth of the economy. He mentioned some examples of some
of the largest companies of the world which spent a large sum on Research and Development and
stated that Indian companies would not be able to compete with the multinational companies.
Pointing out the shortcomings in the Bill, he said that the word ‘dominance’ had not been defined
anywhere in the Bill. He also felt that the Bill must ensure the autonomy of the independent
members in the proposed Commission. He was of the view that there should be a time bound
programme for pre-notification. He felt strongly against the confusion of asset values and turnovers
in the Bill. He suggested for keeping the monetary limits flexible so as to avoid frequent legislations
owing to the change of circumstances. His suggestions included a fixed sum of penalty rather than
a percentage of the turnover. Lastly he stated that we should not copy laws of the developed
world, rather aspire to reach their stage of development.
4. The CMD, Bajaj Auto Ltd. in his presentation inter alia stated that one of the main
objectives of the Bill was consumer interest and welfare. He mentioned that in every sector there
were bad eggs and so was the case with industry where some unscrupulous players did the
spoilsport. He further mentioned that India accounted for 50% in the world’s population of poor
people. In such a scenario he felt that there was an urgent need to take care of the needs of all
sections of the society. However, he simultaneously laid emphasis upon the concern for
industrialists. He felt that both Public Sector and Private Sector industries needed protection from
the Multi National Companies (MNCs). He felt that MNCs might be allowed but not at the expense
of Indian companies. He linked the interest of industrial sector to that of consumer’s interest.
4.1 He agreed with the views of the other witness that the provisions of the Bill should not come
in the way of growth. About the size criteria in the MRTP Act, he stated that it was removed in 1991
but had been introduced in the present Bill. He also suggested for some discretion to the Commission,
such as, for deciding the limits of dominance. He however, felt that too much discretion would lead
to red tape and corruption. He was of the view that competition was good as it controlled the bad
manufacturer and prevented price fixation but even then a regulator was needed.
4.2 Touching upon the aspect of penal provisions in the Bill, he stated that no economic
legislation had such penal provisions as the proposed bill. He was of the view that they were not
necessary and would restrict the production of wealth. He suggested that it should be modified.

48
4.3 He felt that in the sectors like insurance and telecom where IRDA and TRAI were already
regulating, the Competition Commission should not have any regulatory role to play. Regarding
MRTP Act, he stated that it neither prevented anybody from becoming rich nor helped the
consumers. So he felt that the Bill should protect consumer without hurting Indian industry. He
was of the view that if Indian Companies did not perform they should be taken over by Indian
companies only.
4.4 Lastly he spoke on the need for good corporate governance. He stated that disclosure and
transparency were major ingredients of good corporate governance anywhere in the world. He felt
that corporates were required to disclose a lot of information which they were hiding earlier. He
was of the view that companies which were not listed on the Stock Exchanges e.g. MNCs should
also be made to comply with that requirement.
5. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for their observations and for indicating what should
be done in respect of good corporate governance rules and regulations in the country. He then
enumerated three major suggestions made by them viz. the change in purview of the operation of
the Competition Bill so that Competition Commission of India could concentrate on companies
having larger turnover and larger number of employees. Secondly, a clear definition of dominance
depending upon share in the market of that particular product instead of depending on the size of
the company and lastly, Indian consumers must be ensured a stake in the foreign companies. He
wanted to know from them as to how it could be done.
6. A Member pointed out the divergent opinion of the two witnesses on whether MRTP Act
was adequate with certain modifications or a new legislation was required. He disagreed with the
views of one of the witnesses that dominance was not defined anywhere in the Bill. He stated that
dominance was defined albeit without precision and clarity. He further stated that the definition of
dominance as included in the Bill was based on the Report of the High Level Committee. He, then,
enquired from the witnesses as to which way they viewed dominance and combination.
6.1 Another Member wanted to know whether the Competition Bill in its present form with
certain modifications would help healthy competition. He also enquired whether clauses 47, 52, 53
and 60 would create problem for the industry at a later stage when Government changes the policy
keeping in view the competition scenario in the country. The Member asked the witnesses to be
more specific on assets classification.
6.2 A Member specifically asked as to what was the unease in the minds of industry due to
the Competition Bill. He asked the witnesses whether the Competition Bill in its present form or
an amended MRTP Act was acceptable to them. Another Member enquired whether the
multinationals carried out their export obligations at the time of their entry into India and if not
what punishment was given to them. One more Member also wanted to know as to what harm
the Bill would cause to Indian industry and how would it benefit the foreign companies. A Member
suggested that a mechanism might be incorporated in the Bill to recover the fine or penalty.
6.3 One Member sought suggestion from the witnesses regarding penal action against non-listed
foreign companies operating in the country.
6.4 Another Member drew the attention to the role of cartels in the Indian industry. A Member
wanted to know whether the time was ripe to bring regulatory controls in the economy or we
should allow industry to acquire a critical mass before a regulatory mechanism is put in place.
Another Member suggested absolute removal of penalties of sending people to jails and suggested
the alternative of attachment of property. A Member wanted to know if the witnesses favoured
freeing the Competition Commission from the control of the Government.

49
6.5 A Member while favouring the Bill wondered as to how Indian companies became pigmies
in comparison to their foreign counterparts. Another member queried as to how the industry would
protect workers’ interest. Another enquired whether the industry had any collaboration with
educational institutions to develop the industrial sector.
7. The Committee reassembled at 3.00 
P.M.
8. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of ICICI and briefed them about the purpose
of the meeting. He wanted them to express their considered opinion regarding the provisions of the
Bill such as amalgamation, merger, combination, etc. He briefly mentioned the objections of the
other representatives to certain provisions of the Bill. He apprised them of the procedure to be
followed during the course of meeting and left the floor for them.
9. The CMD, ICICI stated that his team would cover as to what were policy objectives, the
business environment and the specific issues in the Bill. On the objective part, he mentioned
freedom of trade, protection of consumers interests, increasing efficiency and making Indian
industry globally competitive. Touching upon the aspect of business environment, he said that
industry had an opportunity as well as a challenge due to the transition from a protected market
to a globalized market. Referring to the companies which were under pressure in terms of inability
to meet their obligations to lenders and in the market place, he suggested a solution to allow them
to effectively merge so as to create companies of scale. He stated that any Competition Bill would
have to be viewed with the perspective of structural change consequent to globalization. He then
mentioned about the largest Indian company i.e. the Indian Oil Corporation which was about one
tenth of the size of the largest global oil company. Similarly, in terms of assets, ONGC the largest
Indian company was about one hundredth of General Electric. He asserted that Indian companies
were no match to such large multinational companies.
9.1 On those lines, he suggested that we needed to ensure that our companies got the strength
and withstood the pressure of globalization. For this he felt that a time-frame of at least five years
was required for the industries to achieve the critical mass.
9.2 While supplementing the presentation of CMD, ICICI another witness from the ICICI
highlighted the four provisions of the Bill which required relook. First, she stated that in addition to
the size of assets and turnover, market share could also be taken into consideration to determine
dominance. She suggested that the size needed to be looked at in the global context. While lauding
the provision pertaining to predatory pricing, she stated that it should be left to the Commission to
investigate and discover the fare market cost of production on a reference basis. Regarding merger
and amalgamation in the financial sector, she stated that sector was well regulated and should be left
out of the CCI’s jurisdiction. Further, she felt that mergers and amalgamations through a Court
process should be completely outside the purview of the Commission. Lastly, on the penal provisions,
she opined that instead of criminal penalty there should be very stiff financial penalties.
10. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for their presentation and invited Members to seek
clarifications from the witnesses.
11.0 A Member wanted to know the monetary limits on combinations and mergers. Besides, he
wanted the witnesses to reflect on the question of the functionality in respect of the combinations
and test for combinations. He requested the witnesses to throw some light on the issue of
balancing global size vis-a-vis domestic dominance. In regard to domestic dominance, he asked the
witnesses for the reasons for suggesting 50% share in the market and for what period of time.
He requested them to send a note on domestic dominance for the consideration of the Committee.
11.1 Another Member, referring to clauses 6 and 28 wanted to know as to what would happen
when the two regulating authorities, operating in a particular field go in opposite direction. Another

50
Member wanted to know the laws which prevented Indian industries from becoming internationally
competitive and also the laws which will make them globally competitive. Few Members asked
some general questions like whether any other regulatory Bill and regulatory authority was needed;
how consumer interests would be protected, etc.
12. The Chairman then asked the witnesses to send their written responses to the queries/points
raised by the Members.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
13. The Chairman while welcoming the representatives of the IDBI, briefly traced the
background of the Bill, mentioned the purpose of the meeting and apprised them with the procedure
to be followed during the meeting. He then requested them to present their views on the various
provisions of the Bill.
14. In his presentation before the Committee, the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of IDBI
suggested that banking and financial sector should be kept outside the purview of the Competition
Commission as that sector was already being regulated by the Reserve Bank of India. Further, he
stated that no guidelines had been laid down in the clause pertaining to the test of appreciable
adverse effect on competition and suggested that it could be specified by way of such rules and
regulations as may be specified by the specified authority. He was of the view that it could be
taken care of by the rules to be prescribed under clause 61 of the Bill. Touching upon the aspect
of dominant position, he felt that its definition in the Bill was quite vague. He stated that the
definition was subjective and needed to be defined with reference to some definitive parameters.
In other words, it needed to be defined from case to case, industry to industry and time to time
basis. He further submitted that such a definition would have to be specified by way of a specific
rule to be laid down from time to time as an administrative measure rather than as general
definition in the Bill. As regards the threshold limit relating to assets and turnover for merger and
amalgamation, he was of the view that rather than laying down any specified limit in the Act, it
may be mentioned “as may be specified from time to time” so that under administrative action the
limits could be changed. Such a provision would obviate the need to amend the Act from time to
time. He expressed the view that merger of the banks or financial institutions should be taken out
of the purview of the Competition Bill.
14.1 Regarding the restriction on acquisition of shares, he stated that further curbs under the
proposed Bill may amount to excessive regulation and as a result may have adverse implications
for the development of the capital market. He pleaded for the re-examination of the relevant clause
from that angle. He went on to suggest that in case of any alleged contravention of clauses 3 (1)
or 4 (1) by any bank or financial institution, the complaint should be entertained by the Commission
only if it was complied by a recommendation from Reserve Bank of India because it was the
regulator for them. As regards penal provisions in the Bill, he expressed the view that nominee
directors appointed by all public financial institutions on the boards of associate companies, should
be exempted from the purview of the penal provisions as they did not look after day-to-day
management of the company at all. Before, winding up his presentation, he summed up his views
by stating that banks and financial institutions may be kept outside the purview of the Competition
Bill.
15. The Chairman thanked the witness for his lucid presentation and wanted a clarification as
to how many sick industries were saved from liquidation by way of mergers and also the extent
to which banks and other financial institutions had been able to save their money through the
instrumentality of merger. He then invited Members to seek clarifications from the witnesses and
asked the latter to note down the points and send written replies latter.

51
16. A Member suggested two models of doing away with multiplicity of regulators and wanted
to know from the witness which one would be functionally most viable. He also wanted to know
as to which method of defining dominance would be better. Lastly, he wanted them to give
concrete and specific suggestions on the issue of guidelines.
17. The Committee adjourned at 5.30 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 6 November, 2001.

52
XLVI
FORTY-SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 6 November, 2001 in Regal Room, The
Oberoi Towers, Mumbai.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
3. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
4. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
5. Shri Kuldip Nayyar
6. Shri Pritish Nandy
7. Shri B.S. Gnandisekan
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
9. Shri Vinay Katiyar
10. Shri Arun Kumar
11. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
12. Shri P.H. Pandian
13. Shri Subodh Ray
14. Shri Anadi Sahu
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
16. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
17. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Bombay Chambers of Commerce and Industry
1. Shri K. Ramchandran, Vice President and Vice Chairman and Managing Director,
Philips India Ltd.
2. Shri R. Prasanna, Chairman, Legal Affairs Committee
52

53
3. Shri S.H. Rajadhyaskha, Co-Chairman, Legal Affairs Committee
4. Ms. S.K. Bharucha, Past-Chairman, Legal Affairs Committee
5. Shri S.M. Bhandarkar, Past-Chairman, Legal Affairs Committee
6. Shri Bharat Vasani ]
7. Shrimati Sandhya Kudtarkar , ] Member, Legal Affairs Committee
8. Shri S. Vutha ]
9. Shri L.A. D’Souza, Executive Director
10. Shrimati Manju Sood, Joint Director
Representatives of Indian Merchant Chamber
1. Shri Arvind Jolly, President
2. Shri Tanil Kilachanda, Past President
3. Shri S.S. Bhandare, Member, Managing Committee
4. Shri Pravin Ghatalia, Member, Managing Committee
5. Shrimati Kiran Nanda, Chairperson, Economics and Business Reform Committee
6. Shri Nanik Rupani, Chairperson, Electronic and telecommunication
7. Shri Shailesh Vaidya, Co-Chair, Law and Company Affairs Committee
8. Dr. D.R. Pendse, Member, Managing Committee
9. Shri Pradip Shah, Member, Managing Committee
10. Shri P.N. Mogre, Secretary-General
11. Shri Jitendra Sanghvi, Secretary
Representatives of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
Shri D.R. Mehta, Chairman
Shri Ananta Barua, Joint Legal Advisor
Representatives of National Stock Exchange.
Shri Ravi Narain, Managing Director and CEO
2. The Chairman while welcoming the representatives of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and
Industry mentioned the purpose of the meeting. While inviting their perceptions on the various
provisions of the Bill, he mentioned basic objective of the Bill as facilitating competition and
protecting the interests of the consumers. The Chairman thereafter hinted at attempts of the
Government to bring in a series of legislations aimed at providing good corporate governance to
suit the changed world economic scenario and thus to fulfil the international obligations. He
referred to the changes already taken place in the Companies Act, 1956 and some of the changes
therein on the anvil to bring in corporate governance. He then touched upon briefly on the salient
features of Competition Bill and stated that the Bill aimed at facilitating competition among the
various manufacturing and service providers to the best interests of ensuring competition and at
the same time to protect the interests of the consumers. He then traced the history of the Bill and
stated that after consultations at various levels the Bill had been introduced in Parliament and
thereafter referred to the Committee, which had taken up the work of eliciting opinion of the cross
section of Indian society. He then invited the representatives of BCCI to make their presentation.
3.0 The Vice-President of the BCCI began the presentation by thanking the Committee for this
opportunity. He stated that their observations were based on certain fundamental building blocks or
the guiding principles such as commercial enterprises must be made globally competitive and for
that purpose the focus should be on productivity and cost competitiveness. Secondly he stressed

54
upon encouraging commercial enterprises to achieve profitable growth. The third principle he
mentioned was that to achieve these, the enterprises necessarily required a business climate that
was investment friendly and attractive in terms of knowledge flow. Thereafter he left the floor to
his colleagues.
3.1 A rap of BCCI opined that the competition scenario in India was not such that required the
proposed legislation at this point of time. He viewed that the players in the Indian market, by global
benchmarks like global volumes and global markets, were very very small. He strongly felt that the
Bill entailed to establish a Commission rather than a law, though the objects seemed to lay down
a policy and a law concerning competition. In that context, he referred to four clauses i.e. 3, 4,
5 and 6 which proposed to lay down competition law which was re-characterization of the
principles laid in MRTP Act and other clauses talked about the administration of that law by
Competition Commission of India. The Competition policy was not rightly spelt out in the Bill,
which must be evolved first. He felt that at the moment there was no need for such a competition
law given the transition India was going through in view of deregulation, privatization, etc. Citing
the American experience, he stated that competition law therein i.e., the Anti Trust Law had
developed in stages and there were constant stabilization and mid course corrections by judicial
pronouncements. He desired that a cooling period must be provided in the Bill. He viewed that
competition in India had not the reached the stage where it adversely affected either industry or
consumer warranting intervention. He opined that replication of competition law of other country
was incorrect which should adapt to the Indian condition.
3.2 Another witness supplemented the views expressed by his colleagues by pointing out the
fact that clauses 5 and 6 of the Bill were akin to Chapter III of the MRTP Act, 1969, which was
scrapped in July, 1991. He wanted to learn the kind of distortion in Indian Industry/market in the
last ten years which led the Government to reintroduce these provisions in different form which
would delay and hamper the growth of Indian corporate sector. These provisions would bring
significant restrictions on joint venture, collaboration, acquisition and mergers. In that context he
viewed that Indian Industries were facing slowdown and finding difficult to adjust to the realities
of post WTO regime, there was a need for bigger scale; hence restriction in combination would
hamper growth. He cited the example of the chemical industry which were larger applicants for
anti-dumper petition which were basically due to the fact that they were not able to match the
international prices because of its low size and operation. He regarded the time as inopportune to
introduce any new restrictions and allow industries to restructure itself. Indian Industry was not
capable of meeting of challenges of globalisation. The capital intensive sector like power, telecom,
petro-chemical have not commanded even ten per cent market share.
3.3 One more witness added that pre notification requirement for merger would delay the whole
process and thus deter competition. The aspects of mergers and acquisitions were already taken
care of under the Companies Act by the High Courts, which may lead to a situation where two
bodies i.e. High Court and Competition Commission of India may give different judgement on the
same issue.
3.4 The Chairman raised a few queries arising out of presentations made; viz. (i) why the
Indian Industries failed to take the advantage of the deletion of chapter 3 of the MRTP Act, 1969
and (ii) what should be the cooling off period after which the country could have the Competition
Bill.
3.5 Another Member suggested an alternative draft of the Bill. A Member protested by saying
that many of the captains of industry did not appear before the Committee although they were
invited. Another Member wanted to know why the Bombay Chamber was sceptical about the
vertical merger.

55
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of BCCI and requested them to send their written
responses to his observations/queries and those of the Member to the Secretariat of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Indian Merchant Chamber and briefly
mentioned the purpose of the meeting and the history of the competition Bill. He thanked them for
responding to the invitation. He also made a brief mention of the points raised by the Industry and
requested the witnesses to give their considered opinion on those issues.
6.0 The President of the Chamber thanking the Committee for giving them an opportunity to
present their views stated that in principle they welcomed the Bill. But, he opined that India was
too pygmy an economy at this point of time to have this Bill. He said that other countries took
8-10 years to bring about such laws; we too should not hurry as it might stifle the economy. He
advocated for some more time before bringing the Bill and even for reconsidering of the harsh
provisions in the Bill. He thereafter requested one of his teammates to deliberate on legal issues.
6.1 Supplementing the views of the President of the Chamber, he stated that consumer interests
as an objective was a misfit for this Bill as there was a separate legislation for it. He stated that
in Indian economy real competition was absent and pseudo competition existed and in that regard
he questioned the necessity of a law to meet the requirement of the WTO regime. He felt that
much more was required to be done in this country to bring about real competition, to promote
and sustain such competition. When queried on the composition of the selection committee, he
desired that representatives of the Industry should be included in the selection process.
6.2 Another witness referring to the aspect of appreciable adverse effect in the Bill said that
it was subjective and would enable the regulatory authority to act in arbitrary manner. About the
definition of dominant position, he felt that the market share of the produce should be included as
an indicator to determine dominant position as the measure by asset value or turnover appeared to
be flawed. He also suggested that the President or Chairperson of the apex Chamber of Commerce
and Industry could be nominated by rotation as a member on the Selection Committee and its
Director General should be a professional person i.e. a Chartered Accountant or a lawyer. The CCI
should not be subjected to take approval of the Central Government to transfer the case from one
bench to another as stipulated under clause 23 of the Bill. In the Independent Advisory Committee,
as laid down under clauses 47, representatives from industry should be considered.
7. A Member, thereafter asked the witnesses to spell out how competitions could be promoted
by this Bill. He wanted them to give a drafted version of representation of the chambers/industry
for advising the Government regarding policy framework. The Chairman requested the
representatives to submit their written comments to the Secretariat.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. The Chairman welcoming the representatives of Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI) and National Stock Exchange (NSE), thanked them for their presence, describing briefly the
history of the Bill and highlighting important issues relating to the Bill such as mergers,
amalgamation, dominance, cooling off period, the Chairman handed over the floor to the witnesses.
9. The Chairman, SEBI, thanking the Committee for the invitation, welcomed the legislation
and said that this was the right time to adopt it. He mentioned that SEBI was concerned with the
legislation in a limited way i.e. takeovers only. He further mentioned that takeover was necessary
for a corporate entity to acquire proper size so to remain in the global competition. He mentioned
the provisions of takeovers investors interests were also protected. He suggested that dominance
should not be characterized by the size of the company as stipulated in the Bill but with the market

56
share in the percentage term. He observed that with the enactment of the proposed legislation,
overlapping of functions with regard to takeover may occur. Thus he was of the view that
takeovers, along with acquisition, mergers which were being dealt by High Court, may be kept out
of Competition Bill.
10. The MD and CEO, National Stock Exchange then expressing his gratitude to the Committee
said that the provisions regarding preventing the practices which had adverse effect on competition
were essential. He also suggested that the Bill could also deal with the developmental objective of
how to foster competition through strengthening the hand of the consumer. The objective could
also be addressed from the consumers’ point of view rather than from producers’ and suppliers’
point of view. Regulation of competition may lead to conflict between multiple regulatory
authorities. He also gave examples as to illustrate this point as to how the multiplicity of regulators
would hamper the functioning of the economy and make the task of the Commission unenviable.
11. The Chairman raised a query as to that what would be the role of SEBI to protect the
interest of shareholders when the Commission decides to unwind a combination of industries.
12.0 A Member wanted from the witnesses some specific suggestions to minimize the multiplicity
with reference to acquisitions, mergers and amalgamations. He also wanted to know the measures
for promoting competition in great detail. Its specific impact on the market share of a industry and
definition dominance.
12.1 Another Member enquired from Chairman, SEBI as to what would happen to Section 11
(2h) of the SEBI Act, 1992 after the enactment of the Competition Bill. He also wanted to know
the instances which were not in consonance with the SEBI Act, 1992.
13. The Committee adjourned at 1.25 
P.M.

57
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 24 January, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Basanti Sarma
3. Shri Kapil Sibal
4. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
6. Shri K.M. Saifullah
7. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
8. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
9. Shri Drupad Borgohain
10. Shri Swaraj Kaushal
11. Shri Ram Jethmalani
LOK SABHA
12. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
13. Shri Anadi Sahu
14. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
15. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
16. Shri Manabendra Shah
17. Sardar Buta Singh
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
19. Shri M.O.H. Farooq
20. Shri Subodh Ray
21. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
22. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
23. Shri Adhi Sankar
24. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
25. Shri Holkhomang Haokip
26. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
57

58
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Company Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs
1. Dr. S. Chakravarthy, Consultant
2. Shri Rajiv Mehrishi, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed all the Members of the Committee and briefed the
new Members about mandate and functioning of the Committee. He also informed the Members
about the next series of meetings to be held during 4 to 6 February and 18 to 20 February, 2002,
to take up four Bills pending its consideration viz. the Competition Bill, 2001, the Companies
(Amendment) Bill, 2001, the Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2001 and the Representation of
the People (Amendment) Bill, 2001.
3.0 Touching upon the background of the Competition Bill, 2001 the Chairman said that the idea
was for the first time announced by the Finance Minister in his Budget speech in 1999. Thereafter,
an Expert Committee was appointed in October, 1999 which submitted its report in May, 2001. A
concept Bill drafted by the Expert Committee was also put on the website of the Department of
Company Affairs. After inter-ministerial consultations, it was introduced in the Lok Sabha and
subsequently referred to this Committee. Since the last Monsoon Session the Committee had been
considering this Bill.
3.1 The Chairman then welcomed Dr. S. Chakravarthy, Consultant in the Department of
Company Affairs alongwith the representative of the Department and invited him to make a
presentation on the Competition Bill, 2001 and to clarify the points/issues raised by the Members
and witnesses in the meetings of  the Committee.
4.0 Thereupon, the Consultant in the Department of Company Affairs made an exhaustive power
point presentation on the Competition Bill, 2001.
4.1 While elaborating on the features of the Bill, the witness said that Competition today had
to be seen in the context of World Trade Organisation agreements to which India was a signatory.
Then tariffs were to be lower resulting into cheaper imports. The Government was also obliged
not to raise tariff beyond certain limits. While defining Competition, the witness said, “the
Competition is a dynamic concept. It is a tool to mount market pressure to penalise the laggards
and reward the enterprising”.
4.2 Tracing the history of MRTPC, the witness said that other three decades had passed since
it came into force in 1970. Looking at the experience of the MRTP Act, it was found that there
was no clear definition of offences like ‘abuse of dominance’, ‘cartel’, ‘collusion’ and ‘price
fixing’, ‘Bid-rigging’ ‘Predatory pricing’ etc. Though in some generic language, they found mention
in some of the sections.

59
4.3 The witness quoted from the Finance Minister’s Budget Speech of February, 1999 that the
MRTP Act had become obsolete in certain areas in the light of the international economic
developments relating to competition laws and there was a need to shift a focus from curbing
monopolies to promoting competition. Following this, a High-level Committee was set up on
Competition policy which submitted a draft law in June, 2001.
4.4 The witness then, explained the four components of the Competition Bill, viz. (i) the anti-
competition agreements; (ii) abuse of dominance; (iii) control of combinations i.e. mergers,
amalgamations, acquisitions and takeovers; and (iv) competition advocacy i.e.  fostering
competition.
5.0 A Member of the Committee requested the witness to simplify the presentation in concrete
terms so that even a common person could understand it. He said; as far as he understood, there
were three purposes of the Bill. The first was to benefit the consumers by outlawing a trade
practice of coming together to hijack the prices. Secondly, to improve the quality of a product or
service and thirdly to curb predatory capitalism of microsoft variety. He again urged the witness
to explain the provisions of the Bill in simple terms.
6.0 The witness began with defining the cartels with an example of cement cartels and narrated
how a horizontal agreement between producers in the manufacturing goods could lead to hijacking
of the price and state of that when it became anti-competitive, there was a provision in the Bill
to outlaw cartels.
6.1 According to the witness the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) was
the biggest cartel in the world, which control the price by reducing or increasing the production.
No anti-cartel law applied to them as it was a Government cartel.
6.2 Explaining the concept of vertical agreements, the witness said tie-in arrangements were
vertical agreements and those were not as bad as the horizontal agreements. He gave the example
of tie-in arrangements like gas connection with a compulsory purchase of a hot-plate; refusal to
deal and resale price maintenance.
6.3 Commenting upon the abuse of dominance, the witness said dominance per se was not
objectionable but abuse of dominance was an offence. Denial of market access was one of the
examples of abuse. Coming to the issues of combinations, mergers or amalgamations, the witness
explained that out of existing four manufacturers, if three merged together, then there would be
only two players, in the market. When they merge they acquire enormous economic strength. This
empowers them to discourage new entrants and then they dictate prices ultimately acquiring the
dominance. To control this there was a need of regulation on competition perspective, the witness
felt. He stated that the combinations would be subject to the merger regulation and notification of
combinations had been made voluntary and not mandatory. He opined that once the proposed
Competition Commission of India was informed of the merger, it was required by law to decide
it within 90 working days or else it would be deemed to have been approved.
6.3 Regarding the small-scale sector or any class of enterprises like steel, fertilizer etc. the
witness had stated that the Government had the power to exempt those industries from competition
law for a particular period of time in the interest of national security or public interest.
6.4 Thereafter, the witness referred to composition and selection of proposed Competition
Commission of India.
6.5.0 The witness then summarised the following apprehensions about the present Bill:
(i) Is the Competition Law required at all?

60
(ii) the new law is draconian;
(iii) the size in MRTP Act has been brought back through the back door in the new law;
(iv) the combination of regulations will impede India from becoming globally competitive;
(v) it would lead to possible injury to domestic industries, particularly to the small scale
sector;
(vi) the CCI will become a super regulator;
(vii) the ‘group concept’ in combination regulation is regressive; and
(viii) the new law supersedes all other laws and thus CCI becomes a behemoth.
6.5.1 The witness while answering the above points said that in the light of globalisation, foreign
companies were arriving in our country and as a consequence anti-competition practices would
surface which needed to be regulated. In order to fulfill WTO obligations, regulatory advocacy
functions needed to be brought into force and that was why competition law was required.
6.5.2 Reacting to the apprehensions that this new law was draconian, the witness said that the
number of per se offences in the MRTP Act were fourteen whereas in the new law there were
only four offences which were per se. Apart from these four offences, the remaining ones in the
new law were under the rule of reason. Elaborating on the per se offences in the new law, the
witness explained that cartels, bid-rigging, limiting territory and limiting production were grave
offences.
6.5.3 The witness then stated that for a merger a threshold limit of Rs.l000 crore assets or
Rs.3000 crore turnover was prescribed only for combinations. He clarified that this threshold limit
was intended only to screen out smaller mergers. Thus, size was no longer a factor in the new
law.
6.5.4 Speaking on the need for combination control, the witness said that the Competition Law
of 72 countries had been studied which included developed, developing and least developed
countries. According to him, out of seventy-two countries fifty-one countries had mandatory pre-
merger notification requirement. Besides, twelve countries had mandatory notification requirement
but at a slightly later stages i.e. post closing stage. However, the new law prescribes own
voluntary notification. Thus, out of Seventy-two countries, only nine had voluntary notification and
India was one of them.
6.5.5 On the question whether the Companies Act could not take care of mergers on the same
had provisions to that effect, the witness was of the view that the Companies Act regulated
mergers in terms of shareholders’ interests, share values, labour interests etc. The witness found
nothing wrong in the mergers being handled under the Companies Act, except that the High Courts
might take six months or one year or more than that for the purpose whereas the new law had
a time limit of 90 working days to dispose of the merger cases.
6.5.6 The witness clarified that it was true that regulations organisations like the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India and the Electricity Regulatory Commission could refer issues within
the competition perspective to the CCI for advice. The CCI would give its advice but that advice
would not be binding on TRAI or ERC. Thus the CCI would not become a super regulator.
6.5.7 D efending the provision of exemptions under the term ‘public interest’ the witness said that
if the law had no exemptions, there existed a possibility of devastating consequences on some
sectors. Thus he justified the provisions.

61
6.5.8 Replying to the charge that the Competition Bill was being enacted under pressure from
WTO, World Bank, IMF, ADB etc. the witness vehemently denied the same.
6.5.9 The witn ess stated that concerns were expressed over the provision of penalties especially
civil imprisonment. He clarified that civil imprisonment was provided for only two offences viz.
contravention of the order of the CCI and non-compliance or failure in complying. This penalty
was to provide teeth to the CCI, lest the CCI should become ineffective like the MRTP
Commission.
6.5.10 Regarding the interests of the staff of the MRTP Commission, the witness submitted that
rights and interests of the staff would be protected. All deputationists would be reverted back to
their parent organisations/Ministries/Departments and regular employees of the MRTP Commission
will become officers/employees of the Central Government with all their rights protected. However,
the Chairman and Members of that Commission would have to vacate their offices with
compensation not exceeding three months’ pay and allowances.
6.6 The witness thereafter made a brief comparison between the MRTP Act and the proposed
Competition Bill, as follows:
(i) the MRTP Act was premised on size and the Competition Bill was premised on
behaviour/conduct;
(ii) The MRTP Act was only procedure oriented whereas the proposed Bill was result
oriented;
(iii) The MRTP Act was only reformatory without teeth and the Competition Bill was
punitive;
(iv) In the MRTP Act the offences were defined implicity but in the new one the offence
were defined explicitly;
(v) The MRTP Act frowned on dominance whereas the new one frowned on abuse of
dominance;
(vi) The MRTP Act had a large number of per se offences whereas in the new law the
number was only four;
(vii) The MRTP Act covered unfair trade practices and thereby affected the individual
consumer interests whereas in the new Bill the unfair trade practices were excluded
and proposed to be covered under the Consumer Protection Act;
(viii) The appointments in the MRTP Commission were political whereas in the new one
it would be a collegium;
(ix) In the MRTP Act there was no competition advocacy, but the CCI had competition
advocacy role; and
(x) The MRTP Act was reactive but the CCI was proactive.
7.0 The Chairman thanked the witness for a comprehensive presentation on the subject and
informed him that the Members would seek clarifications on certain points and told him to note
down the points raised by them and send written responses to the Secretariat later.
8.0 Members raised/made the following points/queries/suggestions/on the Competition Bill.
(i) Was it not possible to amend only certain clauses in the MRTPC Act rather than
bringing a new Bill whereas the purpose was just to benefit the consumers?

62
(ii) Was it not necessary to comply with the W.T.O. objections relating to the labour
laws, administered prices etc. before brining the competition law in the statute
book?
(iii) Regarding the abuse of domination, the price preference and the purchase preference
would remain for the public undertakings. Although the price preference had been
deleted to some extent, purchase preference was still continued. In view of this, if
the law was passed, would it not create problem for the PSUs as many of them had
not disinvested, and many may not disinvest in the near future?
(iv) It would be advisable to have a Judge of the Supreme Court, sitting or retired, to
be the Chairperson, as the appellate authority against the judgement of the CCI was
the Supreme Court.
(v) Clauses 52 and 53 had given lots of powers to the Central Government which may
dilute the independent character of the CCI. Clause 47 needed to be suitably
amended, keeping in view clause 52.
(vi) There could be some legal difficulties in transferring over 5000 pending cases under
the MRTP Act to the Consumer Courts. This required rethinking before this
Committee took a decision as to whether all cases were to be sent to consumer
Courts or as a transitional measure, the MRTP Commission could continue and
dispose of those cases within a period of three-four years.
(vii) What were the provisions regarding competition regulation in the USA and the
European countries and to what extent this legislation was close to the legislations
there? Was it possible to provide the Committee a chart in order to enable them to
analyse it properly?
(viii) Why can’t the powers of the Commission be given to the District Judges instead of
constituting a Competition Commission which will also facilitate enforcement of the
decisions?
(ix) Regarding bringing the small scale sector under the purview of Competition, it was
pointed out that the transition period has to be longer than proposed 5-10 years.
(x) There was no competition law anywhere in the world which gave powers to the
Government to exempt industries from competition. The power of exemption under
Clause 52 of the Bill would destroy competition within the regime of the Competition
Bill.
(xi) The exempted categories should be clearly mentioned and the phrase ‘public interest’
may be deleted.
(xii) The extra-territorial jurisdiction to regulate mergers and combinations outside the
country might discourage the foreign investment in the country.
(xiii) In the initial stages, when the economy was liberalised, there would be number of
mergers and combinations and the industry should have this freedom in order to be
competitive. This Bill envisaged the investigation after the merger took place. An
apprehension was raised that when two companies merged into one entity, and
suddenly the Commission decided to oppose it, there would be a huge financial
impact on their business.

63
(xiv) Regarding logistics it was observed that in a huge country like India, 10 Members
of the Commission would not be able to deal with the mergers and combinations and
anti-competitive prices. It was suggested that the number of members of the CCI
should be 30 instead of 10.
9. The Chairman thanked the witness and requested him to send the written responses of the
Department of Company Affairs to the Secretariat later.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 5.05 
P.M. to meet at 3.00 P.M. on 4 February, 2002.

64
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 5 February, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
4. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
5. Shri Swaraj Kaushal
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
7. Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
8. Shri Anadi Sahu
9. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
10. Shri M.O.H. Farooq
11. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
12. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
13. Shri P.H. Pandian
14. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
15. Shri Holkhomang Haokip
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
2. Following the Committee’s decision to discuss the Competition Bill, amongst ourselves’, the
Chairman traced the origin of the Bill which can be chronologically presented in the following
manner:
2.1 First announced in the Budget speech of the Finance Minister on 27 February, 1999. The
Finance Minister said that in the 1999s, the country had undertaken some major economic
liberalization programmes resulting into changed world, environment rendering MRTP Act obsolete,
and it had necessitated a new Competition Bill, instead of the MRTP Act.
64

65
2.2 In this context, a High Power Committee under Shri Raghavan was appointed, which
submitted its Report in May, 2000, followed by consultations at various stages.
2.3 The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2001 and it was referred to the
Committee on Home Affairs for consideration and report thereon.
2.4 Representatives of various Chambers of Commerce and Industries, professional bodies like,
Institute of Chartered Accountants, Institute of Cost Accountants, Institute of Company Secretaries
etc. have already deposed on the Bill.
2.5 The Committee visited Mumbai in November, 2001 and had interaction with the captains of
Industry, financial institutions and Mumbai based Chambers of Commerce and Industry.
3. The Chairman briefly explained the objectives set out by the Bill, viz. to set up the
Competition Commission of India (CCI); CCI to advocate competition; and to regulate the market
and prevent unfair trade practices to facilitate competition;
3.1 The Chairman citing the issue of amalgmation and merger said that a large section of the
corporate sector felt that India had not reached a stage where there should be discouragement to
amalgmation, merger, acquition etc. because the size of our corporate sector, compared to the
multinationals, with whom they were expected to compete was quite inadequate. Therefore, they
felt that instead of going in for the Competition Bill right now, we  should watch the international
situation and perhaps the Competition Bill, in its present shape and form, was a bit premature. He
further said that the others felt that there should be a legal framework within which the market
forces should be allowed to play its role on a level playing field and also not to the detriment of
the interests of the consumer.
4. A member was of the view that there was no need to pass this piece of legislation in the
present time and in its present form. His argument was that issues like Competition Policy, trade
and investment and many related issues were discussed at WTO level and if we passed this
legislation covering the whole Competition policy, we would be losing the bargaining power at
the WTO. He suggested that since final decisions on these issues would be taken before
1st January, 2005, we should not pass this Bill before that time. Rather if some changes were
required in the MRTP Act, we could move such amendments so as to protect our industries or
to facilitate competition.
5. The Chairman said that so far as the negotiation was concerned it had been agreed upon
at the Ministerial meeting at Doha. However, the modality of negotiations had to be decided, which
would start after the next round of Ministerial meeting in 2005.
5.1 In response to the Member’s points, the Chairman further clarified that so far as the
negotiation in the WTO was concerned, it was only among the trading partners. India would
actually benefit in the absence of negotiations. However, once the negotiations started it would be
mainly among the European Union, USA and Japan. Once these economic powers agreed and made
the negotiations, then others did not have the option but follow as they happend to be the trading
partners of most of the developing countries. He was of the opinion that India’s bargaining power
would have been much more if the negotiations were not agreed upon. Nevertheless, the Chairman
felt, when the modalities of the negotiations were being discussed, we could wait and we should
not show all our cards to them by saying that these were in our Competition Law.
6. The Member agreeing with the apprehensions raised by the Chairman felt that if the
business was opened up fully, then the MNCs with big turnover would come in and capture the
market which would be against the interest of Indian industries.

66
6.1 Referring to the public sector, he said that this Bill would adversely affect their functioning
as safeguard provided in Clause 52 was not sufficient.
6.2 The member elaborating further on the implications of the Bill, said, the Government would
be forced to retreat from most of the economic matters. Rather the Government had to play an
important role in protecting the interest of small scale industries, handicrafts which influenced the
poorer sections of society.
6.3 The member wanted to know the possible effect of the Competition Bill on the trade union
rights such as the right to organise and to make collective bargaining.
7. The Chairman acknowledged the relevance of the above point which deserved examination.
8. The member concluded by saying that we should not rush with this piece of legislation and
wait for at least up to 2005. In the meanwhile, he suggested, if some changes were required, the
MRTP Act may be suitably amended.
9. Another member raised objection to Clause 52 which dwelt upon the power of the
Government to exempt any enterprise in the name of security and public interest. He was of the
view that ‘public interest’ was a matter of big discretion on the part of the Government and it
could be misused to favour certain interests and the very purpose of having the Competition Act
would get defeated. He suggested that the words ‘Public interest’ should be defined and some
guidelines must be laid down for that.
10. A member was of the view that our industry predominated by the Small Scale Industries
did not have enough experience to face the onslaught of Competition from abroad especially in
terms of size. The talk of consumer interest should go hand-in-hand with protecting the interests
of those who contributed maximum to industrial growth. He further said that it would be in the
fitness of things to amend some provisions of the MRTPC Act and keep this Bill in waiting.
11. Another member suggested that there should not be any hurry in enacting laws like this.
He was of the opinion that the agrarian sector had been totally neglected because neither it was
considered an industry nor was it considered a business proposition. However, to protect the
interests of the consumers and not to protect the interests of the producers hit directly at the
agrasian society that was employing more than 70% of our population. He pointed out that Section
52 of this Bill provided no protection to that sector.
11.1 He further said that big business houses had proposed that they were not yet ready for this
Competition Bill in the present economic scenario.
11.2 Referring to a specific point the member said that it had been kept open as to who would
be heading the Commission. He suggested that it should specifically be mentioned whether a retired
Supreme Court judge or somebody else would head the Commission.
12. A member defending the MRTPC said that it was doing quite a useful job in the area of
restrictive trade practices by giving injunction against dumping by MNCs in India. Though, he
agreed that in the present scenario, the law needed some change, but whether we should hurry
through this competition law was an important question, he felt. He said that in Punjab, small
sector and medium sector industries had closed in the face of MNCs. Even the presence of MNCs
in India had not benefited the consumers.
12.1 He was of the firm opinion that the Competition Bill was not going to help our small scale
industries or consumers. Thus, he felt, we should wait for a proper climate, study what changes
were to be made in the already existing MRTP Act and then replace it with another law.

67
12.2. He wondered as to why the Government wanted to bring the Competition Bill. None of the
underdeveloped countries had this law. It was there only in UK and USA. He suggested that the
Government should try to first strengthen our small scale and medium scale sectors and once our
corporates were confident enough to take on to the MNCs, we should go for this law. Till then
this Bill could wait.
13. Another member was of the view that unless we had satisfactory answers to some of the
thorny issues which had been raised through this piece of legislation, we should not take up clause-
by-clause consideration of this Bill.
13.1 He further said that it was much more of a policy matter. According to him, “the law is
not what it says, but it is also what is does”, therefore, we must study this particular piece of
proposed legislation in terms of what it would do and how it would do, how it would operate and
how, it would affect our country.
13.2 Speaking on competition, he said, competition itself was neither good nor bad. When it was
a cut throat competition, it could be terrible and when it was for promoting quality, better price,
it may be very good. But competition between unequal was always a matter of worry.
14.0 A member was of the view that competition should not be blocked. Giving specific example
of Japanes investments he said, they preferred China to India, which was an insult to India and
for this he squarely blamed the bureaucrats for putting so many dos and donts.
15.0 Another Member began by saying that this. Bill, when it became an Act, would not be
implementable because many powers had been given to the Competition Commissioner of India, but
at the same time, lots of controls were vested in the Government. This would create a lot of
conflicting problems.
15.1 Referring to the suggestions of the High Level Committee, the member said, labour laws,
administered prices mechanism, disinvestments etc. had to be taken into account first, before we
enacted this Competition Bill. Thus, he said, we were going in a hurry to pass this Bill. It would
not be appropriate now to pass it at this stage. However, in case this Bill had to be passed, he
would suggest that there should be a transitional phase of 4-5 years, before the CCI should
takeover the MRTPC. During this transitional period the CCI should be entrusted with the role of
advocacy, only.
15.2 He further said that re-reading and re-drafting of the Bill was necessary in order to ensure
that we complied with the WTO agreement, but at the same time, we did not put our people to
disadvantage like the small scale industries.
16. The Chairman thanked the members for their frank and learned opinion on the Bill. Giving
his remarks on the Bill, he said, there was no tearing hurry to get the Bill passed in its formal
shape as it had been presented to us. He felt that some of the provisions of the Bill were to be
looked into in greater details.
16.1 The Chairman wanted the Government to clarify whether it was going to affect, in any
way, our negotiations with our trading partners within the agreement of the WTO. There was no
compulsion or directive from the WTO or from the IMF or from any other international or
multinational agencies. In this case if we found that passage of such legislation was standing in
our way of having a better bargain, we should not do it.
16.2 The Chairman was of the opinion that two things were emerging very clearly. If we wanted
to maintain a reasonable level of GDP Growth, we could not allow our small scale and medium
scale industries to suffer. We could not have globalisation at the cost of our economy.

68
16.3 Though not directly linked to the subject, he wanted to know as to why the economic
growth was slowing down in the last five years.
16.4 The Chairman pointed out that in the light of a major amendment to the company law to
have the Insolvency Act, the comprehensive company legislations are there to govern the corporate
sector. In this backdrop, he wondered, whether there was any need of any separate competition
law.
16.5 While recalling a suggestion from the Secretary, Department of Company Affairs that
instead of calling it a Company Act, we should use the epithet of Corporate Governance Act, the
Chairman wanted to solicit opinion from the Committee whether the Competition could be a part
of the corporate management instead of many separate legislations. However, he wanted to ensure
that the restrictive trade practices must be prevented with adequate legal framework because certain
other countries would try to dump their goods and predatory price would take place, a China was
doing it, though indirectly through Nepal route.
16.6 The Chairman pointed out that this was the record consecutive year of the global recession,
and unless in the next quarter, there was some recovery in certain items, there would be a
tendency of the manufacturing countries to dump their goods and services into countries like India
where there was reasonably expanded market. Thus, he felt, some provision should be there either
in the existing MRTP Act by making necessary amendment or in the company law by adding a
separate chapter, to prevent the practice of dumping in our country.
16.7 Provoking the Members to give their opinion on the mergers, amalgamations and
acquisitions, the Chairman cited an example of Bank Managers. He said, if two-three banks could
be merged together, it could be more effective as it would reduce operational cost. And this was
applicable to the public sector as well as the private sector. He felt that the Committee should find
out whether the public sector should no longer require the statutory protection which it was having
earlier.
16.8 Speaking on the issue of dominance and abuse of dominance, the Chairman wondered as
to who was going to determine the abuse of dominance, and whether there may not be high
subjectivity in determining that a particular act amounted to the abuse of dominance or not. He felt,
that while framing this legislation the element of subjectivity should be minimised and for this he
called upon the members with legal background to guide the Committee.
16.9 The Chairman informed the Committee about inviting Mr. Evan Cox for an informed
discussion on the Bill. He further informed the Committee that Mr. Cox was an expert in
International Competition Laws and wanted to meet him on 15th February, 2002. The Chairman
invited the Member to join him, if interested in the matter.
16.10 Referring to the view expressed by a Member that very few countries had a competition
law, the Chairman said that we should not necessarily be the Casablanca to stand on a burning
deck and proclaim over the whole world that we were the first to do this, to help the corporate
sector.
17. The Chairman told the Committee that he wanted to dispose off the Companies (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2001, soon. Regarding the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001, he said that it
would be taken up only after the Demands for Grants business was over.
18. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
19. The Committee adjourned at 12.50 
P.M.

69
XXII
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 6th June, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Shri Motilal V ora
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
9. Shri Anadi Sahu
10. Shri Vinay Katiyar
11. Shri Manabendra Shah
12. Shri K. Karunakaran
13. Begum Noor Bano
14. Shri M.O.H. Farooq
15. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
16. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
17. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
18. Shri Holkhomang Haokip
19. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
20. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefly touched upon evidences
recorded in Delhi and Mumbai and in-house discussions held on the Competition Bill, 2001. He also
inter alia touched upon the views expressed by the Members on the basic philosophy of the
Competition Bill, 2001. Thereafter, he recapitulated briefly the history of the Bill from its conception
69

70
upto the current stage and some of its salient features for the Members who joined the Committee
lately.
2.1 He mentioned that since the evidence part was over, the Committee may hold indepth
discussion before taking up clause-by-clause considerations on the Bill. The Committee agreed to
the suggestion of the Chairman.
3.0 A Member recalling his earlier stand, stated that the change in circumstances needed the
passage of the Bill. While referring to the Ministry’s reply which stated that the CCl was like a
judicial forum, he suggested changes in the qualification of its Chairperson so as to attract persons
from judiciary exclusively. He also suggested changes in the composition of the Selection
Committee for nominating Chairman and Members of CCl, by excluding the Ministries.
3.1 Another Member was of the view that the predatory capitalism was bad and opined that the
price hijack to the detriment of consumers, needed to be discouraged and cooperative capitalism
rather competitive capitalism needed to be encouraged, which could be achieved by the enactment
of this Bill. He sought more time to express his views on the Bill.
3.2 A Member suggested that the need of the hour could be fulfilled even by amending the
MRTP Act. He wanted to know about the fate of the officials and employees of the MRTP
Commission post enactment of the Competition Bill.
3.3 Another Member expressing his apprehension about the fallout of consumers’ interests, after
the enactment of the Bill, wanted the Committee to consider the aspect deeply. He felt that the
public sector, which was responsible for supplying the essentials, as well as Public Distribution
System, would be affected when they would be transferred to the private sector. In that context,
he desired enlargement of the concept of ‘public interest’ as spelled out in clause 52 of the Bill.
3.4 A Member while referring to the provision of the Bill which gives administrative status to
mergers and amalgamations, stated that it was overlapping with company law which should be
taken care of. He wanted the CCI to be on the lines of National Company Law Tribunal by bringing
in judicial officers as its Chairperson and Members. He also felt strongly as to how the same body
i.e. the CCI would be a body corporate, judicial body and do competition advocacy.
3.5 Another member wanted that a tabulated documentation in respect of evidence recorded by
the Committee, in condensed form, may be circulated to the Members before clause-by-clause
consideration on the Bill.
4. The Committee then discussed the modalities to reflect the views of Members on the Bill,
in the Report. The Committee agreed to take up clause-by-clause consideration after another round
of detailed discussion on the Bill.
5.0 The Committee decided upon the dates of next series of meetings viz. 17, 18, 19 and
20th June, 2002.
5.1 The Committee adjourned at 12.13 
P.M. to meet at 3.00 P.M. on 17th June, 2001.

71
XXIX
TWENTY-NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, 17th July, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
4. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Shri Motilal V ora
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
9. Shri Anadi Sahu
10. Shri Manabendra Shah
11. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
12. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
13. Shri Holkhomang Haokip
14. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members and invited them to make suggestions on the draft
Ninety second Report on the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001
3.0 The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Report without any change.
3.1 The Committee decided to present the Report alongwith the Evidence tendered on the Bill,
on 23rd July, 2002. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Hansraj
Bhardwaj and Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai and Shri Anadi Sahu and Shri Adhi Shankar to present/
lay the report alongwith evidence in the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha, respectively.
4.0 The Chairman then informed the Members about the letter of the Union Finance Minister
dated 9th July, 2000 addressed to the Chairman of the Committee, requesting for the expeditious
71

72
disposal of the Competition Bill by the Committee in view of its significant impact on the country’s
economy.
4.1 The Chairman enumerated the efforts made by the Committee in the process of examination
of the Bill such as recording a number of evidences of a cross section of the society, the visit
to Mumbai and the number of meetings held for the purpose and requested the Members to express
their views on the request of Finance Minister.
4.2 The Committee considered the request of Finance Minister and agreed to present the Report
on the Competition Bill, 2001 in the current session of Parliament.
5. The Committee then decided to meet on 30-31 July, 2002 to further consider on the
Competition Bill and to take up clause-by-clause consideration.
6. The Committee adjourned at 3.55 
P.M.

73
XXXI
THIRTY-FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, 1st August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Shrimati Ambika Soni
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
9. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
10. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
11. Shri Subodh Ray
12. Shri P.H. Pandian
13. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
14. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
Department of Company Affairs
1. Shri Vinod Dhall, Secretary
2. Shri Rajiv Mehrishi, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. S. Chakravarthy, Consultant
4. Shri S.B. Mathur, Consultant
5. Shri V .S. Rao, Director (Inspection and Investigation)
6. Shri Aditya Prakash, Director
73

74
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
Legislative Department
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri A. Vijay Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2.0 The Chairman shared with the Members the contents of the letter of the Union Finance
Minister for clearing the Competition Bill, 2001. He indicated that the Report on the Bill could be
presented before the adjournment of Parliament. Thereafter he requested Shri Ram Jethmalani to
express his views on the Competition Bill, 2001.
2.1 Shri Jethmalani mentioned that the Bill is based upon a new economic theory. He then
referred to the notes of Dr. S. Chakravarthy, Mr. P.M. Narielvala and Mr. Sudhir Mulji, appended
to the Report of High Level Committee on Competition Policy and Law. He mentioned that the
elements of competition law had been present in India since long.
2.2 Speaking about Mr. Sudhir Mulji’s note he felt that his idea that the law was not required
was not proper. Again touching upon the views of Mr. Narielvala, he felt that the suggestion for
doing away with the requirement of pre-notification was not appropriate. He cited the efforts of
WTO in formulating the International Competition Law just like our domestic competition law.
Further on, he suggested that it would help the economy if the trade barriers were removed. He
felt that at this stage after adoption of WTO views and the new philosophy, there was no reason
to object to the Bill. He also referred to the fact that even China had become a member of WTO
which showed that global consensus had emerged on the fact that market forces and economic
efficiency were the best ways.
2.3 Referring to the issues of poverty and hunger which were global problems, required global
solution. He further pointed out that for equitable distribution, a whole new process was required
and a modification of the existing one would not do.
2.4 On the aspect whether the Bill would affect the PSUs and small scale sector, he believed
that in a climate of disinvestment it would not affect the public interest. He felt that exposing the
public sector was not bad as it would improve their efficiency and in turn will benefit the
consumer.
2.5 He further said that anti-dumping law would remain to protect the domestic market. This
Bill would rather protect against the predatory practices of the foreign companies. On the effect
of Competition Law on the labour opportunities, he felt that in the long run due to increased
wealth, new employment would be generated.
2.6 Thereafter a Member aired his disagreement with the basic approach of the Bill. He felt that
Government was trying to bring distribution in the hands of market forces and benefit the
enterprises. He apprehended that on coming into force of this Bill, the Public Distribution Scheme
and Support Price Mechanism would be affected.
2.7 That query, Shri Jethmalani clarified that subsidies were not prohibited by Competition Bill.
The Chairman also clarified that it would lead the Government to redraft the subsidies and only
the negative subsidies would go.
2.8 At that stage, the Consultant in the Department of Company Af fairs clarified that minimum
support price was a sovereign power of the Government and the Bill would not affect that power.
2.9 The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.

75
Clause 2
3.0 One of the suggestions that the words “is proposed to be engaged in any activity” in the
definition of ‘enterprise’ in sub-clause (g) of the clause appeared to be confusing and thus may
be deleted. The Department had agreed to delete those words. Further on the suggestion pertaining
to sub-clause (t) only one professional service i.e. accounting had been included in the definition
of service whereas medical and legal services were excluded. The Department of Company Affairs
had proposed deletion of ‘accounting’ in the clause.
3.1 The Clause was adopted subject to the aforeseen amendments.
Clause 3
4.0 On the suggestion that any of the four per se offences may have negative effect on
desirable joint venture, and to exempt such joint ventures from per se offences, the Department
had agreed to add proviso to sub-clause (3) of the clause to the effect that the genuine joint
venture would be exempted from per se offence but would be examined on the basis of rule of
reason.
4.1 The Department had further agreed to the suggestion to add the words “in India” after the
words “adverse effect on competition” in sub clause (4) of the clause and proposed to bring an
amendment to that effect.
4.2 The Department after examining the suggestion to give blanket exemption to Intellectual
Property Rights (IPRs) had felt that clause 4(6) of the Concept Bill which permit the application
of competition law to examine any unreasonable conditions that may be imposed by the right holder
while exploiting his/her rights, may be incorporated in the present Bill.
4.3 The Clause was adopted subject to the proposed amendments.
Clause 4
5.0 A suggestion was made to add a proviso to make the expression clear as the term
‘discrimination’ in clause 4(2) was without any additional guidance. The Department had agreed to
the suggestion.
5.1 Another suggestion was received for deleting words “or outside India” in explanation (a) to
clause 4(2) (e) not to discourage an Indian company having a position/strength outside India by
the competition law of India to which the Department had agreed.
5.2 The Clause was adopted subject to the proposed amendments.
Clause 8
6.0 The Committee desired that the Chairperson of the CCI should be a person from Judiciary
i.e. a serving/retired judge of a High Court. Thus qualification for the office should be different
from Members of the CCl.
6.1 The Clause was adopted subject to the proposed amendments.
Clause 9
7.0 The Committee had observed that keeping Minister-in-charge of Ministries in the Selection
Committee may lead to executive interference.

76
7.1 The Department had, accordingly, proposed change in the composition of the Selection
Committee by bringing in Secretaries, Ministry of Finance, Labour, Department of Company
Affairs, Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department in place of Ministers.
7.2 The Clause was adopted subject to the proposed amendments.
Clause 10
8.0 The Department had proposed lowering the age cap for the chairperson of the CCI to 67 years
instead of 70 years as has been done in the case of proposed National Company Law Tribunal
(NCLT) under the Companies Act, 1956.
8.1 The clause was adopted subject to the amendment proposed.
Clause 11
9.0 The Department had agreed to delete sub-clauses (2) and (3) of the clause wherein the
provision of reference to the Supreme Court for removal of Chairperson/Members of the CCl was
mentioned, on the suggestion of a witness.
9.1 The clause was adopted subject to above amendments.
Clause 12
10.0 The Department had accepted the suggestion that Chairperson/Members of CCI should be
debarred for a period of 12 months after retirement from accepting any employment instead of 6
months and agreed to bring an amendment in the clause to that effect.
10.1 The clause was adopted subject to amendment agreed to.
Clause 16
11.0 The Department had accepted the suggestion not to count the experience in CBI/Police
investigations for the post of Director-General and Additional/Joint/Deputy and Assistant Directors
General in the CCI and agreed to provide it in the rules while defining investigation.
11.1 The Committee felt that the acceptance of such suggestion would not effect any amendment
in the clause hence the clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 19
12.0 The Department had agreed to the suggestion to delete sub-clause (5) as IPRs would not
be given blanket power to exert its dominance in relevant market in consultation with the Ministry
of Law.
12.1 On the suggestion that while considering the relevant market, the CCI should consider both
relevant geographic market and relevant product market and the Department had proposed
amendment in sub-clause (5) to substitute the word ‘or’ between the relevant geographic market
and the relevant product market with ‘and’.
12.2 The clause was adopted subject to the above.
Clause 21
13.0 On the suggestion that the clause should make it mandatory for the statutory body to make

77
a reference to the CCI when any party to the proceeding raise that the issue was contrary to the
competition law, the Department had proposed to substitute the word ‘shall’ in the last line of sub-
clause (1) of the clause with ‘may’.
13.1 On the suggestion that a time frame may be provided in the clause within which the CCI
should dispose the reference made to it by statutory body, the Department had proposed a time
limit of sixty days for the purpose under sub-clause (2).
13.2 The clause was adopted subject to the above amendments.
Clause 23
14.0 The Department had not agreed to the suggestion to dispense with the requirement of prior
approval of Union Government in case of a transfer of a member by the chairperson of the CCI
in toto . The amendment proposed by the Department was to the effect that prior approval of the
Central Government was required when there was transfer of a member from one city to another.
14.1 The clause was adopted subject to above amendment.
Clause 27
15.0 The Department had agreed to rectify the expression of ‘an enterprise’ occurring in the first
line of the clause by ‘or an enterprise’ as pointed out by a witness.
15.1 The Department had agreed to the suggestion to vest the authority with the CCI to protect
whistle blower for setting leniency programme and incorporate appropriate leniency/ amnesty
provision.
15.2 The Department had agreed to amend sub-clause (b) to the effect that a penalty of three
times the proven gain to the cartel may be levied subject to atleast 10% of the average turnover
for the last three preceding financial years.
15.3 The clause was adopted subject to the amendments.
Clause 31
16.0 A witness had suggested that the CCI should be conferred with powers to cooperate with
competition authorities in other countries. The Department had clarified that such power should be
with the Government rather than with the CCI. The Department had agreed to incorporate a
provision in the Bill to provide power to Government in this regard.
16.1 The clause was adopted subject to the amendment.
Clause 32
17.0 The Department had accepted the suggestion to delete sub-clause (c) as a consequential
change of amendments to clause 4 (2) (C).
17.1 The Committee adopted the clause subject to the amendment.
Clause 38
18.0 The Committee had pointed out that under sub-clause 2(a) of the Clause, the CCI can
amend any order passed by it suo motu.

78
18.1 The Committee recommended that the Government should make the clause specific to the
extent that while amending its own order for rectification of mistakes, the Commission should not
touch the substantive part of its order.
18.2 The Clause was adopted, subject to the above.
Clause 47
19.0 On the suggestion that the CCI should have power to recommend to Central or State
Government, after examining any existing or proposed law from competition angle. The Department
had communicated to the Committee that if the Government in its own discretion make a reference,
the CCI can examine the policy/law from competition angle and to that extent the clause can be
amended.
19.1 The clause was adopted subject to the above.
Clause 52
20.0 A witness had pointed out that an enterprise may be performing sovereign and non-
sovereign functions. Any exemption of the enterprise from the application of competition law would
mean exemption relating to non-sovereign function also. Therefore, the provision under sub-clause
(c) of the clause should lay emphasis on function rather than enterprise. He had accordingly
suggested rewording of the sub-clause. The Department had welcomed the suggestion and
proposed rewording of the sub-clause as: “any sovereign function including functions incidental
thereto performed by an enterprise on behalf of the Central Government or a State Government”.
20.1 The clause was adopted subject to the amendment.
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and the Title
21.0 Clause 1,  the Enacting Formula and the title were adopted with some changes which are
of consequential nature, namely, ‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’ to be substituted by ‘2002’ and ‘Fifty-
third’, respectively.
22.0 The Committee recommended that the Bill may be passed after incorporating amendments
suggested by it and giving due consideration to other observations of the Committee.
23.0 The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 12 August, 2002.

79
XXXII
THIRTY-SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 12 August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Kalraj Mishra
4. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
5. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
6. Shri Drupad Borgohain
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Shri Motilal V ora
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
10. Shri Anadi Sahu
11. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
12. Shri Ramji Lal Suman
13. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
14. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
2.0 The Chairman initiated the meeting by recalling the deliberations held in the previous meeting
on the Competition Bill, 2001 in which clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill was taken up.
2.1 The Chairman then placed the draft Report on the Competition Bill, 2001 before the
Committee for its approval and invited the Members to make suggestions thereon.
3.0 A Member suggested a change in para 7.23 of the draft report. He desired that there should
be a reference to the need for certain safeguards and protection for certain period for the Indian
industry, both private and public sector. The Chairman requested him to give his formulation in
writing for being incorporated in the paragraph.
3.1 Another Member suggested a change in para 9.9.3 so as not to allow the Government to
exclude officers from CBI for the posts of Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors in CCI.
79

80
The Member requested that his view in the matter should also be reflected in the Report. After a
brief discussion on the contents of para 9.9.3 and the suggestion of the Member, the Committee
decided to make suitable additions/modifications in para 9.9.3 with consequential changes in other
paragraphs.
3.2 The Committee, then, adopted the draft Report and authorised the Chairman to present the
Report, alongwith Evidence recorded on the Bill, to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha during the
inter-session period, as it could not be presented to Parliament because of the premature
adjournment sine die of the Monsoon Session.
4.0 * * *
4.1 * * *
4.2 * * *
4.3 * * *
4.4 * * *
4.5 * * *
5.0 The Committee adjourned at 4.09 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

81
ANNEXURES

82

83
ANNEXURE-I
(See para 1, page 1 of the Report)
AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
On 6 August, 2001
THE COMPETITION BILL, 2001
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION  OF CERTAIN AGREEMENTS , ABUSE OF DOMINANT  POSITION  AND REGULATION OF
COMBINATIONS
Prohibition of agreements
3. Anti-competitive agreements.
Prohibition of abuse of dominant position
4. Abuse of dominant position.
Regulation of combinations
5. Combinations.
6. Regulation of combinations.
CHAPTER III
C
OMPETITION  C OMMISSION  OF I NDIA
7. Establishment of Commission.
8. Composition of Commission.
9. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members.
10. Term of office of Chairperson and other Members.
11. Resignation, removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Members.
83

84
12. Restriction on employment of Chairperson and other Members in certain cases.
13. Administrative powers of Chairperson.
14. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and
other Members.
15. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.
16. Appointment of Director General, etc.
17. Registrar and officers and other employees of Commission.
CHAPTER IV
D
UTIES , POWERS  AND FUNCTIONS  OF C OMMISSION
18. Duties of Commission.
19. Inquiry into certain agreements and dominant position of enterprise.
20. Inquiry into combination by Commission.
21. Reference by statutory authority.
22. Benches of Commission.
23. Distribution of business amongst Commission and Benches.
24. Procedure for deciding a case where Members of a bench differ in opinion.
25. Jurisdiction of Bench.
26. Procedure for inquiry on complaints under section 19.
27. Orders by Commission after inquiry into agreements or abuse of dominant position.
28. Division of enterprise enjoying dominant position.
29. Procedure for investigation of combinations.
30. Inquiry into disclosures under sub-section (2) of section 6.
31. Orders of Commission on certain combinations.
32. Acts taking place outside India but having an effect on competition in India.
33. Power to grant interim relief.
34. Power to award compensation.
35. Appearance before Commission.
36. Power of Commission to regulate its own procedure.
37. Review of orders of Commission.
38. Rectification of orders.
39. Execution of orders of Commission.
40. Appeal.

85
CHAPTER V
DUTIES  OF D IRECTOR  G ENERAL
41. Director General to investigate contraventions.
CHAPTER VI
PENALTIES
42. Contravention of orders of Commission.
43. Penalty for failure to comply with directions of Commission and Director General.
44. Penalty for making false statements or omission to furnish material information.
45. Penalty for offences in relation to furnishing of information.
46. Contravention by companies.
CHAPTER VII
C
OMPETITION  ADVOCACY
47. Competition advocacy.
CHAPTER VIII
FINANCE, A CCOUNTS AND AUDIT
48. Grants by Central Government.
49. Constitution of Fund.
50. Accounts and audit.
51. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
CLAUSES
52. Power to exempt.
53. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
54. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission.
55. Restriction on disclosure of information.
56. Members, Director-General, Registrar, officers and employees etc., of Commission to
be public servants.
57. Protection of action taken in good faith.
58. Act to have overriding effect.
59. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.

86
60. Application of other laws not barred.
61. Power to make rules.
62. Power to make regulations.
63. Power to remove difficulties.
64. Repeal and saving.

87
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 67 of 2001
THE COMPETITION BILL, 2001
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Commission to prevent
practices having adverse effect on competition, to promote
and sustain competition in markets, to protect the interests of
consumers and to ensure freedom of trade carried on by other
participants in markets, in India, and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Competition Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of the Act and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “acquisition” means, directly or indirectly, acquiring or
agreeing to acquire—
(i) shares, voting rights or assets of any enterprise; or
(ii) control over management or control over assets of
any enterprise;
87
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.

88
(b) “agreement” includes any arrangement or understanding or
action in concert,—
(i) whether or not, such arrangement, understanding or
action is formal or in writing; or
(ii) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or
action is intended to be enforceable by legal proceedings;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 9;
(d) “Commission” means the Competition Commission of India
established under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(c) “consumer” means any person who—
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been
paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under
any system of deferred payment and includes any user of such
goods other than the person who buys such goods for
consideration paid or promised or partly paid or partly promised,
or under any system of deferred payment when such use is
made with the approval of such person, whether such purchase
of goods is for resale or for any commercial purpose or for
personal use;
(ii) hires or avails of any services for a consideration
which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly
promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes
any beneficiary of such services other than the person who
hires or avails of the services for consideration paid or promised,
or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of
deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the
approval of the first-mentioned person whether such hiring or
availing of services is for any commercial purpose or for
personal use;
(f) “Director General” means the Director General appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 16 and includes any Additional, Joint,
Deputy or Assistant Directors General appointed under that section;
(g) “enterprise” means a person or a department of the
Government, who or which is, or has been, or is proposed to be,
engaged in any activity, relating to the production, storage, supply,
distribution, acquisition or control of articles or goods, or the provision
of services, or any kind, or in investment, or in the business of
acquiring, holding, underwriting or dealing with shares; debentures or
other securities of any other body corporate, either directly or through
one or more of its units or divisions or subsidiaries, whether such unit
or division or subsidiary is located at the same place where the
enterprise is located or at a different place or at different places, but
does not include any activity of the Government relatable to the

89
sovereign functions of the Government including all activities carried
on by the departments of the Central Government dealing with atomic
energy, currency, defence and space.
Explanation—For the purposes of this clause,
(a) “activity” includes profession or occupation;
(b) “article” includes a new article and “service” includes a
new service;
(c) “unit” or “division”, in relation to an enterprise, includes—
(i) a plant or factory established for the production,
storage, supply, distribution, acquisition or control of any article
or goods;
(ii) any branch or office established for the provision of
any service;
(h) “financial institution” means a public financial institution
specified under section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 and includes
a State Financial, Industrial or Investment Corporation;
(i) “goods” means goods as defined in the Sale of Goods
Act, 1930 and includes—
(A) products manufactured, processed or mined;
(B) debentures, stocks and shares after allotment;
(C) in relation to goods supplied, distributed or controlled
in India, goods imported into India;
(j) “Members” means a Member of the Commission appointed
under sub-section;
(1) of section 9 and includes the Chairperson;
(k) “notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette;
(l) “person” includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) a company;
(iv) a firm;
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals,
whether incorporated or not, in India or outside India;
(vi) any corporation established by or under any Central
State or provincial Act or a Government company as defined in
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956;
1 of 1956.
8 of 1930.
1 of 1956.

90
(vii) any body corporate incorporated by or under the
laws of a country outside India;
(viii) a co-operative society registered under any law
relating to co-operative societies;
(ix) a local authority;
(x) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any
of the preceding sub-clauses;
(m) “Practice” includes any practice relating to the carrying on
of any trade by a person or an enterprise;
(n) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;
(o) “price”, in relation to the sale of any goods or to the
performance of any services, includes every valuable consideration,
whether direct or indirect, or deferred, and includes any consideration
which in effect relates to the sale of any goods or to the performance
of any services although ostensibly relating to any other matter or
thing;
(p) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Commission
under section 62;
(q) “relevant market” means the market which may be determined
by the commission with reference to the relevant product market or
the relevant geographic market or with reference to both the markets;
(r) “relevant geographic market” means a market comprising the
area in which the conditions of competition for supply of goods or
provision of services or demand of goods or services are distinctly
homogenous and can be distinguished from the conditions prevailing in
the neighbouring areas;
(s) “relevant product market” means a market comprising all
those products or services which are regarded as inter changeable or
substitutable by the consumer, by reason of characteristics of the
products or services; their prices and intended use;
(t) “service” means service of any description which is made
available to potential users and includes the provision of services in
connection with business of any industrial or commercial matters such
as accounting, banking, communication, education, financing, insurance,
chit funds, real estate, transport, storage, material treatment, processing,
supply of electrical or other energy, boarding, lodging, entertainment,
amusement, construction, repair, conveying of news or information
and advertising;
(u) “shares” means shares in the share capital of a company
carrying voting rights and includes—
(i) any security which entitles the holder to receive
shares with voting rights;

91
(ii) stock except where a distinction between stock and
share is expressed or implied;
(v) “statutory authority” means any authority, board, corporation,
council, institute, university or any other body corporate, established
by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act for the purposes of
regulating production or supply of goods or provision of any services
or markets therefor or any matter connected therewith or incidental
thereto;
(w) “trade” means any trade, business, industry, profession or
occupation relating to the production, supply, distribution, storage or
control of goods and includes the provision of any services;
(x) “turnover” includes value of sale of goods or services;
(y) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and
defined in the Companies Act, 1956 shall have the same meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF CERTAIN AGREEMENTS, ABUSE OF DOMINANT POSITION
AND REGULATION OF COMBINATIONS
Prohibition of agreements
3. ( 1) No enterprise or association of enterprises or person or
association of persons shall enter into any agreement in respect of
production, supply, distribution, storage, acquisition or control of goods
or provision of services, which causes or is likely to cause an
appreciable adverse effect on competition within India.
(2) Any agreement entered into in contravention of the provisions
contained in sub-section ( 1) shall be void.
(3) Any agreement entered into between enterprises or associations
of enterprises or persons or associations of persons or between any
person and enterprise or practice carried on, or decision taken by, any
association of enterprises or association of persons, including cartels,
engaged in identical or similar trade of goods or provision of services,
which—
(a) directly or indirectly determines purchase or sale
prices;
(b) limits or controls production, supply, markets, technical
development, investment or provision of services;
(c) shares the market or source of production or provision
of services by way of allocation of geographical area of market,
or type of goods or services, or number of customers in the
market or any other similar way;
1 of 1956.
Anti-
competitive
agreements.

92
(d) directly or indirectly results in bid rigging or collusive
bidding, shall be presumed to have an appreciable adverse effect
on competition.
Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “bid rigging” means any agreement, between enterprises
or persons referred to in sub-section ( 3) engaged in identical or
similar production or trading of goods or provision of services,
which has the effect of eliminating or reducing competition for
bids or adversely affecting or manipulating the process for
bidding;
(b) “cartel” includes an association of producers, sellers,
distributors, traders or service providers who, by agreement
amongst themselves, limit, control or attempt to control the
production, distribution, sale or price of, or, trade in goods or
provision of services.
(4) Any agreement amongst enterprises or persons at different
stages or levels of the production chain in different markets, in respect
of production, supply, distribution, storage, sale or price of, or trade
in goods or provision of services, including—
(a) tie-in arrangement;
(b) exclusive supply agreement;
(c) exclusive distribution agreement;
(d) refusal to deal;
(e) resale price maintenance;
shall be an agreement in contravention of sub-section (1) if such
agreement causes or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on
competition.
Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “tie-in arrangements” includes any agreement requiring
a purchaser of goods, as a condition of such purchase, to
purchase some other goods;
(b) “exclusive supply agreement” includes any agreement
restricting in any manner the purchaser in the course of his
trade from acquiring or otherwise dealing in any goods other
than those of the seller or any other person;
(c) “exclusive distribution agreement” includes any
agreement to limit, restrict or withhold the output or supply of
any goods or allocate any area or market for the disposal or
sale of the goods;

93
(d) “refusal to deal” includes any agreement which restricts,
or is likely to restrict, by any method the persons or classes of
persons to whom goods are sold or from whom goods are
bought;
(e) “resale price maintenance” includes any agreement to
sell goods on condition that the prices to be charged on the
resale by the purchaser shall be the prices stipulated by the
seller unless it is clearly stated that prices lower than those
prices may be charged;
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to-
(a) “copyright” under the Copyright Act, 1957;
(b) “patent” or “exclusive right” granted under the Patents
Act, 1970;
(c) “collective mark”, “permitted use”, “registered
proprietor”, “registered trade mark” or “registered user” under
the Trade Marks Act, 1999;
(d) “homonymous geographical indication” or “geographical
indications” registered under the Geographical Indications of
Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999;
(e) “design” registered under the Designs Act, 2000;
(f) “layout-design” registered under the Semi-conductor
Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Act, 2000;
(g) the right of any person to export goods from India
to the extent to which the agreement relates exclusively to the
production, supply, distribution or control of goods or provision
of services for such export.
Prohibition of abuse of dominant position
4. ( 1) No enterprise shall abuse its dominant position.
(2) There shall be an abuse of dominant position under sub-
section ( 1), if an enterprise,—
(a) directly or indirectly, imposes unfair or discriminatory-
(i) condition in purchase or sale of goods or services; or
(ii) price in purchase or sale (including predatory price)
of goods; or service;
(b) limits or restricts—
(i) production of goods or provision of services or market
therefor; or
Abuse of
dominant
poition
47 of 1999.
14 of 1957.
39 of 1970.
48 of 1999.
16 of 2000.
37 of 2000.

94
(ii) technical or scientific development relating to goods
or services to the prejudice of consumers; or
(c) indulges in practice or practices resulting in denial or
market access; or
(d) makes conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance
by other parties of supplementary obligations which, by their
nature or according to commercial usage, have no connection
with the subject of such contracts; or
(e) uses its dominant position in one-relevant market to
enter into, or protect, other relevant market.
Explanation–For the purposes of this section, the expression—
(a) “dominant position” means a position of strength,
enjoyed by an enterprise, in the relevant market, whether in
India or outside India, which enables it to—
(i) operate independently of competitive forces
prevailing in the relevant market; or
(ii) affect its competitors or consumers or the
relevant market in its favour;
(b) “predatory price” means the sale of goods or provision
of services, at a price which is below the cost, as may be
determined by regulations, of production of the goods or provision
of services, with a view to reduce competition or eliminate the
competitors.
Regulation of combinations
5. the acquisition of one or more enterprises by one or more
persons or merger or amalgamation of enterprises shall be a combination
of such enterprises and persons or enterprises, if—
(a) any acquisition where—
(i) the parties to the acquisition, being the acquirer
and the enterprise, whose control, shares, voting rights or
assets have been acquired or are being acquired jointly
have,—
(A) either, in India, the assets of the value of
more than rupees one thousand crores or turnover
more than rupees three thousand crores; or
(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate,
the assets of the value of more than five hundred
million US dollars or turnover more than fifteen
hundred million US dollars; or
Combination.

95
(ii) any group or an enterprise belonging to such
group whose control, shares, voting rights or assets have
been acquired or are being acquired jointly have,—
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of
more than rupees four thousand crores or turnover
more than rupees twelve thousand crores; or
(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate,
the assets of the value of more than two billion
US dollars or turnover more than six billion US
dollars; or
(b) acquiring of control by a person over an enterprise
when such person has already direct or indirect control over
another enterprise engaged in production, distribution or trading
of a similar or identical or substitutable goods or provision of
a similar or identical or substitutable service, if—
(i) the enterprise over which control has been
acquired along with the enterprise over which the acquirer
already has direct or indirect control jointly have—
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of
more than rupees one thousand crores or turnover
more than rupees three thousand crores; or
(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate,
the assets of the value of more than five hundred
million US dollars or turnover more than fifteen
hundred million US dollars; or
(ii) the group or its constituent enterprise over
which control has been acquired, or is being acquired
along with the enterprise over which the acquirer already
has direct or indirect, control jointly have,—
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of
more than rupees four thousand crores or turnover
more than rupees twelve thousand crores; or
(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate,
the assets of the value of more than two billion
US dollars or turnover. more than six billion US
dollars; or
(C) any merger or amalgamation in which—
(i) the enterprise remaining. after merger or the
enterprise created as a result of the amalgamation, as the
case may be, have,—

96
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of
more than rupees one thousand crores or turnover
more than rupees three thousand crores; or
(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate,
the assets of the value of more than five hundred
million US dollars or turnover more than fifteen
hundred million US dollars; or
(ii) the group, or its constituent enterprise
remaining after merger of the enterprise created as a
result of the amalgamation, as the case may be, have,—
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of
more than rupees four thousand crores or turnover
more than rupees twelve thousand crores; or
(B) in India or outside India, the assets of
the value of more than two billion US dollars or
turnover more than six billion US dollars.
Explanation—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “control” includes controlling the affairs or management
by—
(i) one or more groups, either jointly or singly,
over another group or enterprise;
(ii) one or more groups, either jointly or singly,
over another group or enterprise;
(b) “group” means two or more enterprises which, directly
or indirectly, are in a position to—
(i) exercise twenty-six per cent or more of the
voting rights in another. enterprise; or
(ii) appoint more than fifty per cent of the
members of the board of directors in another enterprise;
or
(iii) control the management of affairs of another
enterprise;
(c) the value of assets shall be detennined by taking the
book value of the assets as shown, in the audited books of
account of the enterprise, in the financial year immediately
preceding the financial year in which the date of proposed
merger falls, as reduced by any depreciation, and the value of
assets shall include the brand value, value of goodwill, or value
of copyright, patent, permitted use, collective mark, registered

97
proprietor, registered trade mark, registered user, homonymous
geographical indication, geographical indications, design or layout-
design or similar other commercial rights, if any, referred to in
sub-section ( 5) of section 3.
6. ( 1) No person or enterprise shall enter into a combination
which causes or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on
competition within the relevant market in India and such a combination
shall be void.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), any
person or enterprise, who or which proposes to enter into a
combination, may, at his or its option, give notice to the Commission,
in the form as may be specified, and the fee which may be determined,
by regulations, disclosing the details of the proposed combination,
within seven days of—
(a) approval of the proposal relating to merger or
amalgamation, referred to in clause ( c) of Section 5, by the
board of directors of the enterprises concerned with such
merger or amalgamation, as the case may be;
(b) execution of any agreement or other document for
acquisition referred to in clause ( a) of section 5 or acquiring of
control referred to in clause ( b) of that section.
(3) The Commission shall, after receipt of notice under sub
section ( 2), deal with such notice in accordance with the provisions
contained in sections 29, 30 and 31.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to share
subscription or financing facility or any acquisition, by a public financial
institution, foreign institutional investor, bank or venture capital fund,
pursuant to any covenant of a loan agreement or investment agreement.
(5) The public financial institution, foreign institutional investor,
bank or venture capital fund, referred to in sub-section ( 4), shall
within seven days from the date of the acquisition, file, in the form
as may be specified by regulations, with the Commission the details
of the acquisition including the details of control, the circumstances
for exercise of such control and the consequences of default arising
out of such loan agreement or investment agreement, as the case may
be.
Explanation—For purposes of this section; the expression—
(a) “foreign institutional investor” has the same meaning
as assigned to it in clause ( a) of the Explanation to section
115AD of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(b) “venture capital fund” 'has the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause ( b) of the Explanation to clause ( 23FB)
of section 10 of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Regulation of
combinations.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.

98
CHAPTER III
COMPETITION C OMMISSION OF I NDIA
7. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification appoint, there shall be established, for the
purposes of this Act, a Commission to be called the “Competition
Commission of lndia”.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with power,
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at such
place as the Central Government may decide from time to time.
(4) The Commission may establish offices at other places
in India.
8. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and
not less than two and not more than ten other Members to be
appointed by the Central Government:
Provided that the Central Government shall appoint the
Chairperson and a Member during the first year of the establishment
of the Commission.
(2) The Chairperson and every other Member shal1 be the
persons of ability, integrity and standing, who—
(a) are, or have been, or are qualified to be, a Judge of
a High Court; or
(b) have special knowledge of, and professional experience
in, not less than fifteen years, international trade, economics,
business, commerce, law, finance, accountancy, management,
industry, public affairs, administration or in any other matter
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, be useful to
the Commission.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole-time
Members.
9. ( 1) The Chairperson and every other Member shall be
appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of a
Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee – Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister-in-charge of the Ministry of
Finance – Member;
Establishment
of Commission
Composition
of Commission
Appointment
of Chairperson
and other
Members.

99
(c) the Union Minister-in-charge of the Ministry or Department
dealing with this Act – Member;
(d) the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India – Member;
(e) the Cabinet Secretary – Member.
(2) The Secretary-in-charge of the Ministry or the Department
of the Central Government dealing with this Act shall be the Convenor
of the Selection Committee.
(3) The Central Government shall, within one month from the
date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or
removal of the Chairperson or a member and six months before the
superannuation or end of tenure of the Chairperson or a Member,
make a reference to the Selection. Committee for fil1ing up of the
vacancy.
(4) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the
Chairperson and a Member within one month from the date on which
the reference under sub-section ( 3) is made to it.
(5) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two
names for every vacancy referred to it.
(6) Before recommending any person for appointment as the
Chairperson or other Member of the Commission, the Selection
Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any
financial or other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as the Chairperson or a Member.
(7) No appointment of the Chairperson or a Member shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
10. ( 1) The Chairperson and every other Member shall hold
office as such for a of term of five years from the date on which he
enters upon his office and shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold office
as such after he has attained,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy
years;
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-
five years.
(2) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal of the
Chairperson or any other Member under section 11 or by death or
otherwise shall be filled by fresh appointment in accordance with the
provisions of section 9.
(3) The Chairperson and every other Member shall, before
entering upon his office, make and subscribe to an oath of office and
Term of office
of Chairperson
and other
Members.

100
of secrecy in such form, manner and be such authority, as be
prescribed.
(4) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office
of the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise,
the senior-most Member shall act as the Chairperson, until the date on
which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions
of this Act to fill such vacancy enters upon his office.
(5) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member
shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on
which the Chairperson resumes the charge of his functions.
11. (1) The Chairperson or any other member may, by notice
in writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign
his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall, unless he is
permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date
of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his
successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of
office, whichever is the earliest.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), any Member
shall only be removed from his office by order of the Central
Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour after the Supreme
Court, on reference being made to it by the Central Government, has,
on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this
behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that the Member, ought on any
such ground to be removed.
(3) The Central Government may suspend from office the
Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, in respect of whom
a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub-
section ( 2), until the Central Government has passed an order on
receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section ( 2), the Central Government may, by order, remove the
Chairperson or any other Member from his office if such Chairperson
or Member, as the case may be,—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent;
or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office,
in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
Resignation,
removal and
suspension of
Chairperson
and other
Members.

101
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance
in office prejudicial to the public interest; or
(j) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting
as a Member.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 4), no
Member shall be removed from his office on the ground specified in
clause ( d) or clause ( e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court,
on a reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central Government,
has, on any inquiry, held by it in accordance with such procedure as
prescribed in this behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that the
Member, ought on such ground or grounds to be removed.
12. The Chairperson and other Members shall not, for a period
of six months from the date on which they cease to hold office,
accept any employment in, or connected with the management or
administration of, any enterprise which has been a party to a proceeding
before the Commission under this Act:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any
employment under the Central Government or a State Government or
local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation established
by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act or a Government
company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
13. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general
superintendence, direction and control in respect of all administrative
matters of the Commission.
14. (1) There shall be paid to the Chairperson a salary,
which is equal to the salary of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
(2) There shall be paid to a Member a salary, which is
equal to the salary of a Judge of a High Court.
(3) The other terms and conditions of service including
travelling expenses, house rent allowance and conveyance facilities,
sumptuary allowance and medical facilities shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(4) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson or a Member shall not be varied to his
disadvantage after appointment.
15. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Commission; or.
Restriction an
employment
of Chairperson
and other
Members in
certain cases.
Administrative
powers of
Chairperson.
Salary and
allowances and
other terms
and conditions
of Chairperson
and other
Members.
Vacancy, etc.
not to
invalidate
proceedings
of
Commission.
1 of 1956.

102
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as
a Chairperson or as a Member; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission
not affecting the merits of the case.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint
a Director General and as many Additional, Joint, Deputy or
Assistant Directors General, as it may think fit, for the purposes
of assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry into
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act and for the
conduct of cases before the Commission and for performing such
other functions as are, or may be, provided by or under this Act.
(2) Every Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors
General shall exercise his powers, and discharge his functions, subject
to the general control, supervision and direction of the Director General.
(3) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of the Director General and Additional, Joint, Deputy and
Assistant Directors General shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Directors General, and Additional, Joint, Deputy and
Assistant Directors General shall be appointed from amongst persons
of integrity and outstanding ability and who have experience in
investigation, and knowledge of accountancy, management, business,
public administration, international trade, law or economics and such
other qualifications as may be prescribed.
17. (1) The Commission may appoint a Registrar and such
officers and other employees, as it considers necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the Registrar and officers and other employees
of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER-IV
D
UTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF C OMMISSION
18. Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of
the Commission to eliminate practices having adverse effect on
competition, promote and sustain competition, protect the interests of
consumers, and ensure freedom of trade carried by other participants,
in markets in India.
19. (1) The Commission may inquire into any alleged
contravention of the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1) of section
3 or sub-section ( 1) section 4 either on its own motion or on—
(a) receipt of a complaint from any person, consumer or
their association or trade association; or
Registrar and
officers and
other
employees of
Commission.
Appointment
of Director-
General, etc.
Duties, of
Commission.
Inquiry into
certain
agreements and
dominant
position of
enterprise.

103
(b) a reference made to it by the Central Government or
a State Government or a statutory authority.
(2) Without prejudice to the provision contained in sub-
section ( 1), the powers and functions of the Commission shall include
the powers and functions specified in sub-sections ( 3) to ( 7).
(3) The Commission shall, while determining whether an
agreement has an appreciable adverse effect on competition under
section 3, have due regard to all or any of the following factors,
namely:—
(a) creation of barriers to new entrants in the market
(b) driving existing competitors out of the market;
(c) foreclosure of competition by hindering entry into the
market;
(d) accrual of benefits to consumers;
(e) improvements in production or dlstribution of goods
or provision of services; or
(f) promotion of technical, scientific and economic
development by means of production or distribution of goods or
provision of services.
(4) The Commission shall, while inquiring whether an enterprise
enjoys a dominant position or not under section 4, have due regard to
all or any of the following factors, namely:—
(a) market share of the enterprise;
(b) size and resources of the enterprise;
(c) size and importance of the competitors;
(d) economic power of the enterprise including commercial
advantages over competitors;
(e) vertical integration of the enterprises or sale or service
network of such enterprises;
(f) technical advantages including advantages such as
copyright patents, permitted use, collective mark, registered
proprietor, registered trade mark, registered user, homonymous
geographical indication, geographical indications, design or layout-
design referred to in clauses ( a) to ( f) of sub-section ( 5) of
section 3, or similar commercial rights acquired by the enterprise;
(g) dependence of consumers on the enterprise;
(h) monopoly or dominant position whether acquired as a
result of any statute or by virtue of being a Government
company or a public sector undertaking or otherwise;

104
(i) entry barriers including barriers such as regulatory
barriers, financial risk, high capital cost of entry, marketing
entry barriers, technical entry barriers, economies of scale, high
cost of substitutable goods or service for consumers;
(j) countervailing buying power;
(k) market,structure and size of market;
(l) social obligations and social costs;
(m) any other factor which the Commission may consider
relevant for the inquiry.
(5) For determining whether a market constitutes a “relevant
market” for the purposes of this Act, the Commission shall have
due regard to the “relevant geographic market” or “relevant product
market”,
(6) The Commission shall, while determining the “relevant
geographic market”, have due regard to all or any of the following
factors, namely:—
(a) regulatory trade barriers;
(b) local specification requirements;
(c) national procurement policies;
(d) adequate distribution facilities;
(e) transport costs;
(f) language;
(g) consumer preferences;
(h) need for secure, regular supplies or rapid after-sales
services.
(7) The Commission shall, while determining the “relevant product
market”, have due regard to all or any of the following factors,
namely:—
(a) physical characteristics or end-use of goods;
(b) price of goods or service;
(c) consumer preferences;
(d) exclusion of in-house production;
(e) existence of specialised producers;
(f) classification of industrial products.
20. ( 1) The Commission may, upon its own knowledge
or information relating to acquisition referred to in clause (a) of
section 5 or acquiring of control referred to in clause (b) of
Inquiry into
combination
by
Commission.

105
section 5 or merger or amalgamation referred in clause (c) of that
section inquire into whether such a combination has caused or is likely
to cause an appreciable adverse effect on competition in India:
Provided that the Commission shall not initiate any inquiry under
this sub-section after the expiry of one year from the date on which
such combination has taken effect.
(2) The Commission shall, on receipt of a notice under sub-
section ( 2) of section 6 or upon receipt of a reference under sub-
section ( 2) of section 21, inquire whether a combination referred to
in that notice or reference has caused or is likely to cause an
appreciable adverse effect on competition in India.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5, the Central
Government shall on the expiry of a period of two years from the date
of commencement of this Act and thereafter every two years, in
consultation with the Commission, by notification, enhance or reduce,
on the basis of the wholesale price index or fluctuations in exchange
rate of rupee or foreign currencies, the value of assets or the value
of turn over, for the purposes of that section.
(4) For the purposes of determining whether a combination
would have the effect of or is likely to have an appreciable adverse
effect on competition in the relevant market, the Commission shall
have due regard to all or any of the following factors, namely:—
(a) actual and potential level of competition through imports
in the market;
(b) extent of barriers to entry to the market;
(c) level of combination in the market;
(d) degree of countervailing power in the market;
(e) likelihood that the combination would result in the
parties to the combination being able to significantly and
sustainably increase prices or profit margins;
(f) extent of effective competition likely to sustain in a
market;
(g) extent to which substitutes are available or are likely
to be available in the market;
(h) market share, in the relevant market, of the persons
or enterprise in a combination, individually and as a combination;
(i) likelihood that the combination would result in the
removal of a vigorous and effective competitor or competitors
in market;
(j) nature and extent of vertical integration in the market;

106
(k) possibility of a failing business;
(l) nature and extent of innovation;
(m) whether the benefits of the combination outweigh the
adverse impact of the combination, if any.
21. ( 1) Where in the course of a proceeding before any statutory
authority an issue is raised by any Party that any decision which such
statutory authority has taken or proposes to take, is or would be,
contrary to any of the provisions of this Act, then such statutory
authority shall make a reference in respect of such issue to the
Commission.
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section ( 1), the
Commission shall, after hearing the parties to the proceedings, give its
opinion to such statutory authority which shall thereafter pass such
order on the issues referred to in that sub-section as it deems fit.
22. (1) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Commission
may be exercise by Benches thereof.
(2) The Benches shall be constituted by the Chairperson and
each bench shall consist of not less than two Members.
(3) Every Bench shall consist of at least one Judicial Member.
Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, “Judicial
Member” means a Member who is, or has been, or is qualified to be,
a Judge of a High Court.
(4) The Bench over which the Chairperson presides shall be the
Principal Bench and the other benches shall be known as the Additional
Benches.
(5) There shall be constituted by the Chairperson one or
more Benches to be called the mergers Bench or Mergers Benches,
as the case may be, exclusively to deal with matters referred to
in sections 5 and 6.
(6) The places at which the Principal Bench, other Additional
Bench or Mergers Bench shall ordinarily sit shall be such as the
Central Government may, by notification, specify.
23. ( 1) Where any Benches are constituted, the Chairperson
may, from time to time, by order, make provisions as to the distribution
of the business of the Commission amongst the Benches and specify
the matters, which may be dealt with by each Bench.
(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within
the purview of the business allocated to a Bench, the decision of the
Chairperson thereon shall be final.
Reference by
statutory
authority.
Benches of
Commission.
Distribution
of business
amongst
Commission
and Benches.

107
(3) The Chairperson, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, may—
(i) transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench;
or
(ii) authorise the Members at one Bench to discharge also
the functions of the Members of other Bench.
(4) The Chairperson may, for the purpose of securing that any
case or matter which, having regard to the nature of the questions
involved, requires or is required in his opinion or under the rules made
by the Central Government in this behalf, to be decided by a Bench
composed of more than two Members, issue such general or special
orders as he may deem fit.
24. If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point,
they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a
reference to the Chairperson who shall either hear the point or points
himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one
or more of the other Members and such point or points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who
have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
25. An inquiry shall be initiated or a complaint be instituted or
a reference be made under this Act before a Bench within the local
limit of whose jurisdiction.
(a) the respondent, or each of the respondents, where
there are more than one, at the time of the initiation of inquiry
or institution of the complaint or making of reference, as the
case may be, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on
business, or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the respondents, where there are more than
one, at the time of the initiation of the inquiry or institution of
complaint or making of reference, as the case may be, actually
and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain provided that in such case either the leave of the
Bench is given, or the respondents who do not reside, or carry
on business, or personally works for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce
in such institution; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
Explanation— A respondent, being a person referred to in
sub-clause ( iii ) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( vii ) or sub-
clause ( viii) of clause ( 1) of section 2, shall be deemed to carry on
business at its sole or principal place of business in India or at its
registered office in India or where it has also a subordinate office at
such place.
Procedure for
deciding a case
where
Members of a
Bench differ
in opinion.
Jurisdiction of
Bench.

108
26. (1) On receipt of a complaint or a reference from the
Central Government or a State Government or a statutory authority or
on its own knowledge or information, under section 19, if the
Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie case, it
shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made
into the matter.
(2) The Director General shall, on receipt of direction under
sub-section ( 1), submit a report on his findings within such period as
may be specified by the Commission.
(3) Where on receipt of a complaint under clause ( a) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 19, the Commission is of the opinion that there
exists no prima facie  case, it shall dismiss the complaint and may
pass such orders as it deems fit, including imposition of costs, if
necessary.
(4) The Commission shall forward a copy of the report referred
to in sub-section ( 2) to the parties concerned or to the Central
Government or the State Government or the statutory authority, as the
case may be.
(5) If the report of the Director General relates on a complaint
and such report recommends that there is no contravention of the any
of provisions of this Act, the complainant shall be given an opportunity
to rebut the findings of the Director General.
(6) If, after hearing the complainant, the Commission agrees
with the recommendation of the Director General, it shall dismiss the
complaint.
(7) If, after hearing the complainant, the Commission is of the
opinion that further inquiry is called for, it shall direct the complainant
to proceed with the complaint.
(8) if the report of the Director General relates on a reference
made under sub-section ( 1) and such report recommends that there is
no contravention of the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall
invite comments of the Central Government or the State Government
or the statutory authority, as the case may be, on such report and on
receipt of such comments, the Commission shall return the reference
if there is no prima facie  case or proceed with the reference as a
complaint if there is a prima facie  case.
(9) if the report of the Director General referred to in sub-
section ( 2) recommends that there is contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act, and the Commission is of the opinion that
further inquiry is called for, it in shall inquire into such contravention
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
27. Where after inquiry the Commission finds that any agreement
or action, of an enterprise in a dominant position, is in contravention
Orders by
Commission
after inquiry
into
agreements
or abuse of
dominant
position.
Procedure for
inquiry on
complaints
under section
19.

109
of section 3 or section 4, as the case may be, it may pass all or any
of the following orders, namely:
(a) direct any enterprise or association of enterprises or
person or association of persons, as the case may be, involved
in such agreement, or abuse of dominant position, to discontinue
and not to re-enter such agreement or discontinue such abuse
of dominant position, as the case may be;
(b) impose such penalty, as it may deem fit which shall
be not more than ten per cent of the average of the turnover
for the last three preceding financial years, upon each of such
person or enterprises which are parties to such agreements or
abuse;
(c) award compensation to parties in accordance with the
provisions contained in section 34;
(d) direct that the agreements shall stand modified to the
extent and in the manner as may be specified in the order by
the Commission;
(e) direct the enterprises concerned to abide by such
other orders as the Commission may pass and comply with the
directions, including payment of costs, if any;
(f) recommend to the Central Government for the division
of an enterprise enjoying dominant position;
(g) pass such other order as it may deem fit.
28. (1) The Central Government, on recommendation under
clause (f) of section 27, may, notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, by order in writing, direct
division of an enterprise enjoying dominant position to ensure that
such enterprise does not abuse its dominant position.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing powers, the order referred to in sub-section ( 1) may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) the transfer or vesting of property, rights, liabilities or
obligations;
(b) the adjustment of contracts either by discharge or
reduction of any liability or obligation or otherwise;
(c) the creation, allotment, surrender or cancellation of
any shares, stocks or securities;
(d) the payment of compensation to any person who
suffered any loss due to dominant position of such enterprise;
Division of
enterprise
enjoying
dominant
position.

110
(e) the formation or winding up of an enterprise or the
amendment of the memorandum of association or articles of
association or any other instruments regulating the business of
any enterprise;
(f) the extent to which, and the circumstances in which,
provisions of the order affecting an enterprise may be altered by
the enterprise and the registration thereof;
(g) any other matter which may be necessary to give
effect to the division of the enterprise;
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force or in any contract or in any memorandum or
articles of association, an officer of a company who ceases to hold
office as such in consequence of the division of an enterprise shall not
be entitled to claim any compensation for such cesser.
29. (1) Where the Commission is of the opinion that a
combination is likely to cause, or has caused an appreciable adverse
effect on competition within the relevant market in India, it shall issue
a notice to show cause to the parties to combination calling upon them
to respond within thirty days of the receipt of the notice, as to why
investigation in respect of such combination should not be conducted.
(2) The Commission, if it is prima facie of the opinion that the
combination has, or is likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on
competition, it shall, within seven working days from the date of
receipt of the response of the parties to the combination, direct the
parties to the said combination to publish details of the combination
within ten working days of such direction, in such manner, as it
thinks appropriate, for bringing the combination to the knowledge or
information of the public and persons affected or likely to be affected
by such combination.
(3) The Commission may invite any person or member of the
public, affected or likely to be affected by the said combination, to file
his written objections, if any, before the Commission within fifteen
working days from the date on which the details of the combination
were published under sub-section ( 2).
(4) The Commission may, within fifteen,working days from the
expiry of the period specified in sub-section ( 3), call for such additional
or other information as it may deem fit from the parties to the said
combination.
(5) The additional or other information called for by the
Commission shall be furnished by the parties referred to in sub-
section ( 4) within fifteen days from the expiry of the period specified
in sub-section ( 4).
(6) After receipt of all information and within a period of forty-
five working days from the expiry of the period specified in sub-
Procedure
for
investigation
of
combinations.

111
section ( 5), the Commission shall proceed to deal with the case in
accordance with the provisions contained in section 31.
30. Where any person or enterprise has given a notice under
sub-section ( 2) of section 6, the Commission shall inquire:
(a) whether the disclosure made in the notice is correct;
(b) whether the combination has or is likely to have, an
appreciable adverse effect on competition.
31. (1) Where the Commission is of the opinion that any
combination does not, or not likely to, have an appreciable adverse
effect on competition, it shall, by order, approve that combination
including the combination in respect of which  a notice has been given
under sub-section ( 2) of section 6.
(2) Where the Commission is of the opinion that the combination
has, or is likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on competition,
it shall direct that the combination shall not take effect.
(3) Where the Commission is of the opinion that the combination
has, or is likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on competition
but such adverse effect can be eliminated by suitable modification to
such combination, it may propose appropriate modification to the
combination, to the parties to such combination.
(4) The parties, who accept the modification proposed by the
Commission under sub-section ( 3), shall carry out such modification
within the period specified by the Commission.
(5) If the parties to the combination, who have accepted the
modification under sub-section ( 4), fail to carry out the modification
within the period specified by the Commission, such combination shall
be deemed to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition and
the Commission shall deal with such combination in accordance with
the provisions of this Act.
(6) If the parties to the combination do not accept the modification
proposed by the Comission under sub-section ( 3), such parties may,
within thirty working days of the modification proposed by the
Commission, submit amendment to the modification proposed by the
Commission under that sub-section.
(7) If the Commission agrees with the amendment submitted by
the parties under sub-section ( 6), it shall, by order, approve the
combination.
(8) If the Commission does not accept the amendment submitted
under sub-section ( 6), then, the parties shall be allowed a further
period of thirty working days within which such parties shall
accept the modification proposed by the Commission under
sub-section ( 3).
Inquiry into
disclosures
under sub-
section ( 2)
of section 6.
Orders of
Commission
on certain
combinations.

112
(9) If the parties fail to accept the modification proposed by the
Commission within thirty working days referred to in sub-section ( 6)
or within a further period of thirty working days referred to in sub-
section ( 8), the combination shall be deemed to have an appreciable
adverse effect on competition and be dealt with in accordance with
the provisions of this Act.
(10) Where the Commission has directed under sub-section ( 2)
that the combination shall not take effect or the combination is deemed
to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition under sub-
section ( 9), then, without prejudice to any penalty which may be
imposed or any prosecution which may be initiated under this Act, the
Commission may order that:
(a) the acquisition referred to in clause ( a) of section 5;
or
(b) the acquiring of control referred to in clause ( b) of
seetion 5; or
(c) the merger or amalgamation referred to in clause ( c)
of section 5, shall not be given effect to:
Provided that the Commission may, if it considers appropriate,
frame a scheme to implement its order under this sub-section.
(11) If the Commission does not, on the expiry of a period of
ninety working days from the date of publication referred to in sub-
section ( 2) of section 29 pass an order or issue direction in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) or sub-
section ( 7), the combination shall be deemed to have been approved
by the Commission.
Explanation—For the purposes of determining the period of
ninety working days specified in this sub-section, the period of thirty
working days specified in sub-section ( 6) and a further period of
thirty working days specified in sub-section ( 8) shall be excluded.
(12) Where any extension of time is sought by the parties to the
combination, the period of ninety working days shall be reckoned after
deducting the extended time granted at the request of the parties.
(13) Where the Commission has ordered a combination to
be void, the acquisition or acquiring of control or merger or
amalgamation referred to in section 5, shall be dealt with by the
authorities under any other law for the time being in force as if, such
acquisition or acquiring of control or merger or amalgamation had not
taken place and the parties to the combination shall be dealt with
accordingly.
(14) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall affect any proceeding
initiated or which may be initiated under any other law for the time
being in force.

113
32. The Commission shall, notwithstanding that:
(a) an agreement referred to in section 3 has been entered
into outside India, or
(b) any party to such agreement is outside India; or
(c) an abuse of dominant position referred to in section
4 has taken place outside India; or
(d) any enterprise abusing the dominant position is outside
India; or
(e) a combination has taken place outside India; or
(f) any party to combination is outside India; or
(g) any other matter or practice or action arising out of
such agreement or dominant position or combination is outside
India,
have power to inquire into such agreement or abuse of dominant
position or combination if such agreement or dominant position
or combination has, or is likely to have, an appreciabie adverse
effect on competition in the relevant market in India.
33. ( 1) Where during an inquiry before the Commission, it is
proved to the satisfaction of the Commission, by affidavit or otherwise,
that an act in contravention of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 or sub-
section ( 1) section 4 or section 5 has been committed and continues
to be committed or that such act is about to be committed, the
Commission may grant a temporary injunction restraining any party
from carrying on such act until the conclusion of such inquiry or until
further orders, without giving notice to the opposite party, where it
deems it necessary.
(2) The provisions of rules 2A to 5 (both inclusive) of Order
XXXIX of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
shall, as far as may be, apply to a temporary injunction issued by the
Commission under the Act, as they apply to a temporary injunction
issued by a civil court, and any reference in any such rule to a suit
shall be construed as a reference to any inquiry before the Commission.
34. (1) Without prejudice to any other provisions contained in
this Act, any person may make an application to the Commission for
an order for the recovery of compensation from any enterprise for
any loss or damage shown to have been suffered, by such person as
a result of any contravention of the provisions of Chapter II, having
been committed by such enterprise.
(2) The Commission may, after an inquiry made into the
allegations mentioned in the application made under sub-section ( 1),
pass an order directing the enterprise to make payment to the applicant,
of the amount determined by it as realisable from the enterprise as
5 of 1908.
Power to
award
compensation.
Acts taking
place out-
side India but
having an
effect on
competition
in India.
Power to
grant interim
relief.

114
compensation for the loss or damage caused to the applicant as a
result of any contravention of the provisions of Chapter II having been
committed by such enterprise.
(3) Where any loss or damage referred to in sub-section (1) is
caused to numerous persons havmg the same interest, one or more of
such persons may, with the permission of the Commission, make an
application under that sub-section for and on behalf of, or for the
benefit of, the persons so interested, and thereupon, the provisions of
rule 8 of Order 1 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, shall apply subject to the modification that every reference
therein to a suit or decree shall be construed as a reference to the
application before the Commission and the order of the Commission
thereon.
35. A complainant or defendant or Director General may either
appear in person or authorise one or more chartered accountants or
company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any
of his or its officers to present his or its case before the Commission.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant
as defined in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and who has obtained a
certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that
Act;
(b) “company secretary” means a company secretary as
defined in clause (c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the
Company secretaries Act, 1980 and who has obtained a certificate
of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section of that Act;
(c) “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined
in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and
Works Accountants Act, 1959 and who has obtained a certificate
of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;
(d) “legal practitioner” means an advocate, vakil or an
attorney of any High Court, and includes a pleader in practice.
36. ( 1) The Commission shall not be bound by the procedure
laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided
by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions
of this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, the
Commission shall have powers to regulate its won procedure including
the places at which they shall have their sittings, duration of oral
hearings when granted, and times of its inquiry.
(2) The Commission shall have, for the purposes of discharging
its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath;
5 of 1908.
Appearance
before
Commission.
38 of 1949.
56 of 1950.
Power of
Commission
to regulate
its own
procedure.
23 of 1959.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

115
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses
or documents;
(e) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record
or document or copy of such record or document from any
office;
(f) dismissing an application in default or deciding it ex
parte;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Every proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228
and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian penal Code and
the Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
(4) The Commission may call upon such experts, from the
fields of economics, commerce, accountancy, international trade or
from any other discipline as it deems necessary, to assist the Commission
in the conduct of any inquiry or proceeding before it.
(5) The Commission may direct any person:
(a) to produce before the Director General or the Registrar
or an officer authorised by it, such books, accounts or other
documents in the custody or under the control of such person
so directed as may be specified or described in the direction,
being documents relating to any trade, the examination of which
may be required for the purposes of this Act;
(b) to furnish to the Director General or the Registrar or
any officer authorised by it, as respects the trade or such other
information as may be in his possession in relation to the trade
carried on by such person, as may be required for the purposes
of this Act.
(6) If the Commission is of the opinion that any agreement
referred to in section 3 or abuse of dominant position referred to in
section 4 or the combination referred to in section 5 has caused
or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on competition in
the relevant market in India and it is necessary to protect, without
further delay, the interests of consumers and other market participants
in India, it may conduct an inquiry or adjudicate upon any matter
under this Act after giving a reasonable oral hearing to the parties
concerned.
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

116
37. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Commission from
which an appeal is allowed by this Act but no appeal has been
preferred, may, within thirty days from the date of the order, apply to
the Commission for review of its order and the Commission may
make such order thereon as it thinks fit:
Provided that the Commission may entertain a review application
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that
the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the
application in time:
Provided further that no order shall be modified or set aside
without giving an opportunity of being heard to the person in whose
favour the order is giving and the Director General where he was a
party to the proceedings.
38. (1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the
record, the Commission may amend any order passed by it under the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Subject to the other provision of this Act, the Commission
may make—
(a) an amendment under sub-section ( 1) of its own
motion;
(b) an amendment for rectifying any such mistake which
has been brought to its notice by any party to the order.
39. Every order passed by the Commission under this Act shall
be enforced by the Commission in the same manner as if it were a
decree or order made by a High Court or the principal civil court in
a suit pending therein and its shall be lawful for the Commission to
send, in the event of its inability to execute it, such order to the High
Court or the principal civil court, as the case may be, within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of an order against a person referred to
in sub-clause (iii) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (vii) of
clause (1) of section 2, the registered office or the sole or
principal place of business of the person in India or where the
person has also a subordinate office, that subordinate office, is
situated;
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the
place where the person concerned voluntarily resides or carries
on business or personally works for gain, is situated,
and thereupon the court to which the order is so sent shall
execute the order as if it were a decree or order sent to it for
execution.
40. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
Commission may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty
Appeal.
Review of
orders of
Commission.
Rectification
of orders.
Execution of
orders of
Commission.

117
days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the
Commission to him on one or more of the grounds specified in
section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal
within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not
exceeding sixty days:
Provided further that no appeal shall lie against any decision or
order of the Commission made with the consent of the parties.
CHAPTER V
D
UTIES OF D IRECTOR G ENERAL
41. (1) The Director General shall, when so directed by the
Commission, assist the Commission in investigating into any
contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations
made thereunder.
(2) The Director-General shall have all the powers as are
conferred upon the Commission under sub-section (2) of section 36.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2),
sections 240 and 240A of the Companies Act, 1956, so far as may be,
shall apply to an investigation made by the Director General or any
other person investigating under his authority, as they apply to an
inspector appointed under that Act.
CHAPTER VI
P
ANALTIES
42. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, if any
person contravenes, without any reasonable ground, any order of the
Commission, or any condition or restriction subject to which any
approval, sanction, direction or exemption in relation to any matter has
been accorded, given, made or granted under this Act or fails to pay
the penalty imposed under this Act, he shall be liable to be detained
in civil prison for a term which may extend to one year, unless in the
meantime the Commission directs his release and he shall also be liable
to a penalty not exceeding rupees ten lakhs.
(2) The Commission may, while making an order under this
Act, issue such directions to any person or authority, not inconsistent
with this Act, as it thinks necessary or desirable, for the proper
implementation or execution of the order, and any person who commits
breach of, or fails to comply with, any obligation imposed on him
under such direction, may be ordered by the Commission to be
detained in civil prison for a term not exceeding one year unless in the
meantime the Commission directs his release and he shall also be liable
to a penalty not exceeding rupees ten lakhs.
5 of 1908.
Director-
General to
investigate
contraventions.
1 of 1956.
Contravention
of orders of
Commission.

118
43. If any person fails to comply with a direction given by—
(a) the Commission under sub-section (5) of section 36;
or
(b) the Director General while exercising powers referred
to in sub-section (2) of section 41.
the Commission shall impose on such person a penalty or
rupees one lakh for each day during which such failure continues.
44. If any person, being a party to a combination,—
(a) makes a statement which is false in any material
particular, or knowing it to be false; or
(b) omits to state any material particular knowing it to be
material,
Such person shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less
than rupees fifty lakhs but which may extend to rupees one crore, as
may be determined by the Commission.
45. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 44, if any
person, who furnishes or is required to furnish under this Act any
particulars, documents or of any information,—
(a) makes any statement or furnishes any document which
he knows or has in reason to believe to be false in any material
particular; or
(b) omits to state material fact knowing it to be material;
or
(c) wilfully alters, suppresses or destroys any document
which is required to be furnished as aforesaid
the Commission shall impose on such person a penalty which
may extend to rupees ten lakhs.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the
Commission may also pass such other order as it deems fit.
46. (1) Where a person committing contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, order made or
direction issued thereunder is a company, every person who, at the
time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
directions of
Commission
and Director
General.
Penalty for
making falls
statments or
omission to
furnish
material
information.
Penalty for
offences in
relation to
furnishing of
information.
Contravention
by companies.

119
contravention was committed without his knowledge or that he had
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or of any rule,
regulation, order made or direct issued thereunder has been committed
by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on
the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also
be deemed to be guilty of that contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation–For the purposes of this section—
(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a
firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.
CHAPTER VII
C
OMPETITION A DVOCACY
47. ( 1) In formulating a policy on competition, the Central
Government may make a reference to the Commission for its opinion
on possible effect of such policy on competition and on receipt of
such a reference, the Commission shall, within sixty days of many
such reference give its opinion to the Central Government, which may
thereafter formulate the policy as it deems fit.
(2) The opinion given by the Commission under sub-section (1)
shall not be binding upon the Central Government in formulating such
policy.
(3) The Commission shall take suitable measures, as may be
prescribed, for the promotion of competition advocacy, creating
awareness and imparting training about competition issues.
CHAPTER VIII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
48. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Commission
grants of such sums of money as the Government may think fit
for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
49. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the
“Competition Fund” and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all Government grants received by the Commission;
Competition
advocacy.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Constitution
of Fund.

120
(b) the monies received as costs from parties to
proceedings before the Commission;
(c) the fees received under this Act;
(d) the interest accrued on the amounts referred to in
clause (a) to (c).
(2) The fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson
and Members and the administrative expenses including the
salaries, allowances and pension payable to the Director General,
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General, the
Registrar and officers and other employees of the Commission.
(b) The other expenses of the Commission in connection
with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of this
Act.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a committee of such
Members of the Commission as may be determined by the Chairperson.
(4) The Committee appointed under sub-section (3) shall spend
monies out of the Fund for carrying out the objects for which the
Fund has been constituted.
50. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be
specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such
audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the orders of the Commission, being matters appealable to the
Supreme Court, shall not be subject to audit under this section.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts
of the Commission shall have the same rights, privileges and authority
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India generally has, in connection with the audit of the Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production
of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed
by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be
Accounts and
audit.

121
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government
shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
51. (1) The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government
at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or
as the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements
and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing measures
for the promotion of competition advocacy, creating awareness and
imparting training about competition issue, as the Central Government
may, from time to time, require.
(2) The Commission shall prepare once every year, in such
form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving
a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
52. The Central Government may, by notification, exempt from
the application of this Act, or any provision thereof, and for such
period as it may specify in  such notification—
(a) any class of enterprises if such exemption is necessary
in the interest of security of the state or the public interest;
(b) any practice or agreement arising out of and in
accordance with any obligation assumed by India under any
treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or
countries.
(c) Any enterprise which performs a sovereign function
on behalf of the Central Government or State Government.
53. ( 1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
Act, the Commission shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance
of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on
questions of policy, other than those relating to technical and
administrative matters, as the Central Government may give in writing
to it from time to time.
Provided that the Commission shall, as fare as practicable, be
given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given
under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question
is one of policy or not shall be final.
Furnishing of
returns, etc.,
to Central
Government.
Power to
exempt.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.

122
54. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the question—
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the control
of the Commission, it is unable to discharge the functions or
perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of
this Act; or
(b) that the Commission has persistently made default in
complying with any direction given by the Central Government
under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the
financial position of the Commission or the administration of the
Commission has suffered; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in
the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons to
be specified therein, supersede the Commission for such period,
not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification;
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the
Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the
Commission to make representations against the proposed
suppression and shall consider representations, if any, of the
Commission.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1)
superseding the Commission,—
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the
date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged
by or on behalf of the Commission shall, until the Commission
is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and
discharged by the Central Government or such authority as the
Central Government may specify in this behalf;
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Commission
shall, until the Commission is reconstituted under sub-
section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of suppression
specified in the notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central
Government shall reconstitute the Commission by a fresh appointment
of its Chairperson and other Members and in such case any person
who had vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall
not be deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued
under sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this
Power of
Central
Government to
supersede
Commission.

123
section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before
each House of Parliament at the earliest.
55. No information relating to any enterprise, being an information
which has been obtained by or on behalf of the Commission for the
purposes of this Act, shall, without the previous permission in writing
of the enterprise, be disclosed otherwise than in compliance with or
for the purposes of this Act or any other law for the time being in
force.
56. The Chairperson and other Members and the Director General,
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General and Registrar
and other officers and employees of the Commission shall be deemed,
while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions
of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of
the Indian Penal Code.
57. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against the Central Government or commission or any officer of the
Central Government of the Chairperson or any Member or the
Director-General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Director-General
or Registrar or officers or other employees of the Commission for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this
Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
58. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
59. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter which the Commission is
empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall
be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under
this Act.
60. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
61. (1) the Central Government may, by notification, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which and the authority
before whom the oath of office and of secrecy shall be made
and subscribed under sub-section ( 3) of section 10;
Restriction
on disclosure
of
information.
45 of 1860.
Members,
Director
General,
Registrar,
officers and
employees,
etc., of
Commissions
to be public
servants.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Exclusion of
jurisdiction
of civil
courts.
Application
of other laws
not barred.
Power to
make rules.

124
(b) the other terms and conditions of service including
travelling expenses, house rent allowance and conveyance
facilities, sumptuary allowance and medical facilities to be
provided to the Chairperson and other Members under sub-
section ( 3) of, section 14;
(c) the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions
of service of the Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or
Assistant Director General under sub-section ( 3) of section 16;
(d) the qualifications for appointment of the Directors
General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General
under sub-section ( 4) of section 16;
(e) the salaries and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Registrar and officers and other
employees payable under sub-section ( 2) of section 17;
(f) the rules for the purpose of securing any case or
matter which requires to be decided by a Bench composed of
more than two Members under sub-section ( 4) of section 23;
(g) any other matter in respect of which the Commission
shall have power under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 2) of section
36;
(h) the promotion of competition advocacy, creating
awareness and imparting training about competition issues under
sub-section ( 3) of section 47;
(i) the form in which the annual statement of accounts
shall be prepared under sub-section ( 1) of section 50;
(j) the time within which and the form and manner in
which the Commission may furnish returns, statements and
such particulars as the Central Government may require under
sub-section ( 1) of section 51;
(k) the form in which and the time within which the
annual report shall be prepared under sub-section ( 2) of section
51;
(l) the manner in which the monies transferred to the
Central Government shall be dealt with by that Government
under the fourth proviso to sub-section ( 2) of section 64;
(m) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be, or may
be, made by rules.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 3) of section 20
and section 52 and every rule made under this Act by the Central
Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of

125
thirty days which may be comprised in one session, or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or
rule, or both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued
or rule should not be made, the notification or rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or, annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that notification or rule, as the case may be.
62. (1) The Commission may, by notification, make regulations
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provisions, such regulations may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:-
(a) the cost of production to be determined under clause
(b) of the Explanation to section 4;
(b) the form of notice as may be specified and the fee
which may be determined under sub-section ( 2) of section 6;
(c) the form in which details of the acquisition shall be
filed under sub-section ( 5) of section 6;
(d) any other matter in respect of which provision is to
be, or may be, made by regulations.
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation
should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation
63. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for
removing the difficulty.
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of
this Act.
Power to
make
regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

126
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
64. (1) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969 is hereby repealed and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission established under sub-section ( 1) of section 5
of the said Act (hereinafter referred to as the repealed Act) shall stand
dissolved.
(2) On the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission, the person appointed, as the Chairman of the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission and every
other person appointed as Member and Director General of Investigation
and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy, Assistant Director Generals
of Investigation and Registration and any officer and other employee
of that Commission and holding office as such immediately before
such dissolution shall vacate their respective offices and such Chairman
and other Members shall be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding
three months' pay and allowances for the premature termination of
term of their office or of any contract of service:
Provided that the Director General of Investigation and
Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General
of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee who
has been, immediately before the dissolution of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission appointed on deputation basis
to the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall,
on such dissolution, stand reverted to his parent cadre, Ministry or
Department, as the case may be:
Provided further that the Director General of Investigation and
Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General
of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee who
has been, immediately before the dissolution of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, employed on regular basis by
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall
become, on and from such dissolution, the officer and employee,
respectively, of the Central Government with the same rights and
privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like matters as would have
been admissible to him if the rights in relation to such Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission had not been transferred to,
and vested in, the Central Government and shall continue to do so
unless and until his employment in the Central Government is duly
terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment
are duly altered by that Government:
Provided also that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being
in force, the transfer of the services of any Director General of
Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Director General of Investigation and Registration or any officer or
other employee, employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
14 of 1947.
Repeal and
saving. 54 of 1969.

127
Practices Commission, to the Central Government shall not entitle
such Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional,
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Director General of Investigation and
Registration or any officer or other employee any compensation under
this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.
Provided also that where the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission has established a provident fund, superannuation,
welfare or other fund for the benefit of the Director General of
Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Director Generals of Investigation and Registration or the officers and
other employees employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission, the monies relatable to the officers and other
employees whose services have been transferred by or under this Act
to the Central Government shall, out of the monies standing, on the
dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation,
welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central
Government and such monies which stand so transferred shall be dealt
with by the said Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) All cases pertaining to monopolistic trade practices or
restrictive trade practices pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission on or before the Commencement of this
Act, including such cases, in which any unfair trade practice has also
been alleged, shall, on such commencement, stand transferred to the
Competition Commission of India and shall be adjudicated by that
Commission in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act as
if that Act had not been repealed.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 3), all cases
pertaining to unfair trade practices other than those referred to in
clause (x) of sub-section ( 1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 and pending before the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission on or before
the commencement of this Act shall, on such commencement, stand
transferred to the National Commission constituted under the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 and the National Commission shall dispose of
such cases as if they were cases field under that Act.
(5) All cases pertaining to unfair trade practices referred to in
clause (x) of sub-section ( 1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 and pending before the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission on or before
the commencement of this Act shall, on such commencement, stand
transferred to the Competition Commission of India, and the Competition
Commission of India shall dispose of such cases as if they were cases
field under that Act.
(6) All investigations or proceedings, other than those relating to
unfair trade practices, pending before the Director General of
54 of 1969.
68 of 1986.
54 of 1969.

128
Investigation and Registration on or before the commencement of this
Act shall, on such commencement, shall transferred to the Competition
Commission of India, and the Competition Commission of India may
conduct or order for conduct of such investigation or proceedings in
the manner as it deems fit.
(7) All investigations or proceedings, relating to unfair trade
practices other than those referred to in clause (x) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969 and pending before the Director General of Investigation
and Registration on or before the commencement of this Act shall,  on
such commencement, stand transferred to the National Commission
constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and the National
Commission may conduct or order for conduct of such investigation
or proceedings in the manner as it deems fit.
(8) All investigations or proceedings relating to unfair trade
practices referred to in clause (x) of sub-section ( 1) of section 36A
of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade practices Act, 1969 pending
before the Director General of Investigation and Registration on or
before the commencement of this Act shall, on such commencement,
stand transferred to the Competition Commission of India and the
Competition Commission of India may conduct or order for conduct
of such investigation in the manner as it deems fit.
(9) Save as otherwise provided under sub-section ( 3) or sub-
section (4), all cases or proceedings pending before the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission shall abate.
(10) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub-
sections ( 3) to ( 8) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard
to the effect to repeal.
54 of 1969.
68 of 1986.
54 of 1969.
10 of 1897.

129
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the pursuit of globalisation, India has responded by opening up its
economy, removing controls and resorting to liberalisation. The natural corollary
of this is that the Indian market should be geared to face competition from
within the country and outside. The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969 has become obsolete in certain respects in the light of international
economic developments relating more particularly to competition laws and there
is a need to shift our focus from curbing monopolies to promoting competition.
2. The Central Government constituted a High Level Committee on
Competition Policy and Law. The Committee submitted its report on the
22nd May, 2000 to the Central Government. The Central Government consulted
all concerned including the trade and industry associations and the general
public. The Central Government after considering the suggestions of the trade
and industry and the general public decided to enact a law on Competition.
3. The Competition Bill, 2001 seeks to ensure fair competition in India by
prohibiting trade practices which cause appreciable adverse effect on competition
in markets within India and, for this purpose, provides for the establishment of
a quasi-judicial body to be called the Competition Commission of India
(hereinafter referred to as CCI) which shall also undertake competition advocacy
for creating awareness and imparting training on competition issues.
4. The Bill also aims at curbing negative aspects of competition through the
medium of CCI. CCI will have a Principal Bench and Additional Benches and will
also have one or more Mergers Benches. It will look into violations of the Act,
a task which could be undertaken by the Commission based on its own
knowledge or information or complaints received and reference made by the
Central Government, the State Governments or statutory authorities. The
Commission can pass orders for granting interim relief or any other appropriate
relief and compensation or an order imposing penalties etc. An appeal from the
orders of the Commission shall lie to the Supreme Court. The Central.
Government will also have powers to issue directions to the Commission on
policy matters after considering its suggestions as well as the power to
supersede the Commission if such a situation is warranted.
5. The Bill also provides for investigation by the Director-General for the
Commission. The Director-General would be able to act only if so directed by
the Commission but will not have any suo-moto powers for initiating
investigations.
6. The Bill confers power upon the CCI to levy penalty for contravention
of its orders, failure to comply with its directions, making of false statements
or omission to furnish material information, etc. The CCI can levy upon an
enterprise a penalty of not more than ten percent of its average turn-over for
the last three financial years. It can also order division of dominant enterprises.
It will also have power to order demerger in the case of mergers and
amalgamations that adversely, affect competition.
129

130
7. The Bill also seeks to create a fund to be called the Competition Fund.
The grants given by the Central Government, costs realised by the Commission
and application fees charged will be credited into this Fund. The pay and
allowances and the other expenses of the Commission will also be borne out of
this Fund. The Bill provides for empowering the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India to audit the accounts of the Commission. The Central Government will
be required to lay the annual accounts of the Commission, as audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General and also the annual report of the Commission
before both the Houses of Parliament.
8. The Bill aims at repealing the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969 and the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission. The Bill provides that the cases pending before the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission will be transferred to the CCI except
those relating to unfair trade practices which are proposed to be transferred to
the relevant for a established under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; ARUN JAITLEY
The 24th July, 2001.
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. PC-5/23/2000-IGC, dated the 30th July, 2001 from
Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of law, Justice and Company Affairs to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed
Competition Bill, 2001 has recommended its introduction in Lok Sabha under
article 117(1) of the Constitution and for its consideration by Lok Sabha under
article 117(3) of the Constitution.

131
131
Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.— This clause, inter alia, seeks to extend the provisions of the
Bill to the whole of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Clause 2.— This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3.— This Clause, inter alia, provides for prohibition of entering
into anticompetitive agreements. It shall not be lawful for  any enterprise or
association of enterprises, or person or association of persons to enter into an
agreement in respect of production, supply, storage, distribution, acquisition or
control of goods or provision of service which causes or is likely to cause an
appreciable adverse effect on competition within India. All such agreements
entered into in contravention of the aforesaid prohibition shall be void. This
clause also specifies certain activities which shall be presumed to have an
appreciable adverse effect on competition and also specifies certain agreements
which shall be in adverse effect on competition and also specifies certain
agreements which shall be in contravention of sub-clause (1) of the said clause
if such agreement causes appreciable adverse on competition. The provision of
this clause shall not apply to certain rights specified in sub-clause (5) of this
clause.
Clause 4.— This clause prohibits abuse of dominant position by any
enterprise. Such abuse of dominant position, inter alia, includes imposition,
either directly or indirectly, of unfair or discriminatory purchase or selling prices
or conditions, including predatory prices of goods or service, limiting production
or restricting of goods or provision of service, indulging in practices resulting
in denial of market access, making the conclusion of contracts subject to
acceptance by other parties of supplementary obligations and using dominant
position in one market to enter into or protect other market.
Clause 5.— This clause deals with combination of enterprises and
persons. The acquisition of one or more enterprises by one or more persons or
acquiring of control or merger or amalgamation of enterprises under certain
circumstances specified in the said clause shall be construed as combination.
Clause. 6.— This clause, inter alia, provides that no person or enterprise
shall enter into a combination which is likely to cause or causes an appreciable
adverse effect on competition within the relevant market in India. It further
provides exemption from the provisions of this clause to certain institutions
specified in sub-clause (2) of the said clause.
Clause 7.— This clause provides for the establishment of the
Competition Commission of India. The commission shall be a body corporate by
the aforesaid name having perpetual succession and a common seal with power
to acquire, hold and dispose of property. The place of head office of the
Commission shall be decided by the Central Government. However, the
Commission can establish offices at other places in India.

132
Clause 8.— This clause provides for the composition of the Commission.
The Commission shall consist of the Chairperson and not less than two and not
more than ten other members, as may be specified by the Central Government.
However the Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson and a member
during first year of the establishment of the Commission. This clause also lays
down that the Chairperson and other Members shall be persons of  ability,
integrity and standing. A person who is or has been or  is qualified to be a Judge
of a High Court or is having special knowledge of,  and professional experience
in, not less than fifteen years in international trade, economics, business,
commerce, law, finance, accountancy, management, industry, public affairs,
administration or in any other matter which, in the opinion of the central
Government, be useful to the Commission, shall be eligible for appointment as
the Chairperson or as a Member.
Clause 9.— This clause, inter alia, provides for the appointment of the
Chairperson and Members of the Commission. The appointment shall be made by
the Central Government on the recommendation of the Selection Committee
consisting of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee, the Union Minister-in-
charge of the Ministry of finance, the Union Minister-in-charge of the Ministry
of Department of the Central government dealing with the proposed legislation,
the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and the cabinet Secretary. However,
an appointment made to the office of the Chairperson or a Member shall not be
invalid merely on the ground that there is any defect in the constitution of the
Selection Committee or any vacancy therein.
Clause 10.— This clause, inter alia, provides for the term of office of
the Chairperson and other Members. Such term of the office shall be five years.
However, no Chairperson shall hold office after he attains the age of seventy
years and no other member shall hold office after he attains the age of sixty-
five years. This clause also provides for discharge of functions of the
Chairperson by the senior-most member in case the Chairperson is unable to
discharge his functions.
Clause 11.— This clause, inter alia, contains provisions relating to
resignation, removal and suspension of the chairperson and other Members. Sub-
clause (1) of this clause provides for the manner of resignation of the
Chairperson or any Member. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Chairperson or a
Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by the
Central Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour after an inquiry made
by the Supreme Court in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this behalf
by it. Sub-clause (3) confers power upon the Central Government to suspend
the Chairperson or a Member in respect of whom a reference has been made
to the Supreme Court. Sub-clause (4) provides for other circumstances under
which the Chairperson or any Member can be removed from office by the
Central Government.
Clause 12.— This clause provides that the Chairperson or a Member
shall not, for a period of six months from the date on which they cease to hold
office, accept any employment in or connected with the management or
administration of any enterprise which has been a party to a proceeding before
the Commission. However, such a restriction of employment shall not apply in
case of any employment under the Central Government or a State Government

133
or a local authority or a statutory authority or corporation established by a
Central, State or Provincial Act, or in a Government Company.
Clause 13.— This clause empowers the Chairperson to have general
superintendence, direction and control in respect of all administrative maters of
the Commission.
Clause 14.— This clause deals with the salary and allowances and other
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members of the
Commission. The salary of the Chairperson shall be equal to that of a Judge of
the Supreme Court and the salary of a Member shall be equal to that of a Judge
of a High Court. The salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members shall not be varied to their
disadvantage after their appointment.
Clause 15.— This clause provides that any act or proceeding of the
Commission shall not be invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any
vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the Commission or defect in any
appointment or any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting
the merits of the case.
Clause 16.— This clause provides for the appointment of Director
General, Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors General for the
purpose of assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry into the contravention
of the provisions of the proposed legislation, for conduct of cases before the
Commission and performing such other functions as are or may be provided by
or under the proposed legislation. It also empowers the Central Government to
specify, by rules, their qualifications, the salary and allowances payable to them
and the other conditions of their service.
Clause 17.— This clause empowers the Commission to appoint Registrar
and other officers and employees necessary for the efficient performance of its
functions under the proposed legislation. The salary and allowances payable to
such officers and employees and other terms and conditions of their service shall
be determined by rules made by the Central Government.
Clause 18.— This clause deals with the duties, of the Commission. It
provides that it shall be the duty of the Commission to eliminate practices having
adverse effect on competition, to promote and sustain competition in markets in
India, to protect the interests of consumers and to ensure freedom of trade
carried on by other participants in markets in India.
Clause 19.— This clause empowers the Commission to inquire into
violation of provisions of sub-clause (1) of clause 3 or sub-clause (1) of clause
4 of the Bill either on its own motion or on receipt of a complaint from any
person, consumer or their association or trade association or on a reference
made to it by the Central Government or a State Government or a statutory
authority alleging violation of any of those provisions. This clause further lays
down the factors which shall be considered by the Commission for the purpose
of determining whether an agreement has an appreciable adverse effect on
competition, whether an enterprise enjoys the dominant position, or whether a
market constitutes a relevant market for the purposes of the proposed legislation.

134
Clause 20.— This clause, inter alia, empowers the Commission to make
inquiry as to whether a combination causes or is likely to cause an appreciable
adverse effect on competition in India. It also lays down the limitation of time
for initiation of inquiry as one year from the date on which the combination has
taken effect when such inquiry is conducted by the Commission upon its own
knowledge or information. This clause further lays down the factors which the
Commission would take into account for determining whether the combinations
has appreciable adverse effect on the competition in the relevant market.
Clause 21.— This clause contains provisions relating to the
circumstances under which a reference can be made to the Commission by
statutory authorities. It provides that if in the course of a proceeding before any
statutory authority, entrusted with the responsibility of regulating any goods or
service or market therefore, a party has raised an issue that the decision taken
by the statutory authority would be contrary to the provisions of the Bill, then
the statutory authority shall be bound to make a reference to the Commission.
The Commission, after hearing parties to the proceedings, shall, give to the
statutory authority its opinion and the statutory authority shall thereafter pass its
orders.
Clause 22.— This clause contains provisions relating to constitution of
Benches of the Commission and exercise of the jurisdiction, powers and
authority of the Commission by such Benches. Sub-clause (2) and (3) stipulate
that each bench shall consist of two Members of which at least one Member
shall be Judicial Member. A Judicial Member shall be a Member who is or has
been or is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court. Sub-clause (4) provides that
the Bench over which the Chairperson presides shall be the Principal Bench and
the other Benches shall be known as Additional Benches. Sub-clause (5)
empowers the Chairperson to constitute one or more Benches to be called the
Mergers Benches which will exclusively deal with matters referred to in clauses
5 and 6 of the Bill. Sub-clause (6) empowers the Central Government to specify,
by notification, the places at which the Principal Bench and other Benches shall
sit.
Clause 23.— This clause deals with distribution of business of the
Commission amongst its Benches. It also empowers the Chairperson to transfer
a Member from one Bench to another and also to authorise a Member of one
Bench to discharge the functions as a Member of any other Bench with the prior
approval of the Central Government.
Clause 24.— This clause deals with the procedure for deciding a case
where the Members of a Bench differ in opinion. It provides that if Members
of a Bench differ in their opinion on any point or points, they shall state such
point or points on which they differ and made a reference to the Chairperson.
The Chairperson may hear such point or points himself or refer the case for
hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members. The point
or points as decided, according to the opinion of the majority of the Members
who have heard the case including those who had first heard it, shall be the
decision of the Commission.
Clause 25.— This clause lays down the jurisdiction of a Bench of the
Commission. It provides that an inquiry shall be initiated or a complaint be

135
instituted or a reference be made under the proposed legislation before a Bench
within the local limits of jurisdiction of which the respondent or each of the
respondents, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain or the cause of action, wholly or in part, has arisen. The
Explanation to this clause specifies the category of respondents in whose case
the registered or principal office or subordinate office shall be the place of his
business.
Clause 26.— This clause lays down the detailed procedure for any
inquiry initiated suo motu by the Commission and various complaints and
references referred to in clause 19 of the Bill. In case the Commission is of the
opinion in respect of any complaint referred to in item (a) of sub-clause ( 1) of
clause 19 of the Bill that no prima facie case is existing, it shall dismiss the
complaint and pass such orders as it may deem fit including imposition of costs,
if any. If the Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie case,
it shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made into the
alleged matter. The Director General is required to submit a report on his
findings on such allegation to the Commission within the period allowed by the
Commission. On receipt of the report of the Director General in respect of the
said matter, the Commission shall forward a copy of the same to the parties
concerned or to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be. In case the report of the Director General recommends that there is no
contravention of the provisions of the Bill, the complainant shall be given an
opportunity to rebut the findings of the Director General. If, after hearing the
complainant, the Commission agrees with the recommendations of the Director
General, the Commission shall dismiss the complaint. In case, the Commission,
after hearing the complainant, is of the opinion that further inquiry is required
to be conducted, it shall direct the complainant to proceed with the complaint.
If the report of the Director General relates to a reference and such report
recommends that there is contravention of any of the provisions of the Bill, the
Commission shall invite the comments from the Central Government or the State
Government or the statutory authority, as the case may be, and it shall return
the reference if there is no prima facie case or the Commission may proceed
with the reference as a complaint if there is a prima facie case.
Clause 27.— This clause deals with various orders which the
Commission is competent to pass after an inquiry if, on inquiry, the Commission
finds that the agreements or the actions of an enterprise in a dominant position
are in contravention of the provisions of clauses 3 and 4, it may pass any order
which may, inter alia, include an order directing any enterprise or association
of enterprises or person or association of persons involved in the agreement or
abuse of dominant position to discontinue and not to re-enter into any such
agreement or abuse, as the case may be, imposing such penalty as the
Commission deems fit which shall not be more than ten per cent of the average
of the turnover for the last three years upon each such person or enterprise
which is a party to the agreement or abuse of dominant position, awarding
compensation to the parties, directing modification of the agreement,
recommending to the Central Government the division of any such enterprise
enjoying dominant position or complying with its directions including a direction
to pay costs.

136
Clause 28.— This clause empowers the Central Government on the
recommendation of the Commission to order division of an enterprise enjoying
dominant position so as to ensure that it does not abuse its  dominant position.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the various matters relating to such
division in respect which the Central Government may pass the order for
division of such enterprise.
Clause 29.— This clause lays down the detailed procedure for
investigation of combinations if the Commission is of the opinion that any
combination is likely to cause or has caused an appreciable adverse effect on
competition within the relevant market in India.
Clause 30.— This clause deals with an inquiry by the Commission on
receipt of a notice under sub-clause (2) of clause 6. The Commission shall
inquire into whether the disclosure mentioned in the notice is correct and
whether the combination has or is likely to have an appreciable adverse effect
on competition.
Clause 31.— This clause empowers the Commission to issue orders on
certain combinations. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that if the
Commission is of the opinion that a combination does not or is not likely to have
an appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall, by order, approve the
combination including a combination in respect of which a notice has been given
under sub-clause (2) of clause 6. Sub clause (2) of the said clause empowers
the Commission to direct that a combination shall not take effect, if it is of the
opinion that the combination has or is likely to have an appreciable adverse
effect on competition. Sub-clause (3) empowers the Commission to propose
suitable modifications in the combinations in case the adverse effect could be
eliminated. Sub-clause (4) to (12) contain provisions relating to acceptance of
the modifications suggested by the Commission, amendments to such
modifications proposed by the parties to the combination, within the time
specified in those clauses and effect of acceptance or non-acceptance of such
modifications and amendments by the Commission and the parties to the
combinations.
Clause 32.— This clause empowers the Commission to inquire into an
agreement or abuse of dominant position or combination if such agreements or
dominant position or combination has or likely to have an appreciable adverse
effect on competition in India even if such agreement or abuse of dominant
position or combination as specified in sub-clauses (a) to (g) of the said clause
take place outside India.
Clause 33.— This clause empowers the Commission to grant interim
relief by way of temporary injunctions.
Clause 34.— This clause empowers the Commission to deal with
applications made to it by any applicant for an order for recovery of
compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to have
been suffered by him as a result of any contravention of the provisions of
Chapter II, and to award compensation to such applicant.
Clause 35.— This clause contains provisions relating to the persons who
are entitled to appear in proceedings before the Commission. It provides that a

137
complainant, defendant or the Director General may either appear in person or
authorise one or more chartered accountants, or company secretaries or cost
accountants or legal practitioners, or any of the officers of such complainant,
defendant or Director General to present the case before the Commission.
Clause 36.— This clause confers powers upon the Commission to
regulate its own procedure while conducting inquiries. The Commission shall not
be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but
shall be guided by the principles of natural justice. Sub-clause ( 2) confers upon
the Commission the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit. Such powers include powers for
summoning witnesses, production of documents, receiving evidence on
affidavits, deciding cases ex parte, etc. Sub-clause ( 3) provides that the
proceedings before the Commission shall be judicial proceedings within the
meaning of section 193 and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the
Indian Penal code. Sub-clause ( 4) confers powers upon the Commission to call
certain experts from fields specified in this sub-clause to assist it in an inquiry
or proceeding. Sub-clause ( 5) confers power upon the Commission to direct any
person to produce, before the Director General or Registrar or any officer
authorised by it, books, accounts or other documents in the custody or control
of such person and to furnish to the Director General or Registrar or any officer
authorised by the Commission, any information relating to trade which may be
in possession of such person. Sub-clause ( 6) confers power upon the
Commission to conduct inquiry or adjudicate in matters after giving oral hearing
to the parties concerned.
Clause 37.— This clause provides for review of orders of the
Commission in certain cases.
Clause 38.— This clause provides for rectification of orders of the
Commission for rectifying any mistakes apparent from the record.
Clause 39.— The clause contains provisions regarding execution of
orders of the Commission. The order of the Commission under the proposed
legislation shall be enforced by the Commission in the same manner as if it were
a decree or order made by a High Court or the principal civil court in a suit
pending therein.
Clause 40.— This clause provides for filing of an appeal. Any person
aggrieved by any decision or order of the Commission may file an appeal to the
Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the
decision or order to him on one or more grounds specified in section 100 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 arising out of such decision or order. However,
in case of delay in filing such appeal before the Supreme Court, that Court may
allow filing of appeal within a further period not exceeding sixty days if the
appellant can satisfy the Court that he was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal within the said period of sixty days.
Clause 41.— This clause seeks to empower the Director General to
investigate contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules
or regulations made thereunder. The Director General shall, when so directed by
the Commission, assist the Commission in investigating such contraventions. The
provisions of section 240 relating to production of documents and evidence and

138
section 240A relating to seizure of documents by Inspector under the Companies
Act, 1956 shall, so far as may be, apply in conducting the investigations by the
Director General or any other person investigating under his authority as they
apply to an inspector appointed under that Act.
Clause 42.— This clause provides that if any person contravenes without
any reasonable ground the order of the Commission or any condition or
restriction subject to which any approval, sanction, direction or exemption in
relation to any matter accorded, given, made or granted under the proposed
legislation or fails to pay the penalty imposed under the Act, he shall be liable
to be detained in civil prison for a term which may extend to one year or shall
be liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees ten lakhs.
Clause 43.— This clause provides for imposition of penalty for failure to
comply with the directions of the Commission under sub-clause ( 5) of clause 36
or the Director General under sub-clause ( 2) of clause 41. The Commission may
impose a penalty of rupees one lakh for each day during which the person has
failed to comply with the direction given under those sub-clauses by the
Commission or the Director-General, as the case may be.
Clause 44.— This clause provides for the penalty for making false
statements or omission to furnish material information by any person being a
party to a combination. Such penalty shall not be less than rupees fifty lakhs but
it may extend up to rupees one crore, as may be determined by the Commission.
Clause 45.— This clause provides for the penalty for offences in relation
to furnishing of information. If any person furnishes any statement or document
which he knows or has reason to believe to be false in any material particular
or omits to state any material fact, knowing to be material or wilfully alters,
suppresses or destroys any document which is required to be furnished, the
Commission may impose a penalty which may extend to rupees ten lakhs. The
Commission may also pass such other orders as it deems fit.
Clause 46.— This clause contains provisions relating to contravention by
companies. This clause, inter alia, provides that every person—who, at the time
of contravention of any of the provisions mentioned in that clause, was in
charge of and was responsible to the company as well as the company, shall be
deemed to have acted in contravention of the said provision and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. However, such person shall
not be liable to punishment if he proves that contravention was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent such
contravention.
Clause 47.— This clause contains provisions for competition advocacy
by the Commission. In formulating policy, the Central Government may make a
reference to the Commission for its opinion on possible effects of such policy
on competition. The Commission is required to give its opinion to the Central
Government within sixty days from the date of such reference. Such opinion
shall not be binding upon the Central Government. The Commission is also
required to take suitable measures for the promotion of competition advocacy
creating awareness and imparting training about the competition issues as may
be prescribed.

139
Clause 48.— This clause provides for grants to the Commission by the
Central Government. The grants shall be made after due appropriation made by
Parliament.
Clause 49.— This clause provides for the constitution of a fund to be
called the “Competition Fund”. There shall be credited to the fund all
Government grants, monies received as costs and fees received and the interest
accrued on the said amounts. The Fund may be applied for meeting the various
expenses of the Commission including payment of salary to the Chairperson and
other members, Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant
Directors General, Registrar, officers and staff of the Commission. The Fund
shall be administered by a committee of such Members of the Commission as
may be determined by the Chairperson.
Clause 50.— This clause provides that the commission shall maintain
proper accounts and other relevant records in the form as may be prescribed by
the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India and those accounts shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India with the same rights and privileges as in the case of audit of
Government accounts. This clause also provides that the accounts of the
Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India together
with the audit report thereon shall be laid every year before each House of
Parliament. It is further provided that the orders of the Commission being
matters appealable to the Supreme Court, shall not be subject to audit under this
clause.
Clause 51.— This clause provides for furnishing of returns, etc., by the
Commission to the Central Government.
Clause 52.— This clause empowers the Central Government, by
notification, to exempt any class of enterprises from all or any of the provisions
of the proposed legislation for such period as may be specified in that
notification if such exemption is necessary in the interest of security of the State
or public interest or any practice or agreement arising out of and in accordance
with any obligation assumed by India under any treaty or international agreement
or convention. This exemption may also be given to any enterprise which
performs a sovereign function on behalf of the Central Government or a State
Government.
Clause 53.— This clause empowers the Central Government to issue
directions on questions of policy to the Commission. The Commission shall, in
exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under the proposed
legislations, be bound on such directions on questions of policy. The
Commission shall be given an opportunity to express its views before any such
direction is given.
Clause 54.— This clause provides for supersession of the Commission
in certain circumstances. The Central Government may, by notification,
supersede the Commission for a period not exceeding six months, by
notification, if the Central Government is of the opinion that on account of
circumstances beyond the control of the Commission, it is unable to discharge
its functions or perform its duties under the provisions of the proposed
legislation or that the Commission has persistently defaulted in complying with

140
any direction given by the Central Government under the proposed legislation or
in the discharge of its functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by
or under the provisions of proposed legislation and as a result of such default
the financial position of the Commission or the administration of the Commission
has suffered or that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public
interest so to do. The Central Government before issuing a notification of
supersession shall give the Commission a reasonable opportunity to make
representation against such supersession and shall also consider such
representations, if any, made by the Commission. Sub-clause ( 2) deals with the
effect of supersession. Sub-clause ( 3) provides for constitution of the
Commission by a fresh appointment of Chairperson and other members. Sub-
clause (4) provides for laying of the notification and a full report of any action
taken under this clause before each House of Parliament.
Clause 55.— This clause deals with restriction on disclosure of
information by the Commission.
Clause 56.— This clause provides that the Chairperson and other
Members and the Director General, additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Directors General Registrar and other officers and employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 57.— This clause provides for protection of action taken in good
faith by the Central Government or Commission or any officer of the Central
Government or Chairperson or any Member or Director General, Additional,
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General or Registrar or officers or other
employees of the Commission for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under the proposed legislation or any rules and regulations
made thereunder.
Clause 58.— This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall have overriding effect on any other law for the time being in
force.
Clause 59.— This clause provides for exclusion of jurisdiction of civil
courts in respect of any matter which the Commission is empowered by or
under the proposed legislation to determine.
Clause 60.— This clause seeks to provide that the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 61.— This clause confers upon the Central Government the
power to make rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) of this clause enumerates the various matters in respect of which
such rules may be made. Sub-clause (3) provides that every notification issued
under sub-clause (3) of clause 20 and Clause 52 and every rule made by the
Central Government under the proposed legislation shall be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
Clause 62.— This clause confers power upon the Commission to make
regulations consistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made

141
thereunder, to carry out the purposes of the proposed legislations. Sub-clause (2)
enumerates the various matters in respect of which such regulations may be
made by the Commission. Sub-clause (3) provides for laying of regulations
before both Houses of Parliament.
Clause 63.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to
made provision, by order, published in the official Gazatte, to remove difficulties
which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. However, such
order can be issued only within a period of two years from the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation. The orders made under this clause
shall be required to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
Clause 64.— This clause provides for repeal and savings. This clause,
inter alia, proposes to repeal the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969. Upon such repeal, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the said Act shall
stand dissolved. Sub-clauses (2) to (10) deal with the matters arising out of
such repeal.

142
142
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 7 of the Bill provides for the establishment of
a Commission to be known as the Competition Commission of India with effect
from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint in this
behalf. Sub-clause (3) provides that the head office of the Commission shall be
at such place as the Central Government may decide. Sub-clause (4) enables the
Commission to establish offices at other places in India.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Commission
shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than two and not more than ten other
Members to be appointed by the Central Government. During first year of its
establishment, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and one Member.
The Chairperson and other Members shall be the whole-time Members.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 14 of the Bill provides that the Chairperson
shall be entitled to a salary equal to the salary of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
Sub-clause (2) provides that a Member shall be paid salary equal to that of a
Judge of a High Court. Sub-clause (3) provides that the other conditions of
service relating to travelling expenses, provision of house rent allowance and
conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance and medical facilities shall be such as
may be specified by rules made by the Central Government.
4. Clause 16 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Director General
and as many Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General as the
Central Government may think fit for assisting the Commission in conducting
inquiry into contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation and for
performing such other functions as may be provided by or under the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (3) provides that the salary, allowances and other
conditions of service of the Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or
Assistant Directors General shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
5. Sub-clause (1) of clause 17 of the Bill enables the Commission to
appoint a Registrar and such officers and employees of the Commission as it
considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) provides that the salary and allowances
payable and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar, other officers
and employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
6. Clause 22 of the Bill provides that the jurisdiction, powers and
authority of the Commission may be exercised by Benches thereof. The
Chairperson may constitute one or more Bench including Mergers Benches.
7. Clause 48 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law, make to the Commission grants
of such sums of money as the Government may think fit for being utilised for
the purposes of the proposed legislation.

143
8. The details of recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the first
year, second year, third year and subsequent years for the establisbment of the
Competition Commission of India shall be as under:—
Statement showing year-wise Expenses
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Recurring Non-recurring T otal
First Year
1. Principal Bench 56.94 24.26 81.21
2. Director General’s office 39.67 19.90 59.57
96.61 44.17 140.78
Recurring Non-recurring T otal.
Second Year
1. Principal Bench 63.02 18.19 81.21
2. Director General’s office 43.63 15.94 59.57
3. Three Benches 147.05 55.77 202.82
4. Three Additional Director 90.33 40.77 131.10
General’s Offices
344.03 130.67 474.70
Recurring Non-recurring T otal
Third Year and each
subsequent year
1. Principal Bench 73.70 7.51 81.21
2. Director General’s Office 53.03 6.54 59.57
3. Three Benches. 161.75 41.07 202.82
4. Three Additional Director 103.54 27.56 131.10
General Offices
5. One Merger Bench 44.98 22.62 67.60
6. One Additional Director 26.09 17.61 43.70
General’s Office
463.09 122.91 586.00
9. The Bill will not involve any other expenditure of recurring or non
recurring nature.

144
144
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (3) of clause 20 of the Bill confers power upon the Central
Government to enhance or reduce the value of assets or the value of turnover
for the purposes of combination under the proposed legislation.
2. Clause 52 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to
exempt, by notification, from the application of the proposed legislation or any
provision thereof and for such period as it may specify in such notification, any
class of enterprises if such exemption is necessary in the interest of security of
the State or public interest or any practice or agreement arising out of and in
accordance with any obligation assumed by India under any treaty or
international agreement or convention or any enterprise which performs a
sovereign function on behalf of the Central Government or a State Government.
3. Clause 61 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of
which rules may be made relate, inter alia, to provide for the form and manner
in which, and the authority before whom, the oath of office and of secrecy shall
be made and subscribed under sub-section (3) of section 10; the other
conditions of service relating to travelling expenses, house rent allowances and
conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance and medical facilities to be provided
to the Chairperson and other Members under sub-section (3) of section 14; the
salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Director
General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General under sub-
section (3) of section 16; the qualifications for appointment of the Director
General or Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General under sub-
section (4) of section 16; the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions
of service of the Registrar and officers and other employees payable under sub-
section (2) of section 17; the rules for the purpose of securing any case or
matter which requires to be decided by a Bench composed of more than two
Members under sub-section (4) of section (23); any other matter in respect of
which the Commission shall have power under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of
section 36; the promotion of competition advocacy, creating awareness and
imparting-training about competition issues under sub-section (3) of section 47;
the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under sub-
section (1) of section 50; the time within which, and the form and manner in
which the Commission may furnish returns, statements and such particulars as
the Central Government may require under sub-section (1) of section 51; the
form in which, and the time within which, the annual report shall be prepared
under sub-section (2) of section 51; the manner in which the monies transferred
to the Central Government shall be dealt with by that Government under fourth
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 64; any other matter which is to be, or
may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made
by rules.
4. Clause 62 of the Bill confers power upon the Competition Commission
of India to make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules made

145
thereunder to carry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in respect of
which, regulations may be made, relate, inter alia, to provide for the cost of
production to be determined under clause (b) of the Explanation to section 4; the
form of notice as may be specified and the fee which may be determined under
sub-section (2) of section 6; the form in which details of the acquisition shall
be filed under sub-section (5) of section 6; any other matter in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by regulations.
5. The notifications issued under sub-section (3) of section 20 and
section 52, the rules made by the Central Government and the regulations made
by the Competition Commission of India shall be laid, as soon as may be, after
they are made, before each House of Parliament.
6. The matters in respect of which notifications may be issued and the
rules and regulations may be made are generally matters of procedure and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

146
146
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
To provide for the establishment of a Commission to prevent practices having adverse
effect on competition to promote and sustain competition in markets. to protect the
interests of consumers and to ensure freedom of trade carried on by other
participants in markets. in India and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company affairs)

147
ANNEXURE-II
(See para 5.0, page vii of the Introduction)
NAMES OF INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTING ON THE
COMPETITION BILL, 2001
1. PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry
2. Federation of India Chambers of Commerce And Industry (FICCI)
3. The Associated Chambers of Commerce And Industry of India (ASSOCHAM)
4. The Indian Merchants Chamber (IMC)
5. Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
6. Reliance industries Limited
7. Bajaj Auto Limited
8. Mahindra and Mahindra Limted
9. Tata Sons Limited
10. Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI)
11 National Stock Exchange (NSE)
12. Industrial Credit And Investment Corporation of India (ICICI)
13. Consumer Coordination Council (CCC)
14. V oluntary Organisation in Interest Of Consumer Education (VOICE)
15. The Consumer Protection Forum
16. India Defence Foundation
17. Consumer Unity and Trust Society (CUTS)
18. Endeavour Foundation
19. Organisation of Pharmaceuticals Producers of India
20. The All India Association of Industries
21. Nath Bros. Exim International Ltd.
22. Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
23. Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICS!)
24. Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)
147

148
MEMORANDUM RECEIVED FROM INDIVIDUALS
1. Mr. Evan Cox, Washington-based law firm Covington and Burling.
2. Majmudar and Co., Internation Lawyers, Mumbai.
3. Shri K.B.S. Rajan, Advocate on Record, Supreme Court of India.
4. Shri N. Ranganathasamy, 314-A, SFS Flats, Pankha Road, C-3, Janakpuri, New Delhi – 110058.
5. Shri Kedar Nath Laldas.
6. Shri T.S.V . Panduranga Sarma, A-3/205, Ekta Gardens, 9 – Patparganj, Mother Dairy,
Delhi 110092.
7. Shri Ramesh Upadhyay, Mahendervi Bhawan, Lanka – Sankat Mochan Road, Lanka,
V aranasi.
8. Shri M.S. Pandit, Advocate, E-206, Bramha Memories, Pune – 411007.
9. Shri P.K. Agarwal, Q – 441, Sector – 21, Noida – 201301.
10. Shri R.K. Gupta, Advocate, H – Block, Chendmeri Road, Howrah.
11. Shri R. Krishnan, E-18, B-1 Extn., Mathura Road, Mohan Cooperative, Industrial Estate,
New Delhi – 110004.
12. Shri V .T. Korde, D – 4/4093, V asant Kunj, New Delhi – 110070.
13. Shri K.S. Sundara Rajan, 10-11, G.M. Colony, Chittoor – 517001.
14. Dr. (Maj.) Umacharan Panigrahi, Station Road, Rayagada – 765001.
15. Mr. Vinod Kumat, 18-B, Neenuch Mata Scheme Udaipur – 313001.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.