 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation] 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
18 

 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation’] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 July, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31 July, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 


 
 
 
CONTENT 
 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                           (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                         (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter-I Report  1 
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
7 
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
15 
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
16 
Chapter-V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited  
17 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025 18 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.’ 
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10.Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11.Thiru Arun Nehru  
12.Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13.Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14.Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15.Prof. Sougata Ray  
16.Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17.Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18.Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19.Shri Manish Tewari  
20.Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21.Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Smt. Mradula Dubey Assistant Committee Officer 
(iv) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized by 
the Committee, present this Eighteenth Report on action taken by Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation. 
 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
06 December, 2024.  The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were received 
from the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation on 03 February, 2025.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July, 
2025.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi;                              Bhartruhari Mahtab  
29 July, 2025                                                                                             Chairperson                                                           
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                               Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
(v)  
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Fifth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 06 December, 2024.  
 
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the six recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,5 and 6  
       (Total: 06) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation No. NIL 
                  (Total: NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Recommendation No.  NIL 
       (Total : NIL)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL          (Total: NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 

2 
 
1.3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
1.4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on their 
recommendations. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
Budgetary Allocations 
1.5. The Committee note that the shortfall in fund utilization by Rs. 234.43 crore in 
2022-23 against the BE of Rs. 562.10 crore and Rs. 170.06 crore in 2023-24 against 
the Budget allocation of Rs. 600.00 (28.34% downfall) under Capacity Development 
(CD) Scheme was mainly due to shifting of timelines of two surveys, namely, Time Use 
Survey and Annual Survey of Service Sector Enterprises. The field work of these 
surveys has been started from January 2024 (TUS) and May 2024 (ASSSE pilot) 
respectively and thus the requirement under the heads was reduced at RE stage 
accordingly. However, the performance of the Ministry witnessed a marked 
improvement in utilization of funds in FY 2023-24 as against FY 2022-23 as MoSPI has 
incurred an expenditure of 94.29% over RE 2022-23 and 58.29% over BE 2022-23 of 
CD Scheme. Further, in FY 2023-24, an expenditure of 95.54% over RE 2023-24 and 
71.66% over BE 2023-24 of CD Scheme has been incurred. The Committee expect a 
similar and motivated performance in utilizing the budgeted funds and to reduce the 
savings for timely conducting the surveys under CD Scheme.  
1.6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation have stated as under:- 
“The recommendation of the Standing Committee is noted for compliance. 
Further, the utilization of funds and expenditure incurred under CD Scheme is 
being monitored on weekly basis and the instructions are also being issued from 
time to time to Divisions of the Ministry to formulate an action plan and review the 
expenditure status for ensuing timely utilization of funds in FY 2024-25 under 
Capacity Development (CD) Scheme.” 
 

3 
 
1.7 The Committee note that the Ministry strives for timely utilization of funds 
and have formulated a dedicated Action Plan in this regard. However, as the 
Ministry have stated that they have "noted for compliance" the observations / 
recommendations, the Committee would expect that under-utilisation of funds 
would become a rare phenomenon in future. Besides, the primary objective of the 
Time Use Survey (TUS) is to measure the participation of men, women, and other 
groups of persons in paid and unpaid activities including caregiving, 
volunteering, and domestic work, providing insights into daily social life patterns 
while the Annual Survey of Service Sector Enterprises (ASSSE) has been 
conducted to develop a comprehensive database of the services sector, 
capturing key characteristics like GVA, fixed capital, capital formation, 
employment, and other important features, both at the state and industry levels. 
The Committee acknowledge the importance of these two surveys and would like 
the Ministry to work earnestly towards all survey related work to be completed in 
a time bound manner.   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
Development of National Child Index 
1.8 The Committee note that there is a dire need for timely and reliable statistics for 
policy formulation and planning to ensure better protection of the rights of the children, 
monitor programmes relating to the survival, protection, participation and development 
of children and it cannot be overemphasized. To address the issue of child rights, the 
Committee recommend that a system should be made to capture statistics for children 
working in informal sector, street children, out of school children etc.  The Committee 
recommend to conduct regular Child survey and to develop a National Child Index in 
synergy with the Ministry of Women and Child Development. The Committee also 
suggests the Ministry to tie-up with State Governments to engage Panchayats/Municipal 
bodies to help facilitate data collection for conducting National Child Survey, 
development of Child Index in convergence with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development to map the needs of children through a periodic child survey, so as to 

4 
 
envisage a suitable response in terms of an effective policy to eliminate Child Labour 
and to protect child rights. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation should expedite the process in coordination with the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development.   
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation have stated as under:- 
"MoSPI has initiated a discussion to collaborate with M/o WCD for conducting a 
National Child Survey to map the needs of children covered under the Mission 
Vatsalya Scheme through a periodic survey. The main focus of the Child Survey 
is the preparation of a child index under Mission Vatsalya which is a scheme for 
children in need of care and protection & children in conflict with law. 
Presently, M/o WCD is exploring the requirements in terms of indicators to be 
considered in the survey and the frame to be used in the survey etc. Once, the 
requirements are received from M/o WCD, the feasibility of taking up the survey 
will be explored, subject to recommendation/concurrence of technical Groups/ 
Steering committee.” 
1.10 The Committee note that MOSPI has initiated a discussion to collaborate 
with Ministry of Women and Child Development for conducting a National Child 
Survey to map the needs of children covered under the Mission Vatsalya Scheme 
through periodic survey and that the various requirements of the survey are 
being worked out. The Committee may be apprised of the latest development at 
the time of submission of Action Taken Statement.   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
Eighth Economic Census 
 
1.11 The Committee understand that Economic Census gives a total count of non-
farm establishments in the formal and informal sectors and number of workers working 
therein along with other cross-sectional parameters at the lowest level of geography.  It 
provides valuable insights into clusters of economic activities, ownership patterns, 

5 
 
source of finance etc. of all establishments in the country. The Committee note that the 
Seventh Economic Census faced severe delays due to fieldwork stretching over the 
COVID-19 pandemic, leading to concerns about data accuracy.  The status of Seventh 
Economic Census was placed before the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in the 
meeting dated 13.07.2023 and the CoS inter-alia recommended that it may not be 
possible to publish the results of the Seventh Economic Census and the Ministry did not 
publish the same. In this regard, the Committee would like to be apprised whether in the 
past too there have been such instances and its impact thereon. Also, the alternate 
mechanisms in place to deal with such an extraordinary situation.  The Committee thus 
recommend that Ministry should take steps to ensure that the Eighth Economic Census 
is completed in a timely manner and that the data collected is accurate and reliable. To 
prevent similar issues in the future, Ministry should establish clear timelines for data 
collection and processing. The Ministry should also collaborate with State and Union 
Territory Governments to successfully conduct the Eighth Economic Census. The 
Ministry should provide adequate training and resources to enumerators and focus to 
implement robust quality control measures to overcome the obstacles.  
1.12 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
"Apart from 7th Economic Census, no other instance has happened, where the 
result of Economic Census had not been published.  At the time of data 
finalization of 7th EC, State Governments reported several issues related to data, 
including coverage, misclassification of economic activity, duplication and 
unusual variations, compared to the corresponding figures of 6th Economic 
Census.  It was noted that since the field work was conducted during COVID-19 
when most of the business establishments were closed, the data may not provide 
a true account of the entrepreneurial activity in the country. Thus, after detailed 
discussion, in the meeting taken by Cabinet Secretary on 13th July, 2023, it was 
recommended that “It may not be feasible to publish the results of 7th Economic 
Census”. In future, in case of a disaster / pandemic or natural calamity, timelines 
of the Economic census will be modified suitably to avoid data collection in 
abnormal period.  The 8th Economic Census will be implemented in close 

6 
 
coordination of the States / UTs. The States / UTs have the role of fieldwork / 
training / finalisation of results, etc.  Ministry has prescribed clear timelines to the 
States / UTs for conduct of field work and other activities of the 8th Economic 
Census." 
 
 
1.13 The Committee note that the results of the 7th Economic Census were not 
published due to concerns on data accuracy mainly due to the COVID-19 
pandemic. Apart from this, there was no instance where the results of any 
Economic Census was not published. Now the Ministry has decided that in future, 
in case of a disaster/pandemic or natural calamity, timelines of the Economic 
Census would be modified suitably to avoid data collection in abnormal period. 
As the Economic Census is an important document, the Committee hope that this 
measure would be effective in avoiding gaps between two surveys. The 
Committee also expect that the 8th Economic Census would be published in time.  
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
Budgetary Allocations 
 The Committee note that the shortfall in fund utilization by Rs. 234.43 crore in 
2022-23 against the BE of Rs. 562.10 crore and Rs. 170.06 crore in 2023-24 against 
the Budget allocation of Rs. 600.00 (28.34% downfall) under Capacity Development 
(CD) Scheme was mainly due to shifting of timelines of two surveys, namely, Time Use 
Survey and Annual Survey of Service Sector Enterprises. The field work of these 
surveys has been started from January 2024 (TUS) and May 2024 (ASSSE pilot) 
respectively and thus the requirement under the heads was reduced at RE stage 
accordingly. However, the performance of the Ministry witnessed a marked 
improvement in utilization of funds in FY 2023-24 as against FY 2022-23 as MoSPI has 
incurred an expenditure of 94.29% over RE 2022-23 and 58.29% over BE 2022-23 of 
CD Scheme. Further, in FY 2023-24, an expenditure of 95.54% over RE 2023-24 and 
71.66% over BE 2023-24 of CD Scheme has been incurred. The Committee expect a 
similar and motivated performance in utilizing the budgeted funds and to reduce the 
savings for timely conducting the surveys under CD Scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Standing Committee is noted for compliance. Further, 
the utilization of funds and expenditure incurred under CD Scheme is being monitored on 
weekly basis and the instructions are also being issued from time to time to Divisions of 
the Ministry to formulate an action plan and review the expenditure status for ensuing 
timely utilization of funds in FY 2024-25 under Capacity Development (CD) Scheme.  
  
 [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 03-02-2025] 
        
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I)  

8 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
MPLADS 
 
 The MPLADS Scheme has been revised w.e.f. 01.04.2023 and a new fund flow 
mechanism introduced and the scheme is now being fully managed through e-SAKSHI 
Portal which is an end-to-end web solution for implementation of the MPLADS Scheme. 
According to the Ministry the new system has streamlined the processes and enhanced 
transparency of the system. New provisions have been introduced broadening the 
scope of recommendations by Members. The systems are constantly being improved 
based on the feedback from various stakeholders. Despite all these measures the 
Members of Parliament  are still facing issues. The Committee recommend that regular 
awareness workshops to give hands-on-training on the use of e-SAKSHI portal may be 
held for all the stakeholders to enhance the effectiveness of the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
Since, the release of revised MPLADS Guidelines and Implementation of revised 
fund flow system and accordingly launch of eSAKSHI portal, the Ministry has conducted 
50 Workshops/trainings, 39 Physical Workshops and 11 Online Webinars for the 
stakeholders of the MPLAD Scheme, including Hon’ble MPs, District Authorities, 
Implementing Agencies, State Nodal Department and representatives of the Hon’ble MPs 
in States/UTs since the launch of eSAKSHI portal and also given hands on training to the 
participants came from District and Agency of those State/UTs. The Ministry would 
continue to provide trainings on use of eSAKSHI Portal to enhance effectiveness of the 
scheme.  
Besides this, dedicated Kiosk is being set up during each session of the Parliament 
for resolving issues raised/faced by Hon'ble Members. The Ministry has also prepared 
short videos both in Hindi and English, regarding use of eSAKSHI app by Hon'ble MPs 
and shared with Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariats. 
 [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M.  No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 03-02-2025] 

9 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
Indian Statistical Institute 
 Indian Statistical Institute is mainly engaged in conducting comprehensive 
programme of research, training and practical application of different statistics spanning 
across various disciplines through a large number of projects/schemes. The Committee 
are satisfied to note about progress of development of national facilities like Centre for 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, Centre for Research on the Economics of 
Climate, Food, Energy and Environment, Center for Soft Computing Research, the R. 
C. Bose Centre for Cryptology and IDEAS – Technology Innovation Hub, development 
of Coal Index and National Mineral Index. The Committee have note that ISI has seen a 
total allocation of 375.59 crores, which is a substantial hike from the BE & Actuals 
(exp.as on 31.03.2024) of 2023-24 of Rs.322.29 crore and Rs.312.80 crore, 
respectively is mainly due to enhancement in salary and allowances. The Committee 
thus urge the Ministry to increase the provisions in the General Head also to meet the 
requirements. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to provide necessary 
resources to enable the Institute to fulfill its mandate, particularly completion of its 
ongoing projects including academic programmes.  
Reply of the Government 
It is true that there is a hike in the allocation of Rs. 375.59 crores for the 2024-25 
comparing with the BE and actual for the FY 2023-24 due to enhancement in salary and 
allowances, recruitment and promotion of faculty and staff as per actual. 
  
  For various activities of the Institute like academic activities, salaries, stipend to the 
students, infrastructure creation and maintenance, etc. the Institute prepares its Budget 
Plan including Monthly Expenditure Requirement along with details of the funds available 
with the Institutes and Utilization Certificate (UC) for funds released in Grant-in-Aid from 
the Ministry.   The proposal submitted by ISI are examined in the Ministry keeping in view 
of the Budget allocation, the funds are released after taking necessary financial and 
administrative on Quarterly/ Monthly basis as per the availability of funds in the Budget 

10 
 
Heads of Grant-in-Aid and in accordance with the guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance 
from time to time.  
  
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (MoSPI) acknowledges the 
importance of ensuring efficient fund utilization to meet research, academic, and 
institutional goals of the Institute and appreciates the Committee's observations to 
minimize the fluctuations in budget allocations and the occasional under-utilization of 
grants. 
  
Ministry reviews the trend of past utilization of the Institute along with demand 
raised by it during BE and RE stages. Considering the pattern of utilization of funds during 
the period, necessary instructions have also been issued to the Institute to strengthen the 
system of budget planning and management to have timely reporting of requirements of 
funds so that the Budget as allocated and released may be utilized in a planned manner, 
avoiding undue savings and establishing a predictable regime. 
  
Further, with a view to enable the institute to fulfill its mandate, meeting at functional 
level is being held in MoSPI on monthly basis.  MoSPI is also continuously guiding the 
Institute to upgrade its research infrastructure, including modernizing laboratories, 
expanding computational facilities, and upgrading campus facilities to support cutting-edge 
research. 
  
MoSPI remains committed to improving the efficiency of fund allocation, utilization 
and project execution.  
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 03-02-2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
Development of National Child Index 
 The Committee note that there is a dire need for timely and reliable statistics for 
policy formulation and planning to ensure better protection of the rights of the children, 
monitor programmes relating to the survival, protection, participation and development 

11 
 
of children and it cannot be overemphasized. To address the issue of child rights, the 
Committee recommend that a system should be made to capture statistics for children 
working in informal sector, street children, out of school children etc.  The Committee 
recommend to conduct regular Child survey and to develop a National Child Index in 
synergy with the Ministry of Women and Child Development. The Committee also 
suggests the Ministry to tie-up with State Governments to engage Panchayats/Municipal 
bodies to help facilitate data collection for conducting National Child Survey, 
development of Child Index in convergence with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development to map the needs of children through a periodic child survey, so as to 
envisage a suitable response in terms of an effective policy to eliminate Child Labour 
and to protect child rights. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation should expedite the process in coordination with the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development.   
Reply of the Government 
MoSPI has initiated a discussion to collaborate with M/o WCD for conducting a 
National Child Survey to map the needs of children covered under the Mission Vatsalya 
Scheme through a periodic survey. The main focus of the Child Survey is the preparation 
of a child index under Mission Vatsalya which is a scheme for children in need of care and 
protection & children in conflict with law. 
Presently, M/o WCD is exploring the requirements in terms of indicators to be 
considered in the survey and the frame to be used in the survey etc. Once, the 
requirements are received from M/o WCD, the feasibility of taking up the survey will be 
explored, subject to recommendation/concurrence of technical Groups/ Steering 
committee. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 03-02-2025  
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I)  
 
 

12 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
Shortage of Manpower 
 The Committee have noted with concern the shortage of manpower in the 
Ministry, especially in the Junior Statistical Office cadre; on 01 October, 2024, 977 
vacancies exist which is 40.67% of the total sanctioned strength. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to pursue the matter of recruitment with Staff 
Selection Commission (SSC) vigorously so that the vacancies can be filled within this 
financial year. With regard to shortage of manpower in Field Operation Division in 
NSSO, the Committee would recommend for recruiting more regular field based staff on 
a mission mode basis for accurate and reliable data collection and activities which are 
being undertaken on a regular basis. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the extant Subordinate Statistical Service (SSS) Rules, 90% of the posts for 
Junior Statistical Officers (JSOs) are to be filled through direct recruitment via the 
Combined Graduate Level Examination (CGLE) conducted by the Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC). The remaining 10% of the posts are to be filled by promotion from 
feeder posts (Statistical function posts at Level 4 and Level 5 of the pay matrix). 
The recruitment process for the year 2024 was initiated in January 2024, and at that 
time, 725 vacancies for JSOs were communicated to the SSC for filling through CGLE-
2024. The Tier-II examination for CGLE-2024 is scheduled IN January, 2025. Upon the 
release of the final results of CGLE-2024 by the SSC, the appointment process for JSOs 
will be initiated accordingly.  
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated  03-02-2025] 
 
  

13 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Eighth Economic Census 
 
 The Committee understand that Economic Census gives a total count of non-
farm establishments in the formal and informal sectors and number of workers working 
therein along with other cross-sectional parameters at the lowest level of geography.  It 
provides valuable insights into clusters of economic activities, ownership patterns, 
source of finance etc. of all establishments in the country. The Committee note that the 
Seventh Economic Census faced severe delays due to fieldwork stretching over the 
COVID-19 pandemic, leading to concerns about data accuracy.  The status of Seventh 
Economic Census was placed before the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in the 
meeting dated 13.07.2023 and the CoS inter-alia recommended that it may not be 
possible to publish the results of the Seventh Economic Census and the Ministry did not 
publish the same. In this regard, the Committee would like to be apprised whether in the 
past too there have been such instances and its impact thereon. Also, the alternate 
mechanisms in place to deal with such an extraordinary situation.  The Committee thus 
recommend that Ministry should take steps to ensure that the Eighth Economic Census 
is completed in a timely manner and that the data collected is accurate and reliable. To 
prevent similar issues in the future, Ministry should establish clear timelines for data 
collection and processing. The Ministry should also collaborate with State and Union 
Territory Governments to successfully conduct the Eighth Economic Census. The 
Ministry should provide adequate training and resources to enumerators and focus to 
implement robust quality control measures to overcome the obstacles.  
Reply of the Government 
Apart from 7th Economic Census, no other instance has happened, where the 
result of Economic Census had not been published. 
At the time of data finalization of 7th EC, State Governments reported several 
issues related to data, including coverage, misclassification of economic activity, 
duplication and unusual variations, compared to the corresponding figures of 6th 
Economic Census.  It was noted that since the field work was conducted during COVID-19 

14 
 
when most of the business establishments were closed, the data may not provide a true 
account of the entrepreneurial activity in the country. Thus, after detailed discussion, in the 
meeting taken by Cabinet Secretary on 13th July, 2023, it was recommended that “It may 
not be feasible to publish the results of 7th Economic Census”. 
In future, in case of a disaster / pandemic or natural calamity, timelines of the 
Economic census will be modified suitably to avoid data collection in abnormal period. 
The 8th Economic Census will be implemented in close coordination of the States / 
UTs. The States / UTs have the role of fieldwork / training / finalisation of results, 
etc.  Ministry has prescribed clear timelines to the States / UTs for conduct of field work 
and other activities of the 8th Economic Census. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 03-02-2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I)  
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER- V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                           Bhartruhari Mahtab  
29 July, 2025                                                                                              Chairperson,                                                           
03 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Finance 
  

18 
 
Annexure 
 Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). The 
Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 hrs in Committee 
Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
PART I 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 

19 
 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services, Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and 
Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 

20 
 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
4. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken Reports 
and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
  

21 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS     
(2024-25) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
06  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government (vide 
Recommendations at SI. Nos.1,2,3,4,5 & 6) 
06 100.00% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies 
NIL -- 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
NIL -- 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
 
 