 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Planning] 
  
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025 /Sravana,1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 22 

ii 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Planning] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
6 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
17 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
18 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
19 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025 20 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
23 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Vandana Committee Officer 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Twenty-Second Report on action taken by the Government 
on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Planning.  
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha 
on 19 March, 2025. The Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were 
received from the Ministry of Planning on 29 May, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July 
2025.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025      
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 11th Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Planning 
which was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 March, 2025.  
 
1,2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the 8 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation No. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 and 8          
(Total 08)  
(Chapter- II) 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL               (Total 
NIL)                           
(Chapter- III) 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
NIL 
 (Total NIL)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
NIL 
(Total - NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
 

2 
 
1.3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
1.4.   The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
Analysis of Budget 
1.5. The Committee note, the Ministry of Planning has sought Rs. 1006.06 crore as 
Budget Estimates 2025-26 as compared to BE of Rs. 837.26 crores for the fiscal year 
2024-25, which is an increase of 16.77%. The Actuals for the FY 2022-23 were to the 
tune of Rs. 849.10 crore against a BE of Rs. 321.42 crore. Likewise the Actuals for the 
FY 2023-24 were pegged at Rs. 290.82 crore only, against a BE of Rs. 824.39 crore. 
The scrutiny further reveals that the Actuals for the following fiscal i.e., 2024-25 are to 
the tune of Rs. 197.49 crore in the first three quarters which is 23.58% of the BE. After 
overall scrutiny of estimates, allocations and utilization of the budget grants during 
financial years under reference, there emerges a trend of amateur planning where the 
Ministry of Planning has not been able to apply adequate foresight in planning and 
projecting their probable expenditures with due accuracy. Undenying the presence of 
intervening factors like introduction of new programmes/scheme, pending 
project/scheme approvals, administrative compulsions and new guidelines etc., the 
Committee strongly feel that there is a dire need of a more realistic assessment of the 
envisaged targets and expenditures thereon. This is primarily so considering that our's 
is a developing nation with limited fiscal resources and unlimited demands on those 
resources. 
 The Committee in their previous reports have also emphatically advocated the 
need for prudent financial management and better targeting of available financial 
resources. The Ministry should make utmost efforts to avoid spill-overs and parking of 
large funds in the temporarily infructuous Heads/Sub-Heads, essentially that it remains 
the prerogative of the Union Ministries/Departments to raise demands for 
supplementary grants as many times as the need arises. The Committee therefore 
recommend Ministry of Planning to be more fiscally prudent in allocating and utilizing 

3 
 
the available resources in future and to be more precise and accurate in assessment 
of their projected expenditure and targets. 
 
1.6. In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as 
follows:- 
 
“The Ministry of Planning acknowledges the observations made by the 
Committee regarding the budget estimates, actual expenditures, and 
associated trends over the past fiscal years.  Agreeing with the Committee’s 
emphasis on the need for greater fiscal prudence, realistic forecasting, and 
optimal utilization of resources, all concerned spending authorities are being 
again sensitized to strengthen the mechanisms for expenditure forecasting 
and financial planning to ensure more accurate budget projections, efficient 
utilization of allocated funds and minimize the spill-overs.” 
 
1.7 The Committee had emphasised the need for realistic assessment of the 
envisaged targets and expenditures thereon for preventing spill overs and 
unnecessary parking of large funds in various Heads as it creates fund crunch 
for other Government priorities. The Ministry has informed that it has sensitized 
concerned spending authorities to ensure efficient utilization of allocated funds 
and minimize the spill-overs. The Committee, however would appreciate, if the 
Ministry gives a more specific and elaborate reply as regards the steps taken 
and proposed action plan. This will facilitate in-depth scrutiny by the Committee 
to give prolific suggestions/observations on various issues. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7    
Research & Study (R&S) 
1.8 The Committee are concerned to note that despite there being a specialized 
Central Sector Scheme ‘Research & Study’ formulated to give requisite stimulus to 
research in various socio-economic sectors, the Ministry of Planning is continuously 
falling short in achieving their physical as well as financial targets.  As against a target 
of 20 Research studies, for each of the FY 2023-24 and 2024-25, only 14 and 13 
Research Studies respectively had been awarded. Further, there is shortfall in 
finalizing the seminar/workshop proposals as well. The Committee sense a clear lack 
of due diligence on the part of the Ministry of Planning in achieving their set targets. 
The stagnated allocations and slow pace of fund utilization during fiscal years from 
2023-24 to 2024-25, which ultimately resulted in underutilization of allocated budget, 

4 
 
grows the concern further. The Ministry of Planning has not been able to utilize even 
the meager amount of Rs. 4.00 crore during these years on such an important scheme. 
Nonetheless, the Committee are hopeful and expect that the new division “Research 
& Networking” and amended Research Scheme of NITI Aayog (RSNA) guidelines 
would come to the aid of the Ministry and it would thereby be able to successfully 
achieve the projected targets for FY 2025-26. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry of Planning must ensure the achievement of complete projected 
physical targets and make concerted efforts to fully utilize the allocated budget. The 
Committee also desire that to compensate the previous loss of targets, more Research 
studies should be awarded in the coming years and accordingly budget allocations 
should also be enhanced for the scheme. 
 
1.9  In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as 
follows:- 
 
“With setting up of a new Division viz Research & Networking(R&N) and 
revision of the RSNA guidelines to streamline the process for commissioning 
of research studies, the R&N Division has been able to utilize the entire 
budgeted amount for FY2024-25 i.e Rs 4.00 Crore. 
Further, the R&N Division's concerted efforts and a timebound 
manner of procurement have enhanced the pipeline of research studies 
which are at the tendering stage. For FY2025-26, it is anticipated that both 
physical and financial targets will be achieved. For FY2025-26, the 
committed expenditure for the ongoing studies is already ~Rs 3.5 crore. 
Given the growing pipeline of research studies, it is expected that enhanced 
budget allocation will be sought in the fiscal year 2025-26.” 
 
1.10 The Committee had pointed out the stagnated allocations, 
underutilisation and slower pace of utilisations over the years under ‘Research 
and Study’ scheme. The underutilisation of the stagnated allocation of Rs. 4.00 
crore during FY 2023-24 to 2025-26 coupled with slower utilisation pace of 
allocated grants during 2024-25  and consequential loss of Research studies 
targets was the ultimate cause of concern for the Committee. To the satisfaction 
of the Committee, Research & Networking (R&N) division and revised NITI 
Aayog (RSNA) guidelines has streamlined the process for commissioning of 
research studies.  
The Ministry in their action taken replies have informed that for FY 2024-
25, the R&N Division has successfully utilized the entire budgeted amount of Rs 

5 
 
4.00 crore and have compensated the slower pace of fund utilisation in previous 
three quarters. The Committee expects the Ministry to evenly utilise the grants 
throughout the four quarters in the future.  
The Committee further note that several research studies are at the 
tendering stage and it is anticipated that enhanced budget allocation will be 
needed, as the committed expenditure for the ongoing studies has already 
reached Rs 3.5 crore, the Committee recommend the Ministry of Planning to 
timely seek the supplementary grants so that the delay in allocation of grants 
do not hamper and procrastinate the tendering/commissioning of Research 
Schemes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
Analysis of Budget 
The Committee note, the Ministry of Planning has sought Rs. 1006.06 crore as 
Budget Estimates 2025-26 as compared to BE of Rs. 837.26 crores for the fiscal year 
2024-25, which is an increase of 16.77%. The Actuals for the FY 2022-23 were to the 
tune of Rs. 849.10 crore against a BE of Rs. 321.42 crore. Likewise the Actuals for the 
FY 2023-24 were pegged at Rs. 290.82 crore only, against a BE of Rs. 824.39 crore. 
The scrutiny further reveals that the Actuals for the following fiscal i.e., 2024-25 are to 
the tune of Rs. 197.49 crore in the first three quarters which is 23.58% of the BE. After 
overall scrutiny of estimates, allocations and utilization of the budget grants during 
financial years under reference, there emerges a trend of amateur planning where the 
Ministry of Planning has not been able to apply adequate foresight in planning and 
projecting their probable expenditures with due accuracy. Undenying the presence of 
intervening factors like introduction of new programmes/scheme, pending 
project/scheme approvals, administrative compulsions and new guidelines etc., the 
Committee strongly feel that there is a dire need of a more realistic assessment of the 
envisaged targets and expenditures thereon. This is primarily so considering that our's 
is a developing nation with limited fiscal resources and unlimited demands on those 
resources. 
 The Committee in their previous reports have also emphatically advocated the 
need for prudent financial management and better targeting of available financial 
resources. The Ministry should make utmost efforts to avoid spill-overs and parking of 
large funds in the temporarily infructuous Heads/Sub-Heads, essentially that it remains 
the prerogative of the Union Ministries/Departments to raise demands for 
supplementary grants as many times as the need arises. The Committee therefore 
recommend Ministry of Planning to be more fiscally prudent in allocating and utilizing 
the available resources in future and to be more precise and accurate in assessment 
of their projected expenditure and targets. 
of key performance parameters. It is only through rigorous analysis of data 
collected in respective stages from varied sources that well performing Districts and 

7 
 
blocks are incentivized and additional funds are allocated for other projects. The 
Committee note with satisfaction that NITI Aayog is presently using three stage 
verification strategy for collecting and ensuring the correctness of data under ADP. In 
case of ABP, data is being sourced directly from databases maintained by Ministries 
concerned. The Committee are however of the opinion that Ministry should keep 
evolving their tools and techniques to further improvise their data collection techniques 
and must also employ methods like regular/random data quality checks to ensure the 
completeness and accuracy to establish data standards.  The Committee would also 
recommend that regular Workshops and Seminars for the field Officers in local 
administrative units, working close to ground realities must be organized to inculcate 
and share best practices in data management. The local administrative units must also 
be trained to work in coordination with other Government departments/agencies to 
take advantage of information and knowledge database maintained by them.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Planning acknowledges the observations made by the 
Committee regarding the budget estimates, actual expenditures, and associated 
trends over the past fiscal years.  Agreeing with the Committee’s emphasis on the 
need for greater fiscal prudence, realistic forecasting, and optimal utilization of 
resources, all concerned spending authorities are being again sensitized to strengthen 
the mechanisms for expenditure forecasting and financial planning to ensure more 
accurate budget projections, efficient utilization of allocated funds and minimize the 
spill-overs.  
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.05.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) 
 The Committee note that the budget outlays for the Atal Innovation Mission 
(AIM) for the FY2025-26 are to the tune of Rs. 400 crores as against the BE of Rs. 
155 crores during FY 2024-25. The enhanced allocation has been sought to meet the 
projected expenditure under revamped Atal Mission Program 2.0 where in along with 
already running programs of AIM 1.0, the Ministry of Planning seeks to meet 
expenditures to be incurred on 8 new initiatives under AIM 2.0. The Committee also 

8 
 
note that the saving under the Scheme during FY 2023-24 and 2024-25 occurred on 
account of recast of the AIM Programme. 
 The Committee appreciate the focused approach adopted by the Ministry of 
Planning to fill in the identified gaps under AIM 1.0 programme by devising 8 new 
initiatives. The committee is looking forward to witness the promising outcomes. The 
Committee, however, note that the recasting/approval process of AIM 2.0 continued 
for almost two years, which somehow jeopardized and halted the pace of ongoing 
initiatives under AIM like Atal Incubation Centre (AIC) Atal Community Innovation 
Centre (ACIC) and Atal New India Challenges (ANIC) and thereby resulted in the 
under achievement of the projected targets under these programmes. The Committee 
feel that there is a need to expedite and reform the Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) for getting approvals for continuation of a scheme, as the intervening breaks 
occurring due to pending approvals, puts a spanner in the wheel and mars the overall 
progress. The Committee desire the Ministry of Planning to think in this direction and 
come up with some feasible solution in their capacity of the premier think tank of 
government, shouldering responsibility of paving the way forward. 
 The Committee note with satisfaction that 8 new initiatives have been 
conceptualized by Ministry of Planning/NITI Aayog to fill in various gaps identified in 
the AIM 1.0 Program. These includes initiatives like Language inclusive Program of 
Innovation (LIPI) which seeks to combat and break the language barrier, which is one 
of the core challenge areas, ‘Frontier Program’ to create tailored interventions for 
developing innovations and entrepreneurship ecosystem in the frontier regions of the 
country (Hilly and NE-Indian Regions), Atal Acceleration Centre for Scale-up of start-
ups (AACESS-industry Accelerator) for building platform for supporting revenue stage 
start-ups and Atal Sectoral Innovation Launchpad(ASIL) to create institution  in central 
government ministries to independently run sectoral innovation programs through 
establishing acceleration centres and corporate, PSUs and industries. The Committee 
hope these initiatives would further strengthen the foundation of innovative and 
entrepreneurship ecosystem in the country laid by AIM 1.0 and take it a notch higher. 
The Committee feel that these schemes/initiatives and any development Programme 
could be made further successful by associating Member of Parliament, representing 
a particular constituency, so as to have ground level inputs on the progress of the 
scheme. The Committee recommend Ministry of Planning to achieve projected 

9 
 
physical and financial targets for FY (2025-26) with laser focused conviction for 
achieving various intended objective under these programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
AIM acknowledges the views of the Committee on the Continuation of AIM. 
AIM acknowledges the appreciation of the committee on the conceptualization of 8 
new programs to address the gaps in the innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem 
in India. The 8 new programs have been detailed out with specific interventions, 
implementation plans and output-outcome pathways which will enable the programs 
to be impactful. AIM duly notes the recommendations of the committee including on 
keeping respective Members of Parliament informed on developments in their  
respective constituencies. 
 
AIM acknowledges the recommendation of the committee on achieving the projected 
targets of 2025-26. AIM has put to execution a detailed operational and financial plan 
to achieve the physical and financial targets for 2025-26.  
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.05.2025] 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
Atal Incubation Centre (AIC) & Atal Community Innovation Centre (ACIC) 
The Committee note that Atal Incubation Centre(AIC) is an important initiative 
of AIM 1.0 Programme which aims to foster world-class incubation and support 
entrepreneurs in building scalable as well as sustainable enterprises.  As on date, out 
of the total target of 101 AICs, 72 AICs have been established across 21 States with 
an estimated number of 41,965 jobs created therefrom. During FY 2024-25, out of the 
remaining 29 newly selected AICs, the disbursement of first tranche of grants is 
expected to be released to 12 AICs. The Committee desire work of establishing 
remaining 29 AICs to be expedited. The Committee are of the view that number of 
AICs to be established must be increased and must target States having higher 
percentage of unemployment. These AICs present an opportunity for aspiring 
entrepreneurs having workable dynamic ideas but lack the resources to generate 
multiple job and employment opportunities for others. More such Centres must be 
opened in the North-eastern States where there are fewer traditional job opportunities. 
Likewise under Atal Community Innovation Centres (ACIC), startup and innovation are 
being supported in unserved or underserved areas of the country by enabling the 

10 
 
reach of the innovators at the bottom of the demographic pyramid. To create the 
enabling infrastructure, so far 14 ACICs are presently operational in 9 States and 36 
more are lined up for operationalisation. The Committee recommend the Ministry to 
operationalise the remaining 36 new ACICs at the earliest. It is often seen that many 
such government programmes go unnoticed due to lack of requisite publicity and 
therefore, unable to harness the desired outcomes. The Committee therefore urge the 
Ministry of Planning to give sufficient publicity to AICs and ACICs and other such 
programmes to spread awareness among people to popularise such programmes.  
Reply of the Government 
AIM acknowledges the observation of the committee on the importance of the 
AICs. AIM has already put together an operationalization plan for the 29 new AICs and 
the expects the completion of the disbursement of the 1st tranche of the approved grant 
by Q2 2025-26. 
As per the approval of the Cabinet, AIM has been mandated to establish 101 AICs 
and with the operationalization of the 29 new AICs, the mandate of 101 AICs will be 
achieved. 
Besides, AIM will continue to be a knowledge partner to any Central Government 
Ministry or the State Government for building incubators, specifically through AIM 2.0 
programs – Atal Sectoral Innovation Launchpad and State Innovation Mission 
respectively. 
AIM acknowledges the special need of the North Eastern states. The Frontier Program 
of AIM 2.0 will conceptualize and pilot new templates of innovation programs tailored 
to the specific needs of the North Eastern states. 
AIM notes the observation of the committee on the importance of the ACICs. AIM has 
put together an operationalization plan for the 36 new ACICs and the expects the 
completion of the disbursement of the 1st tranche of the approved grant by Q2 2025-
26. 
AIM acknowledges the observation of the committee on giving publicity to the AIC and 
ACIC programs. AIM has been promoting the work of AICs and ACICs through various 
events, workshops and its own social media accounts. AIM is also engaging with 
states to spread the work and impact of AICs and ACICs.  
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.05.2025] 

11 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
Atal Tinkering Lab(ATL) 
The Committee note that in the Union Budget (2025-26), it has been announced 
for the establishment of 50,000 Atal Tinkering Labs in government schools across the 
country over the next five years. As per approved implementation plan, the ATL 
programme is to be transferred to the Ministry of Education (MoE). It has been 
informed that a Programme Management Unit (PMU) is proposed to be set up by 
Ministry of Education in coordination with ATL unit of NITI Aayog for which timeline for 
establishing 50,000 ATLs is to be decided by the Ministry of Education. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry of Planning in collaboration with the Ministry of Education to 
strive and ensure that the envisaged target of 50,000 ATLs is achieved within set time 
frame of 2030. 
In this regard, the Committee would also like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation contained in 4th Report (18th Lok Sabha) regarding the uniform 
coverage of ATLs in all the States wherein the Committee had categorically 
recommended that the number of ATLs to be established in any particular State must 
be commensurate with the population size and requirement of that region to extend 
equitable access to all targeted beneficiaries. As the Ministry of Planning will be 
working in tandem with the Ministry of Education, the Committee expects this 
collaboration to create the supporting infrastructure as well in States/UTs needed for 
establishing ATLs across country. 
Reply of the Government 
AIM acknowledges and fully supports the principle of equitable distribution of 
ATLs and access to all beneficiaries based on objective parameters.  
In line with this recommendation, AIM has proposed that Department of School 
Education & Literacy (DoSEL), Ministry of Education, as the implementing agency for 
ATL 2.0, adopt a data-driven approach in allocating the upcoming ATLs. The allocation 
model will factor in key parameters such as total number of government schools, 
existing ATL penetration and population in each State/UT. This approach aims to 
ensure that no region is left behind and that underserved and aspirational 
blocks/districts receive adequate attention under the expansion plan. 

12 
 
AIM will also establish 2,500 ATLs in frontier regions including North-east, J&K, 
Ladakh, Aspirational Districts and Aspirational Blocks which will ensure equitable 
access to students in remote and backward regions. 
NITI Aayog appreciates the Committee’s continued guidance and assures support 
towards the successful and equitable implementation of the ATL 2.0 programme 
through close collaboration with the DoSEL, Ministry of Education. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.05.2025] 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
Aspirational Districts Programme(ADP) 
The Committee find that under Official Development Assistance(ODA) from 
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for Sustainable Development Goals/ 
Aspirational Blocks Scheme, the Ministry of Planning has not been able to utilize the 
earmarked grants, continuously for the FY 2023-24 & 2024-25 respectively. There has 
been only token  releases of Rs. 8 and Rs. 17 as against the financial sanctions of Rs. 
178.23 crore and Rs. 230.81 crore for the fiscal years under reference, as the Districts 
have failed to utilize these grants in the required time span, given for completion of 
targets. Furthermore, for the current FY 2025-26 as well, only a token provision of Rs. 
0.01crore has been made, suggesting bleak prospects of change in status quo in near 
future, though the phase III of ADP got approved on 10.1.2025. 
 In this connection, the Committee have been informed that the revised 
guidelines dated  9th March, 2022 of Ministry of Finance put certain restrictions on 
making new fund sanctions in FY 2023-24 which resulted in the release of token 
amounts only. The Committee are, however, of the view that these guidelines not in 
any manner, hinder the progress of the ongoing projects and that they merely seek to 
prevent the parking of excessive funds in ‘Central Nodal Agency’ Account in case of 
non/underutilisations of the previously allocated grants. The Committee appreciates 
that the Ministry of Planning already understands and knows the corrective measures 
needed to be taken to contain the damage and is already working on monitoring the 
utilization of funds to ensure optimum utilization and timely completion of projects. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry must further firm up their in place monitoring 
mechanism and should make all efforts to ensure that projects are completed within 

13 
 
the scheduled timeframe to avoid any cost/time overruns and budgetary allocations 
are put to the optimum and efficient utilization.  
Reply of the Government 
The Committee’s recommendations are noted. NITI Aayog will constantly 
engage with the relevant districts to monitor fund utilization and ensure the timely 
completion of the projects. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.05.2025] 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
Aspirational Blocks Programmes(ABP) 
The Committee note that Aspirational Blocks Programme was approved in July 
2024 and allocated a budget outlay of Rs. 152.26 crore at Revised Estimates (2024-
25) stage, which remained unutilized, as the fund was received only in the last quarter 
of the fiscal year 2024-25. As per the utilization proposal, the Ministry would be 
disbursing the entire grant of Rs. 152.2 cr under ABP to prevent savings on this 
account. Similarly, for the FY (2025-26) the allocated budget of Rs. 353 crore will be 
disbursed in three tranches and approval of projects are being taken in the 
Empowered Committee Meetings. The Committee recommend the Ministry to adhere 
to their stipulated implementation plan for the remaining period of the current fiscal 
2024-25 as well for the following FY 2025-26. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee is duly noted. All efforts would be made to 
ensure adherence to the implementation plans during 2025-26. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
Research & Study (R&S) 
The Committee are concerned to note that despite there being a specialized 
Central Sector Scheme ‘Research & Study’ formulated to give requisite stimulus to 
research in various socio-economic sectors, the Ministry of Planning is continuously 
falling short in achieving their physical as well as financial targets. As against a target 
of 20 Research studies, for each of the FY 2023-24 and 2024-25, only 14 and 13 
Research Studies respectively had been awarded. Further, there is shortfall in 

14 
 
finalizing the seminar/workshop proposals as well. The Committee sense a clear lack 
of due diligence on the part of the Ministry of Planning in achieving their set targets. 
The stagnated allocations and slow pace of fund utilization during last three fiscal 
years from 2023-24 to 2024-2025, which ultimately resulted in underutilization of 
allocated budget, grows the concern further. The Ministry of Planning has not been 
able to utilize even the meager amount of Rs. 4.00 crore during these years on such 
an important scheme. Nonetheless, the Committee are hopeful and expect that the 
new division “Research & Networking” and amended Research Scheme of NITI Aayog 
(RSNA) guidelines would come to the aid of the Ministry and it would thereby be able 
to successfully achieve the projected targets for FY 2025-26. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Planning must ensure the achievement of 
complete projected physical targets and make concerted efforts to fully utilize the 
allocated budget. The Committee also desire that to compensate the previous loss of 
targets, more Research studies should be awarded in the coming years and 
accordingly budget allocations should also be enhanced for the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
With setting up of a new Division Viz Research & Networking(R&N) and revision 
of the RSNA guidelines to streamline the process for commissioning of research 
studies, the R&N Division has been able to utilize the entire budgeted amount for 
FY2024-25 i.e Rs 4.00 Crore. 
Further, the R&N Division's concerted efforts and a timebound manner of procurement 
have enhanced the pipeline of research studies which are at the tendering stage. For 
FY2025-26, it is anticipated that both physical and financial targets will be achieved. 
For FY2025-26, the committed expenditure for the ongoing studies is already ~Rs 3.5 
crore. Given the growing pipeline of research studies, it is expected that enhanced 
budget allocation will be sought in the fiscal year 2025-26. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.05.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
State Support Mission(SSM) 
The Committee note that SSM as an umbrella initiative is an important vehicle 
of NITI Aayog to promote and foster competitive and cooperative federalism amongst 

15 
 
States/UTs by establishing State Institution of Transformation (SITs), in the interested 
States. It has been informed that till date 28 SITs have been notified under SSM, which 
are now working in States for boosting  their socio-economic growth and implement 
sector and State specific development strategies. The Committee further note that 
SSM was announced in the FY 2023-24 to be implemented during 2022-23 to 2024-
25. The Scheme, however, has been extended for another year and an allocation of 
Rs. 45 crore has been made for the financial year 2025-26. The Committee note with 
satisfaction that by establishing 10 SITs during FY 2024-25, the Ministry of Planning 
has not only achieved but have comfortably exceeded their envisaged target of 
establishing 7 SITs during the fiscal year under reference. The Committee are of the 
considered view that for establishing SITs in remaining States/UTs, NITI Aayog must 
not wait for the expression of interest or intent by the States/UTs, instead must actively 
pursue in garnering the interest of remaining States/UTs for establishing SITs, to give 
the requisite push to the socio-economic growth of the country as a whole. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Planning must actively pursue 
these target of establishing SITs in remaining States/UTs in the extended term of the 
scheme itself. In this regard, the Committee further note that to support SITs, cross-
sectoral partnerships ‘Lead Knowledge Institutions (LKIs)’ are designated by 
States/UTs to bring expertise and domain knowledge. As of now only State of Bihar 
and Kolkata have officially on-boarded Chandragupt Institute of Management (LKI 
Bihar) and IIM Kolkata (LKI Tripura). The Committee recommends the Ministry of 
Planning to encourage other remaining States/UTs as well to designate LKI partners 
where SITs have already been established. 
Reply of the Government 
As highlighted in 11th Report of the Standing Committee on Finance, NITI 
Aayog under its umbrella initiative of State Support Mission (SSM) has been actively 
pursuing with remaining States/UTs for establishing State Institution for 
Transformation (SITs). Some of the measures undertaken involves communication 
with remaining States/UTs on various fronts such as e-mails, physical/virtual meetings 
by senior leadership of NITI Aayog with States/UTs, DO letters etc. highlighting the 
significance of the Scheme and circulation of its guidelines. SSM Team at NITI Aayog 
has been assisting States/UTs/LKIs to draft their proposals/action plan in accordance 
with SSM Guidelines and facilitate their presentations before the Mission 

16 
 
Implementation Committee (MIC) Meetings. To propagate the significance of the Lead 
Knowledge Institutes (LKI) for SITs, the chairperson of the MIC has been highlighting 
the presence of this components under the Scheme and encouraging SITs to establish 
LKI partners in the meetings of State Support Mission. Further, as form of reminders, 
DO letters from NITI Aayog to various Planning Secretaries are circulated to 
boost/encourage the onboarding of LKIs in every SITs. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.05.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

18 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025      
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
  

20 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-
25). The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 
hrs in Committee Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
PART I 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 

21 
 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Financial Services, Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset 
Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and 
Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the 

22 
 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken 
Reports and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to 
the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
 
  

23 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 11TH 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2025-26) OF THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
   
Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of 
Recommendations 
08 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 
3,4, 5, 6 and 7) 
08 100% 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies  
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations 
in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  
Nil 0.00 
(v) Observations / Recommendations 
in respect of which final reply of 
the Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 