 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
 
REVIEW OF WORKING OF INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY 
CODE AND EMERGING ISSUES 
  
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana,1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2025-26)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 28 

ii 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
REVIEW OF WORKING OF INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY 
CODE AND EMERGING ISSUES 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 02 December, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02 December, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENT 
 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)                                                               (iv)   (i 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25)                                                               (v))    
Introduction                                                                                                             (vi)  
(vi) 
PART-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
Section                                          Content                                                     Page No. 
A Introductory 1 
B Components of IBC 3 
C Impact of the IBC 4 
D Performance under the IBC 8 
E MSMEs 28 
F Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund 37 
G Capacity Building 38 
H Emerging Issues and Challenges 48 
I Suggestions for Strengthening IBC Ecosystem 68 
 PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
73 
Appendix-I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29 May, 2025 
(Forenoon) 
91 
Appendix-II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29 May, 2025 
(Afternoon) 
94 
Appendix-III Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 30 May, 2025  97 
Appendix-IV Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 10 July, 2025  100 
Appendix-V Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29 July, 2025  103 
Appendix-VI Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 26 November, 
2025 
106 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2025-26) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
9. Shri Kishori Lal  
10. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram 
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
24. Shri Praful Patel 
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy 
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
27. Shri Sanjay Seth 
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
29. Smt. Darshana Singh 
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
     3. 
     4. 
Shri T. Mathivanan 
Ms. Vandana                                
Deputy Secretary 
Committee Officer 

v 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        
 
 
 
 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized 
by the Committee, present this Twenty-Eighth Report on the subject ‘Review of working of 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’. 
 
2. The Committee, on 29 May, 2025, held deliberations with the representatives of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs and also took oral evidence of the representatives of three 
Public Sector Banks namely Union Bank of India, Punjab National Bank and Canara Bank 
on the subject. In their next sitting on 30 May, 2025, the Committee took oral evidence of 
the representatives of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI). Thereafter, the 
Committee, on 10 July, 2025, took oral evidence of four Public Sector Banks, namely State 
Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Indian Bank and Indian Overseas Bank. Finally, the 
Committee, on 29 July, 2025, took oral evidence of the representatives of Reserve Bank of 
India on the subject.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on                           
26 November, 2025.       
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the above-mentioned organizations 
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite material and information 
desired by the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold at the end of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
26 November, 2025 
05 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 

1  
   PART-I  
                     INTRODUCTORY 
 
  (A)  Background 
Several attempts were made in the past to provide a legal and institutional 
machinery for dealing with debt defaults. The Provisions for recovery action by 
creditors through fragmented legislations like the Indian Contract Act, 1872, special 
laws such as the Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993 (RDBFI) and the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Securities 
Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI) did not yield desired outcomes.  Further, action 
through the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (SICA) and the 
winding-up provisions under the Companies Act, 1956 were not proving to be very 
helpful for either recovery by lenders or restructuring of firms. The laws dealing with 
individual insolvency, namely, the Presidential Towns Insolvency Act, 1909 and the 
Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, were also archaic and not suitable to the changing 
needs of the time. This hampered confidence of lenders and consequently debt 
market.  
1.2 It is in this backdrop that a Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee (BLRC) was 
constituted to study the legal framework for corporate bankruptcy in India. Based on 
the recommendations of the BLRC, the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 was 
enacted on 28th May, 2016 to consolidate and amend the law on insolvency, revival 
and liquidation of companies, limited liability partnerships, and individuals in a time 
bound manner for maximization of value of assets of such persons, to promote 
entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders 
including alteration in the order of priority of payment of the Government dues. 
                                                
Amendments to the Code 
 
1.3  The Code has matured over the past six years with several amendments made 
to streamline the process based on stakeholders’ experience on the ground. Over the 
first six years, a major legislative amendment was made each year which addressed a 
specific burning issue. The corrective measures brought about with each amendment 
are summarised here under: 
 
 

2  
Amendment Concern/Corrective Measure 
1st Amendment 
(23-11-2017) 
• Classified personal guarantors to corporate debtors as a 
separate category of debtors (S. 2)   
• Preventing undesirable persons from taking over companies 
(Section 29A) 
2nd Amendment 
(06-06-2018) 
• Home buyers made financial creditors 
• Voting threshold reduced from 75% to 66% 
• Permitted withdrawal of the corporate insolvency resolution 
process by 90% or more voting of Committee of Creditors 
(S. 12A) 
• Excluded guarantors from moratorium 
• Relaxed section 29A for MSMEs 
• Section 240A opened window for special regime for MSMEs 
3rd Amendment 
(16-08-2019) 
• Mandatory completion in 330 days 
• Distribution of resolution proceeds 
• Decision by classes of creditors, present and voting 
• Resolution plan binding on everyone 
4th Amendment 
(28-12-2019) 
• No termination of license, permits, grants, etc. 
• Immunity to CD from past misdeeds (Section 32A) 
• Facilitation of resolution of financial service providers 
5th Amendment 
(05-06-2020) 
• Suspension of initiation for COVID-19 related defaults 
 
 
6th Amendment 
(04-04-2021) 
• Introduction of a pre-packaged insolvency resolution process 
7th Amendment 
(Bill introduced 
in Lok Sabha on 
12.8.2025- 
under 
examination of 
the Select 
Committee of 
Lok Sabha) 
• Introduction of “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process” with an out-of-court initiation mechanism for 
genuine business failures to facilitate faster and more cost-
effective insolvency resolution, with minimal business 
disruption. 
• Introduction of “group insolvency” and “cross-border 
insolvency” frameworks. The cross-border insolvency 
framework is another area covered in the bill which seeks to 
lay the foundation for protecting stakeholder interests in 
domestic and foreign proceedings, promoting investor 
confidence and aligning domestic practices with international 
best practices 
 
1.4   On being asked about the procedure that can be adopted for disposing of  cases 
which were pending before implementation of IBC in 2016, the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs in their written submission stated as under:-  
 
 “On enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC), 
transitional provisions were introduced to bring pre-existing insolvency 
matters under its ambit. These are below: 
 
 BIFR cases: All pending references before the Board for Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) and Appellate Authority (AIFR) stood 

3  
abated with the repeal of Sick Industrial Companies Act, 1985 (SICA) with 
effect from December 1, 2016. However, companies could, within 180 
days, file afresh under IBC if they wished to seek insolvency resolution. 
 
 High Court Winding-up Cases: Pending winding-up petitions under the 
Companie Act, 2013 before High Courts were partly transferred to the 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), depending on their stage. If the 
petition had not reached the stage of notice to the company, they were 
transferred to NCLT and treated as IBC petitions. Advanced-stage cases 
continued under the Companies Act, 2013. 
 
 Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) Cases: Recovery suits pending before 
DRTs continued there, but fresh insolvency applications by banks/financial 
institutions post-IBC were filed before NCLT/DRT under the new 
framework.” 
                                                                                               
 
(B) Components of IBC  
 
1.5  The Code is considered as a game-changing economic legislation as it 
provides a comprehensive procedural framework to deal with insolvency in a time-
bound manner. The Code provides a four-pillar ecosystem to resolve the insolvency 
related stress. A class of regulated Insolvency Professionals (IPs), who play a key role 
in the efficient working of the insolvency, liquidation, and bankruptcy processes serve 
as the first pillar. Next pillar is the Information Utility (IU) that stores financial 
information about debts and defaults, providing records of defaults, thereby, 
minimizing the possibility of admission delays and related disputes. Thirdly, the 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) are the 
Adjudicating Authorities (AAs) on matters pertaining to the IBC. The fourth pillar is the 
regulator, the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) which regulates the IPs 
and other service providers as well as the processes. 
 
1.6 The Code provides a comprehensive procedural framework to deal with 
insolvency in a time-bound manner. The Code provides for reorganisation in two 
ways; firstly, by way of the rescue of the company in financial distress through a 
resolution plan; secondly, in cases where resolution is not possible due to the 
Corporate Debtor (CD) being under economic distress, the company is closed through 
liquidation. The Code enables the market to make the choice. The market usually 
chooses to rescue a company if its business is viable or close it if unviable. 

4  
1.7 The Code has brought about a significant behavioral change amongst the 
creditors and debtors. As a consequence of the resolution process control and 
management of the company moves away from existing ineligible promoters. This in 
turn encourages the debtors to settle default with the creditor, at the earliest, even 
outside the ambit of the Code.  
  
(C)    Impact of the IBC 
1.8 When the Committee sought to know from representatives of the IBBI, the 
overall impact of IBC on various stakeholders, the IBBI submitted the following details 
in their written replies:- 
“Through the research initiatives of the IBBI, a comprehensive research 
study has been conducted by the Indian Institute of Management 
Ahmedabad (IIMA) to assess the effectiveness of the resolution process 
under the IBC in India. This study examined the performance of firms both 
before and after the resolution process, comparing them against sector and 
size peers to understand the impact of the IBC. Key findings from the IIM 
Ahmedabad study are as follows: 
(a) Financial Recovery: Creditors have, on average, realised 32% of 
admitted claims and 168% of liquidation value in cases resolved under 
IBC. 
(b) Sales Growth: Average sales of resolved firms increased by 76% in the 
three years following resolution. 
(c) Operational Profitability: While net margins remain negative, resolved 
firms have achieved operational break-even (4% operating margin) by 
the third year post-resolution, a significant improvement from the pre-
resolution period. 
(d) Employment: There was a 50% increase in average employee expenses 
three years post- resolution, indicating higher employment intensity in 
resolved listed firms. Total employment across firms also showed a 
substantial increase. 
(e) Asset Growth: Average total assets of resolved firms increased by about 
50% post- resolution, coupled with a 130% increase in capital 
expenditure (CAPEX), indicating a build-up of tangible assets. 
(f) Profitability Convergence: The study found that profitability ratios of 
resolved firms converged with benchmark averages in the post-
resolution period. 
(g) Market Valuation: For listed resolved firms, there was a significant 
revival in average market valuations post-resolution. The aggregate 
market valuation of all resolved firms increased from around Rs. 2 lakh 
crore to Rs. 6 lakh crore post-resolution. 
(h) Liquidity Improvement: Liquidity improved by about 80% in the post-
resolution period. The current assets to current liabilities ratio improved 
from 1.01 in the year of bankruptcy to 1.83 in the third year post-
resolution. 
These findings suggest that IBC has been effective in not only 
providing financial recovery for creditors but also in reviving and 

5  
improving the operational and financial health of resolved firms. The 
study demonstrates that firms undergoing resolution through the IBC 
process have shown significant improvements in various aspects of their 
business, including sales, profitability, asset growth, market valuation, 
and liquidity. 
IIM Bangalore study: 
Further, the impact of the IBC on credit discipline has also been 
corroborated by a comprehensive study conducted by the Indian Institute 
of Management Bangalore (IIMB). The study has analysed data on 
corporate loan accounts, CIRP, firm-level financial data and NPA data. 
The study finds that IBC has prompted borrowers to adhere to stipulated 
loan payment schedules. During the period under review, the study 
notes a significant reduction in loan accounts deemed ‘Overdue’, both in 
terms of the Rupee amount as well as in terms of the number of 
accounts. Similarly, the yearly proportion of transitions of loan accounts 
from the ‘Overdue’ category to the ‘Normal’ category have increased, 
supporting the view of an improvement in the credit culture of 
corporates. Even the average number of days that a loan account stays 
in ‘Overdue’ category before transitioning to ‘Normal’ category has 
reduced from 248–344 days to 30-87 days. This shows that both debtors 
and creditors are trying to resolve the delinquencies at the earliest. 
 
The IIM Bangalore study also indicates a 3% reduction in cost of debt for 
distressed firms post- IBC (vs. non-distressed firms), indicating an 
improved credit environment for distressed firms. As per the study, the 
IBC has improved corporate governance by increasing independent 
directors on resolved companies’ Boards….”                         
 
1.9 The IIM Ahmedabad in their focus interviews with management of firms that 
underwent Resolution had registered following findings:- 
“ We conducted discussions with a few of the representatives of the resolved 
firms to get a detailed review and suggestions about the resolution process 
and the period after that. The representatives indicated satisfaction with the 
overall process post-IBC. The participants also conveyed that some 
improvements are desirable going forward. The firms found interactions with 
NCLT helpful. However, the participants raised process difficulties with other 
government institutions, such as the Income Tax Department, Customs 
Department and RBI. A lack of general awareness about the new resolution 
process by all stakeholders has been pointed out by the respondents. This 
has led to delays in getting necessary clearances from these departments 
and an overall delay in the resolution process. A transparent online 
mechanism was proposed to issue no dues claims once the process is 
completed as a step to solve the issue. This will enable the firms to engage 
freely with banks with a clean slate. Suggestions were also made to improve 
the resolution process. Sometimes, claims are made, or bids are put in at the 
last moment, further delaying the process. The appeals filed prolong the 
resolution process; hence, some mechanisms to discourage such parties 
must be incorporated, as many of the participants still had pending litigation 

6  
processes. A few participants mentioned difficulty in obtaining bank financing 
even after the resolution process was over. The banks were very cautious 
and had not removed the label of “defaulter” until after the firms started 
performing well. The respondents had varied opinions about the performance 
and guidance of the Resolution Professionals (RP) during the interim period. 
Most participants believed that the RPs’ competence could be improved 
through training, as most of them do not have a business/managerial 
background. While the committee of creditors are entrusted with monitoring 
the RPs, it will be beneficial if there is a control mechanism through an 
additional internal auditor or similar arrangements.”  
 
1.10 Asked about the views of RBI, in their written submission they provided as stated 
below:- 
”After the notification of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Insolvency and 
Liquidation Proceedings of Financial Service Providers and Application to 
Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2019 (FSP Rules), the RBI has been notified as 
the appropriate regulator by the Government of India for initiating the CIRP 
under the IBC framework against non-banking financial companies (including 
housing finance companies),with an asset size of ₹500 crore or more. Pursuant 
to this, the RBI has initiated CIRP against four Financial Service Providers 
(FSPs), namely Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited, Srei 
Infrastructure Finance Limited, Srei Equipment Finance Limited, and Reliance 
Capital Limited. In these cases, the RBI ensured that the appointed 
Administrator (acting as the Resolution Professional) as well as the members of 
the Advisory Committee possessed adequate experience in both banking and 
non-banking sectors. Further, in terms UNCITRAL of FSP Rules, the RBI is 
also required to provide a “no-objection” to the successful resolution applicant 
with regard to the “fit and proper” criteria for acquiring the concerned FSP. It is 
submitted that in all four CIRP cases, the RBI has issued the requisite “no-
objection” in a timely manner, and no delays have been observed in this 
process.”                                                                                      
 
1.11    On being enquired about the protection available to the Corporate Debtor from legal 
actions of other Government agencies during resolution process and cases are pending 
before the NCLT, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written response apprised as 
under:- 
“Under the IBC, when a company is undergoing resolution and cases are 
pending before the NCLT, the Code provides a moratorium that protects the 
company from legal actions, including recovery or enforcement proceedings. 
However, this protection does not extend to criminal investigations or actions by 
investigation agencies, which can continue independently. If funds are seized or 
deposited in government accounts, their release depends on the outcome of 
these investigations and relevant court orders. IBC safeguards creditors and 
investors during resolution, In essence the IBC aims to streamline the 
insolvency process by pausing certain legal actions while allowing the 
resolution process to take place. However, it does not shut down all legal 

7  
activity; it selectively halts proceedings that could interfere with the resolution 
process. The concept of Moratorium is to protect to the Company and its asset. 
Section 60(5) of the IBC, grants the NCLT a residuary jurisdiction to adjudicate 
any question of law or fact arising out of or in relation to the insolvency 
resolution of a corporate debtor. This should afford sufficient protection to 
investors who are investing in good faith.”                          
 
1.12 When asked further about country’s position in global landscape in respect of 
insolvency laws, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs submitted the following written reply:- 
“As per the World Bank's Ease of Doing Business Report 2020, India had moved 
up to rank 52, with a significant improvement in the “Resolving Insolvency” 
parameter from 136 to 52 in just a few years, largely attributed to the enactment 
of IBC. Advanced jurisdictions such as the UK, Singapore, and the USA offer 
models where restructuring is emphasized over liquidation, cross-border 
insolvency is fully recognized, and judicial capacity is stronger and more 
specialized….”  
  
1.13  In this regard, the Chairperson, IBBI in an elaborate submission during the course 
of evidence inter alia indicated towards various indirect benefits accrued under the 
Code:- 
“But IBC has a large number of indirect benefits, and I will just touch on this. The 
first and the biggest indirect benefit is that IBC has changed the debtor-creditor 
relationship in this country and this has led to improvement in bank NPAs. The 
bank NPAs, which were about 12 per cent or 11.18 per cent have come down to 
about 2.5-2.6 per cent. This is the figure of September. In March, it would be 
even lower. 
 Sir, a large number of creditors file applications in NCLT, but as you can see, 
about 30,000 applications have been withdrawn because of this change in 
debtor-creditor relationship because people are afraid that their companies will 
be taken over. About Rs. 13.94 lakh crore of debt has been underlined, and has 
been settled just by withdrawal alone. 
Sir, in the last Ease of Doing Business Report, which came in 2020, India did 
exceedingly well, and IBC was one of the reasons or one of the factors which 
helped in our rank improvement. The most important thing here is that India did 
better than most OECD countries. Our recovery rate was better than the average 
of OECD countries. In 2026, when the next Report will come, I expect that we 
will continue to do as well as we had done in 2020.”  
 
1.14     He further added as follows:- 
“…….Another significant improvement is that the average days in overdue of all 
loans has dropped from about 344 days to 30 to 87 days because companies do 
not want to go into insolvency. They do not want to go to NCLT. So, there has 
been a great improvement in the credit culture because of IBC.  

8  
 
The last Economic Survey which was presented to the Parliament shows that 
IBC has led to improved forex hedging. It has reduced the bond credit spreads, 
and has improved access to credit for exports. Now these are great indirect 
benefits which I think IBC has achieved.”          
 
1.15     On being asked about the interest of global investors in IBC, the Bank of 
Baroda in their written submission informed as stated below:- 
“The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) has generally increased global 
investor interest in India due to its framework for efficient resolution of 
distressed assets, enhanced creditor rights, and improved legal 
certainty. However, certain challenges like procedural delays and the need 
for a robust cross-border insolvency framework still need addressing to 
further boost investor confidence.  
The IBC promotes transparency in the insolvency resolution process, which 
helps build trust and confidence among foreign investors. The IBC aims for 
efficient recovery of dues for creditors, including foreign investors, making 
India a more attractive destination for investment.  
Overall, the IBC has been a positive step in attracting foreign investment, 
but ongoing reforms and addressing the existing challenges are crucial for 
maximizing its impact and attracting sustained global interest.”  
                                                                                            
(D)  Performance under the IBC 
(a)  Ecosystem 
1.16    The IBC since its inception, has fostered a robust ecosystem featuring 4,435 
IPs (Individuals), 92 Insolvency Professional Entities (IPEs) functioning as IPs, 127 
IPEs, three Insolvency Professional Agencies (IPAs), one Information Utility (IU) viz. 
the National e-Governance Services Limited, 5,812 Registered Valuers (RVs), 118 
Registered Valuer Entities (RVEs) and 14 Registered Valuer Organisations (RVOs). 
 (b)   Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) 
1.17   Till October 31, 2025, 8715 CIRPs have been admitted under the Code. Out of 
these, the Code has rescued 1322 Corporate Debtors (CDs) through resolution plans. 

9  
1.18 The stakeholder-wise outcome of CIRPs as on March 31, 2025 is given below:- 
 
Outcome Description CIRPs initiated by/for 
Financial 
Creditors 
Operational 
Creditors 
Corporate 
Debtors 
FiSPs Total 
 
Status of 
CIRPs 
Closure by 
Appeal/Review/S
ettled 
402 863 11 0 1276 
Closure by 
Withdrawal u/s 
12A 
343 803 8 0 1154 
Closure by 
Approval of 
Resolution Plan  
725 383 82 4 1194* 
Closure by 
Commencement 
of Liquidation 
1290 1172 296 0 2758 
Ongoing CIRP’s 1133 678 114 1 1926 
Total  3893 3899 511 5 8308* 
CIRPs 
yielding 
Resolution 
Plans 
Realisation by 
Creditors as % of 
Liquidation Value 
187.0 128.0 144.9 134.9 170.1 
Realisation by 
Creditors as % of 
their Claims 
33.2 25.2 18.1 41.4 32.8 
Average Time 
taken for Closure 
of CIRP 
723 724 577 677 713 
CIRPs 
yielding 
Liquidation
s 
Liquidation Value 
as % of Claims 5.3 8.2 8.1 - 6.0 
Average Time 
taken for order of 
Liquidation 
518 511 455 - 508 
 
*As per the updated information / data received from the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
till October 31, 2025, 8715 CIRPs have been admitted under the Code. Out of these, 
the Code has rescued 1322 Corporate Debtors (CDs) through resolution plans. 
1.19 When the Committee asked why does the IBC's Section 12A grant the original 
applicant absolute veto power over withdrawal even when the debtor is ready to 
settle, and why is the CoC voting threshold for withdrawal (90%) significantly higher 
than the one for approving a resolution plan (66%), the Chairman, IBBI has stated 
the following during oral evidence before the Committee:- 

10  
“…… only the applicant can withdraw and there needs to be 90 per cent of 
the CoC approval. There are different views in the market. There is a view 
that the applicants should not be necessary. There is a view in the 
ecosystem.  
As of now, both should agree, but there is a view in the market that it should 
not be mandatory for the applicant because if 90 per cent of the COC has 
agreed, then why should the applicant consent also be necessary? So, this 
view is there, but the law says that both should be there”.  
 
1.20   As regards the scope of disposal of cases at pre-admission stage, the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs submitted following written response:- 
“ Pre-admission cases under the IBC are typically disposed of due to a 
settlement having been arrived between the Corporate Debtor and the 
applicant or owing to non-fulfilment of mandatory conditions such as the 
existence of a default or procedural deficiencies. The National Company 
Law Tribunal (NCLT) reviews whether the default is genuine and all filing 
requirements are met before admitting a case. Disposal at this stage helps 
filter out non-meritorious or technically flawed petitions, ensuring efficient 
use of judicial resources.”                                                 
 
1.21  On being asked about the measures taken for the benefit of resolution 
applicants, facing uncertainty and delays in CIRP, the IBBI in its written reply stated the 
following:- 
“Several legislative and structural measures have been implemented under 
the IBC framework. The doctrine of the ‘clean slate’ finds its roots in section 
31(1) of the Code which provides that the approved resolution plan by the AA 
shall be binding on the all the stakeholders in the resolution plan. The 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019 amended section 
31(1) to make the successful resolution plan binding on Central Government, 
any State Government or any local authority and such amendment was 
declaratory and clarificatory in nature and therefore retrospective in 
operation. 
The Supreme Court in the case of Ghanashyam Mishra and Sons Private 
Limited Vs. Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Company Limited & Ors[2021] 
has ruled that once a resolution plan is approved by the AA under Section 
31 of the Code all claims which are not a part of the resolution plan shall 
stand extinguished and no person will be entitled to initiate or continue any 
proceedings in respect to a claim which is not part of the resolution plan. 
Section 238 of the IBC provides that the provisions of the IBC shall override 
the provisions of any other law, notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
contained under such other laws. Further, all claims, which are not a part of 
resolution plan, shall stand extinguished and no person will be entitled to 
initiate or continue any proceedings in respect of a claim, which is not part of 
the resolution plan. In recognition to the above provision, the Government 
has amended the Finance Act 2022 by inserting section 156A in the Income 
Tax Act to give effect to the orders of the AA and to modify the demands 
accordingly 

11  
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2020 inserted 
section 32A that reiterates the importance of ring fencing the CD from 
liabilities for past offences once a resolution plan has been approved. The 
Supreme Court in the matter of Manish Kumar vs. Union of India (2021) 
upheld the constitutional validity of Section 32A of the IBC, which provides 
immunity to the CD and its property from prosecution for prior offences once 
a resolution plan is approved and there is a change in management/control.” 
      
 
Recent Amendments in CIRP Regulations  
 
1.22   Several Amendments have been undertaken in the IBBI (Insolvency Resolution 
of Corporate Persons) Regulations, 2016 (CIRP Regulations) for reducing delays, 
maximising the value, and facilitating processes by better flow of information. Some of 
the recent amendments are as under:- 
(i)  Measures to reduce delays: 
 Limiting Modification in RFRP: The amendment caps the number of 
times the Request for Resolution Plan (RFRP) can be modified, 
addressing delays caused by repeated Expression of Interests (EoIs) 
and RFRP changes. 
 
 Extended Claim Filing: The amendment extends the claim filing deadline 
to 90 days from insolvency commencement date (ICD) or until the RFRP 
is issued, whichever is later. RPs can opine on late claims, and CoC can 
recommend their inclusion before AA’s adjudication. 
 
 Recording Reasons for Liquidation: The amendment provides that CoC 
must consider guiding factors and record reasons when recommending 
early liquidation, to be submitted with the application to the AA. 
 
(ii) Measures to maximise value 
 
 Challenge Mechanism Introduced: A challenge mechanism process as 
an additional option is made available under CIRP to promote value 
maximization and transparency. 
 
 Marketing Strategy Formulation: The amendment permits CoC-approved 
asset marketing strategies to expand applicant outreach and also 
advances Form G issuance to the 60th day from ICD with improved 
disclosures. 
 
 Flexibility in Real Estate Cases: Allows CoC to direct RPs to invite 
separate resolution plans for individual projects within a real estate case, 
acknowledging the unique nature of each project. 

12  
 (iii)      Measures to facilitate processes by better flow of information 
 
 Information Submission by Management: Requires CD personnel, 
promoters, and others to submit information such as records of 
information relating to the assets, finances and operations of the CD and 
assets recorded in the balance sheet of the CD to support the RP. 
 
 Information Sharing by Creditors: Creditors must share relevant financial 
and audit information from their records in respect of assets and 
liabilities of the CD from the last valuation report, stock statement, 
receivables statement, inspection reports of properties, audit report, 
stock audit report, title search report, technical officers report, bank 
account statement to aid RPs in preparing the Information Memorandum 
(IM) and avoidance applications. 
 
 Strengthened Information Disclosure in IM: Timeline for preparing the IM 
extended from 54 to 95 days, with mandatory inclusion of details like 
contingent liabilities, asset locations, company overview, investment 
highlights, and growth drivers for companies with assets over Rs. 100 
crore. The IM will also include the details of carry forward of losses and 
unabsorbed depreciation as per the Income Tax Act. 
 
 Revision of Form H:  The compliance certificate (Form H) is revised to 
include key elements typically reviewed by NCLT, streamlining approvals 
and improving transparency. 
 
 Disclosure of Valuation Methodology: Mandates explanation of valuation 
methods to CoC before estimating values to enhance transparency and 
reduce disputes. 
 
(iv) Measures to facilitate resolutions in the real estate sector 
 
 Handing Over Possession: RPs can now hand over possession of plots, 
apartments, or buildings to homebuyers during the resolution process, 
with CoC approval and upon fulfilment of obligations by homebuyers. 
 
 Appointment of Facilitators: Facilitators can be appointed for sub-classes 
(e.g., homebuyers) to aid communication with the authorised 
representative and support creditor understanding of the resolution 
process. 
 
 Participation of Competent Authorities: CoC may invite land authorities 
(e.g., NOIDA, HUDA) to meetings for regulatory inputs, improving 
resolution plan feasibility and stakeholder confidence. 
 

13  
 Report on Development Rights: RPs must prepare a report within 60 
days on development rights, approvals, and permissions in real estate 
projects to guide creditor decision-making. 
 
 Relaxations for Homebuyer Groups: CoC can relax eligibility criteria, 
performance security, and deposit requirements to enable homebuyer 
groups to participate as resolution applicants. 
 
 Separate Bank Accounts for Real Estate Projects: Requires opening 
separate bank accounts for each real estate project to ensure financial 
transparency and accountability.     
1.23   When asked about the major bottlenecks faced in implementation of CIRP, the SBI 
in their written submissions stated as below:- 
“For NCLT:  
NCLT is experiencing significant backlogs, with a large number of cases 
pending at various stages. This is mainly due to following reasons:  
(i) Shortage of NCLT benches  
(ii) Vacant position of judges and administrative staff at NCLT/NCLAT  
(iii) Requirement of separate bench for non-IBC matters  
(iv) Plethora of vexatious and frivolous litigations, and  
(v) NCLT travelling beyond Section 31, leading to avoidable delays. 
 For RP: 
(i)  IPs face difficulty in obtaining information and records from the 
suspended directors/promoters of the CD as in many instances, 
information/record are either not provided or are reported lost/burnt.  
(ii) Resistance from employees/workers of the CD in taking control of the 
CD.  
(iii)  If the information is submitted on a single platform, there will be a 
single source of truth which can be viewed by all parties having access to 
that information.  
For CoC:  
(i) Undue delay in admission of CIRP application.  
(ii) Personal guarantors having undue benefit of interim moratorium, during 
which time the moratorium is not applicable on them.  
(iii)  Adjournments by NCLT based on compromise submitted by erstwhile 
promoters  
(iv) Undue delay in adjudication of PUFE petitions Multiplicity of litigations    
and IAs resulting into undue delay in plan approval.” 

14  
                                                                                               
1.24 The Chairman, SBI has inter-alia made the following suggestions during his 
oral submission before the Committee:- 
“One of the suggestions to reduce excessive haircuts is asset valuation 
systems to ensure the reflection of enterprise value instead of liquidation value. 
This is something we are working on. IBBI has also come out with guidelines on 
valuation and also a list of valuers who can be utilised for assessment of the 
enterprise value. The bankers probably would have to take insolvency steps if 
the company is not able to resolve. Early filing, early admission and preparation 
of complete information memorandum also will be helpful. Other things which 
are also delaying, as I mentioned, in terms of the distribution of recovery or 
resolution amount among the creditors because there are unsecured creditors 
who are also claiming this. Reduced differential voting rights between secured 
and unsecured creditors will be reducing the litigation.  
There are non-core assets of the corporate data which is undergoing CIRP. If 
some monetisation in the interim is permitted, I think would also be helpful in 
terms of reducing the haircuts”.                                            
1.25 SBI has further added the following in their written reply as follows:- 
“Asset valuation means valuation of all physical and financial assets of the 
company. Valuation is based on fair market value, realizable value, 
liquidation or distress value. For cases under IBC, at least 2 valuers are 
appointed who based on records & physical examination of the assets, 
arrive at fair value and liquidation value applying approved methodologies. 
As already suggested by us, though valuation methodology is shared with 
CoC members, it would be beneficial if the entire valuation is discussed to 
ensure that all assets are included and are properly valued as per 
established standards.    
The role of auditor is to assess the inclusion/exclusion of assets, adoption of 
internationally accepted methodology, true realizability of value and ethical 
ways of valuation. However, at times we observe opacity in their conduct”.  
              
1.26 The Chairman, IBBI has inter-alia stated the following during his oral evidence 
before the Committee:- 
“Two years back, the Supreme Court permitted personal guarantors also to 
be taken up under IBC. Now, this is being misused. A lot of rich people are 
just applying to NCLT, and an interim moratorium sets in, and the banks 
cannot proceed against them under SARFAESI. So, this needs to be 
removed. This is part of the amendments that I had discussed. But this 
needs to be removed very urgently so that this loophole can be plugged. A 
lot of rich personal guarantors are taking advantage of this”. 
                  
1.27 Asked about the sector-wise major bottlenecks encountered in the 
implementation of IBC, the Indian Overseas Bank apprised in their written reply, as 
given below:- 

15  
“The sector-wise major bottlenecks encountered by the Resolution 
Professional (RP) and the Committee of Creditors (CoC) during the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) are as follows: 
Real Estate & Construction 
 Fragmented ownership and multiple stakeholders (homebuyers, 
authorities, contractors). 
 Regulatory overlaps with RERA and local development bodies. 
 Incomplete projects with low liquidation value. 
 Delays in approvals for resolution plans involving project 
completion. 
           Manufacturing 
 Outdated technology and machinery reduce buyer interest. 
 Environmental clearances and compliance issues delay asset 
transfer. 
 High fixed costs and low working capital attractiveness. 
 Labour disputes and legacy liabilities. 
           Hospitality & Tourism 
 Brand-dependent valuation—assets lose value without brand 
continuity. 
 Seasonal cash flows make viability assessments difficult. 
 Licensing and lease issues with state/local authorities. 
 Low bidder interest due to pandemic aftershocks and high capex. 
          Retail & Wholesale Trade 
 Inventory obsolescence and fast-changing consumer trends. 
 Leasehold properties with non-transferable agreements. 
 Thin margins and high competition reduce resolution value. 
 Limited interest from strategic investors. 
          Power & Energy 
 Long-term PPAs (Power Purchase Agreements) complicate 
resolution. 
 Tariff disputes and regulatory interventions. 
 High capital intensity and sector-specific risks. 
 Pending dues from DISCOMs affect valuation. 
      Transport & Logistics 
 Asset-heavy models with depreciating fleet value. 
 Route permits and licenses are often non-transferable. 

16  
 Fuel price volatility and regulatory compliance burdens. 
 Limited interest from new entrants due to high entry barriers. 
     Common Bottlenecks Across Sectors 
 Delays in admission and plan approval by Adjudicating Authorities 
(AA). 
 Litigation by promoters or operational creditors. 
 Lack of quality resolution applicants. 
 Disagreements within CoC on valuation and plan viability.” 
                                                                                                                                                                         
          
(c)  Realisation by creditors 
1.28 Creditors have realised about Rs.3.89 lakh crore under the resolution plans till 
March, 2025. This realisation is more than 32.8% as against the admitted claims and 
more than 170.1% as against the liquidation value. Resolution plans on average are 
yielding 93.41% of fair value of the CDs. 
  
1.29 As regards the key factors impacting recovery rate, the Union Bank of India in their 
written response provided the following:- 
“Key Factors Affecting Recovery:  
▪ Delay in Resolution Process: due to litigation, CoC indecisiveness, or NCLT 
backlogs.  
▪ Stressed Asset Value – significant erosion in asset value by the time it enters 
CIRP.  
▪ Limited Security – many accounts have insufficient or unsecured exposures.  
▪ Legal Complications – attachment by ED, tax issues, and inter-creditor conflicts.”                                                                                         
(UBI Reply 17) 
 
1.30 During oral evidence before the Committee, the CGM, Indian Bank has inter-
alia suggested the following measures to prevent frequent stays from unsuccessful 
resolution applicants that cause delays in the resolution plan:- 
“One is, the promoters are unsuccessful, resolution applicants are frequently 
challenging the admissions and resolution plans are sent for liquidation. Then, its 
impact is that legal cost and also deterioration in the value of the asset. What we 
suggest is that IBBI may prescribe some threshold amount to be deposited upfront 
before these what you call unsuccessful resolution applicants are approaching for 
stay or something like that so that there will be some discipline and each and every 
person cannot go for stay in the decision”. 

17  
1.31   In this connection the Committee wanted to understand the prospects of Competitive 
bidding and of global outreach for expanding excess to international Bidders, the Bank of 
Baroda provided following information in their written replies:- 
“Competitive bidding is a procurement process where multiple vendors or suppliers 
submit proposals to win a contract. Global outreach expands the potential pool of 
bidders to international markets, increasing competition and potential benefits. This 
combination can lead to lower costs, access to innovative solutions, and a more 
robust supply chain.  
Understanding Competitive Bidding: 
It aims to ensure transparency, fairness, and optimal value for the buyer by 
fostering competition among bidders. Competitive bidding can lead to lower costs, 
improved quality, access to innovative solutions, and increased transparency in the 
procurement process.  
Global Outreach in Competitive Bidding: 
1. Extends the competitive bidding process to international markets, potentially   
attracting a wider range of suppliers and increasing competition. 
2. By including international bidders, organizations can drive down costs and 
improve the quality of goods or services through enhanced competition. “ 
                                                                                                            
1.32   As regards the effectiveness of recovery rate of 32.8 per cent against total admitted 
claims and 170 percent against liquidation value under the IBC, the Committee sought to 
know about the key factors contributing to the significant shortfall in recovery against total 
claims despite achieving higher realization compared to liquidation value, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs in their written submissions apprised as mentioned below:- 
“The higher realization compared to liquidation shows the IBC’s success in 
preserving enterprise value and supporting revival of distressed companies, 
aligning with its objective of maximizing asset value and balancing creditor 
interests. However, the low recovery against total claims highlights issues 
are majorly due to factors such as pre-existing financial deterioration of 
firms.  
Realisation in CIRP depends on several factors, including the nature of 
business, business cycles, market sentiments, and marketing effort. It, 
however, critically depends on at what stage of stress, the company enters 
the IBC process, If the company has been sick for years, and the assets 
have depleted significantly, the IBC process may yield low or no realisation 
or even liquidation.   
It may not be appropriate to see realisation in relation to claims of the 
creditors. The assets available on the ground may make better sense, 
because the market offers a value in relation to what a company brings on 
the table, and not what it owes to creditors. The IBC maximises the value of 
the existing assets at the commencement of the process, not of the assets 
which probably existed earlier. Since it redeems a part of the going concern 

18  
surplus, rescue is realising, on average, around 170% of the liquidation 
value of the existing assets.   
The amount of realisation often does not include the amount that would be 
realised from equity holding post-resolution, and through reversal of 
avoidance transactions and insolvency resolution of guarantors, personal 
and corporate. It also does not include realisations made in other accounts. 
The amount of claim often includes NPA, which may be completely written 
off, and interest on such NPA. It may include loans as well as the guarantee 
against such loans.  
It is to mention here that the primary objective of the Code is resolution not 
recovery. However, recoveries are merely incidental to CIRP under the 
Code.  The stakeholders should use IBC in early days of stress, when value 
of the company is almost intact, and close the process quickly before value 
recedes further. “ 
             
1.33 Given the data as of September 2024 concerning avoidance transactions 
under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) — specifically, 1,326 applications 
filed, valued at ₹3.76 lakh crore, yet resulting in a recovery of only about ₹7,500 
crores — the Committee when asked what measures can be implemented to 
effectively address this significant gap and the apparent diversion of funds With 
regard to avoidance transactions, RBI in their post-evidence reply has stated as 
under:- 
“Diversion or siphoning of funds is a critical concern for REs, as it can severely 
undermine asset quality and lead to large-scale loan defaults. To address this, 
regulations require REs to adopt a comprehensive approach that combines 
strong credit appraisal and end use monitoring mechanisms. Further, diversion 
of funds etc. is also subjected to checks such as credit audits by regulated 
entities. Supervisory examinations of RBI also focus on diversion and end use if 
fund. 
The primary responsibility of monitoring of individual large borrower accounts 
lies with the banks. RBI examines compliance to its regulations, including on 
exposure norms, bank’s credit underwriting and monitoring processes, on a 
sample basis as part of on-site inspection / continuous supervision. The sample 
selection for examination of large accounts varies from bank to bank, 
depending upon the assessment of the Senior Supervisory Manager of the 
concerned bank. Significant observations, if any, are captured in the Inspection 
and Risk Assessment Report for necessary supervisory/enforcement action. 
Supervisory action includes giving direction to banks to revise internal policies, 
enhance monitoring mechanisms, placing the bank under Prompt Corrective 
Action framework, among others. While enforcement action constitutes 
imposition of penalties for violations related to exposure limits, borrower 
monitoring, improper end-use of funds, etc. 

19  
Banks are also required to examine staff accountability and wilful default in loan 
default cases, and carry out fraud examination where fraud is suspected, which 
leads to filing fraud complaint with the Law Enforcement Agencies.  
In addition to the above, Central Repository of Information on Large Credits has 
been put in place by RBI for gathering information about borrowers with 
aggregate exposure of ₹5 crore and above across all forms (fund-based, non-
fund-based, and investments). This facilitates in monitoring of large borrowers. 
However, RBI’s onsite inspection and/or off-site monitoring are not audit per se, 
and RBI’s supervisory framework does not seek to replace an audit.” 
                                                                                                         
1.34 In this regard, SBI has submitted the following written response to improve 
the recovery rate:- 
“Though 32% recovery through IBC is low, it is still relatively better than other 
modes of recovery e.g. SARFAESI, DRT etc. both in terms of time as well as 
amount recovered. However, this can further improve if recovery from financial 
assets can be expedited by way of adjudication of PUFE transactions, 
streamlining of PIRP cases etc”.      
1.35  In this context the Committee sought to understand the Asset valuation 
System, the Indian Overseas Bank submitted following in their written Reply:- 
“The asset valuation system under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(IBC) in India is a structured and regulated process designed to determine 
the value of a corporate debtor’s assets during insolvency proceedings. 
Here's an overview of how it works: 
Types of Valuation 
 Fair Value: The estimated realizable value of assets in an arm’s length 
transaction between knowledgeable and willing parties. 
 Liquidation Value: The estimated realizable value if the corporate debtor 
were to be liquidated on the insolvency commencement date  
Role of Registered Valuers 
 Valuation must be conducted by IBBI-registered valuers, appointed by the 
Resolution Professional (RP). 
 Typically, two independent valuers are appointed to ensure objectivity and 
reduce bias  
Valuation Process 
 Valuers assess both tangible and intangible assets, including land, 
buildings, machinery, intellectual property, and brand value. 
 Sector-specific methodologies are applied depending on the nature of the 
business (e.g., manufacturing, real estate, technology)  
Regulatory Oversight 

20  
 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) provides guidelines 
and compliance standards for valuation. 
Valuation reports are submitted to the Committee of Creditors  (CoC) and 
form the basis for evaluating resolution plans” 
                                                                                              
 1.36   On being further queried about the Asset Valuation System and its 
importance in resolution process, the Bank of Baroda in their written reply stated the 
following:- 
“One of the crucial aspects of resolution under IBC, is accurate and timely 
valuation of the corporate debtor’s assets. This valuation plays a pivotal role 
in maximizing the value of assets for creditors and ensuring a fair outcome 
for all stakeholders involved. 
The IBC emphasizes achieving several key objectives through valuation: 
Maximizing Asset Value: Accurate valuation helps identify the true worth of 
the corporate debtor’s assets. This allows for maximizing  the recovery      
for creditors and potentially facilitating a successful revival plan. 
Facilitating Resolution Process: A clear understanding of the asset    values 
helps guide decisions throughout the insolvency resolution process. This 
includes determining the viability of a revival plan, negotiating with PRAs and 
ensuring fair liquidation proceeds.”          
           
         
(d)  Resolutions 
1.37 The number of liquidations have come down over the years. In 2017-18, for 
every 1 CD resolved, 5 CDs were liquidated. Steadily, this ratio has now improved to 
nearly 10 CDs being resolved against 5 CDs going to liquidation. Till March 31, 2025, 
1,194 CDs have been resolved under the IBC. 
 
     The year-wise number of cases ending with resolution under IBC 
 

21  
  
 
 
 
 
1.38 Out of 1194 Resolution Plans over the last eight years, 702 resolutions i.e. 60% 
of the cases were done during 2022-23, 2023-24, and 2024-25. About 40% of the 
CIRPs, which yielded resolution plans, were defunct companies that were not ‘going 
concerns’. In these cases, the claimants have realised 151.92% of liquidation value 
and 19.03% of their admitted claims. 
 
1.39  When the Committee pointed this out that the 60% cases of the total resolutions 
have happened in the duration of last three years and asked about the factors behind 
it, the IBBI in their written submission provided as mentioned below:- 
“The last three years have witnessed an unprecedented surge in the approval 
of resolution plans by the NCLT under the IBC, showcasing the 
effectiveness of the legal framework in facilitating the revival of insolvent 
businesses. This upward trend can be largely attributed to the efficient 
decision-making and sustained efforts of the NCLT. The NCLT should be 

22  
commended for speeding up resolutions in the last three years. Out of 1194 
resolution plans over the last eight years, 60% (708) resolutions were done 
in the last 3 years. Further, a number of initiatives are being taken to 
improve the outcomes of the Code. These include monitoring of cases 
pending for admission and ongoing CIRPs. Further, the IBBI revised its 
mechanisms for real-time sharing of information regarding applications for 
the initiation of CIRP with the IU. These initiatives have had a substantial 
impact on the IBC process, as evidenced by the increase in NCLT-approved 
resolutions and the admission of cases initiated by financial creditors.”   
 
                                                                                             
1.40  In absence of buyers for distressed assets, the process invariably might lead to 
liquidation rather than resolution, on being asked as to how RBI ensure that every 
effort is put into rehabilitating distressed businesses, the RBI furnished following 
written reply:- 
“In line with the objectives enshrined in the IBC of time-bound resolution of 
stressed assets, RBI has put in place a Prudential Framework for 
Resolution of Stressed Assets (07, June 2019) which mandates banks to 
identify stress and attempt time-bound restructuring, focusing on turnaround 
options before initiating insolvency. The framework provides that since 
default with any lender is a lagging indicator of financial stress faced by a 
borrower, lenders are expected to initiate the process of implementing a 
resolution plan even before a default. Once a borrower is reported to be in 
default by any of the banks/ AIFIs, lenders have to undertake a prima-facie 
review of the account within thirty days of such default (“Review Period”). 
During this Review Period of thirty days, lenders may decide on the 
resolution strategy,  Including the nature of the resolution plan, the approach 
for implementation of the resolution plan, etc. The lenders may also choose 
to initiate legal proceedings for insolvency or recovery. To incentivize 
resolution in a time bound process, the framework provides for additional 
provisioning requirement in case of delay in resolution. 
Further, RBI is taking steps to progressively deepen the market for 
distressed assets and pool of resolution professionals, inter-alia, including 
allowing ARCs as resolution professional and proposing a regulatory 
framework for securitization of stressed assets (draft circular issued for 
consultation, final circular yet to be issued).”                    
1.41   When asked about the key issues faced pertaining to Asset Valuation of the 
corporate debtor under IBC, Indian Overseas Bank in their written submissions  
provided following information:- 
“Key Issues faced by the CoC/RP in Asset Valuation of the corporate 
debtor under IBC are as under:  
Inconsistent Valuation Standards 
Valuation practices vary widely due to lack of uniform guidelines across 
sectors. 

23  
Registered valuers often use different methodologies, leading to 
divergent valuation reports that confuse stakeholders. 
Third-Party Held Assets 
Assets used by the corporate debtor (CD) but legally owned by related 
parties or sister concerns pose valuation challenges. 
Determining beneficial ownership vs. legal title is complex and often 
requires forensic audits.  
Sector-Specific Complexities 
Industrial assets like machinery, infrastructure, and technology require 
specialized valuation approaches. 
Valuers often lack sectoral expertise, leading to mispricing or 
undervaluation, especially in manufacturing, real estate, and energy 
sectors. 
Data Limitations 
Incomplete or outdated asset records hinder accurate valuation. 
Lack of digital asset registries and poor documentation practices are 
common in distressed companies. 
Judicial Oversight and Interpretation 
Courts have had to intervene to clarify valuation disputes, especially 
where economic realities differ from legal structures.  
Timing and Cost Constraints 
Valuation is time-sensitive under CIRP timelines but delays in appointing 
valuers or receiving reports can derail resolution. 
High costs of multiple valuations (especially when a third valuer is 
needed) burden the insolvency estate.” 
                       
1.42 In this regard, the Union Bank of India in their written reply shared their opinion 
as under:- 
“Valuation is a concern. RPs appoint two valuers, but the process lacks 
transparency and accountability. Sometimes, undervaluation leads to 
distress-sale prices, especially in liquidation. The role of liquidators and 
registered valuers must be strengthened with clear SOPs, audit trails, and 
post-resolution valuation reviews. We suggest that fresh valuation can be 
carried out again after specific intervals.”                               
(e)  Liquidations 
1.43    Till March, 2025, 2758 CIRPs have ended in liquidation. Of 2758 CDs ending 
up with orders for liquidation, 214 had admitted claims of more than Rs. 1,000 crore. 
These CDs had an aggregate claim of Rs. 9.63 lakh crore. However, they had assets, 

24  
on the ground, valued only at Rs. 0.46 lakh crore. Of the 2758 CDs, 1374 CDs have 
been completely liquidated with submission of final report. Around 78% of the CIRPs 
ending in liquidation (2107 out of 2704 for which data are available) were earlier with 
BIFR and/or defunct. The economic value in most of these CDs had almost completely 
eroded even before they were admitted into CIRP. These CDs had assets, on 
average, valued at 6% of the outstanding debt amount.                           
 
1.44   On being enquired about the main reasons corporates are going into liquidation, 
the Canara Bank in their written response informed as under:- 
“Major reasons for accounts going into liquidation are as follows: 
(i) Non-Receipt of Viable / acceptable Resolution Plans 
(ii) Multiple litigations filed by stakeholders. 
(iii) Non-compliance of Plan by Resolution Applicant 
(iv) Dispute among creditors regarding distribution of proceedings 
(v) Ineligibility of Resolution Applicant under section 29A 
 Average % of recovery in liquidation is 10.62% of admitted claims.” 
        
1.45   Asked about the extant or proposed mechanisms to encourage bankers to opt 
for resolution rather than liquidation, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs furnished the 
following written reply:- 
 “Financial creditors constitute the Committee of Creditors. The IBBI’s 
Guidelines for the Committee of Creditors (CoC) issued in 2024 emphasize 
objectivity, integrity, and informed decision-making in the CoC's 
functions. Members must adhere to the Code and regulations, maintain 
integrity, and foster informed decisions by sharing relevant information with 
the CoC and the Insolvency Professional. The CoC plays a crucial role in 
deciding on the needs of the company to remain a going concern. Ultimately 
the objective of the IBC is Resolution and it is expected that a fine balance 
would be struck between viability and commercial wisdom while considering 
the resolution plan by not deciding on liquidation in cases of companies 
which can be revived.”  
 
1.46   Asked about the conditions that justify a re-CIRP instead of liquidation, the RBI 
in their written reply made clear that:- 
“Under the current IBC framework, once a resolution plan has been 
approved by the CoC and sanctioned by the Adjudicating Authority, a failure 

25  
of that plan normally triggers liquidation under Section 33(2). It may be 
noted that, once a resolution plan is approved by the NCLT, its 
implementation should be swift and strict with provisions for penalizing non-
compliance by the successful resolution applicant including, forfeitures of 
performance security and faster legal recourse for breaches. Thus, re-CIRP 
should be the exception and not the rules and only employed where it 
preserves value and is supported by the commercial wisdom of the CoC. 
Further, it should be with the concurrence of CoC and NCLT approval.” 
                                                                                               
(f)        Impact on Non-Performing Assets(NPA)  
 
1.47   The IBC has enhanced recovery of NPAs by Scheduled Commercial Banks 
(SCBs). As per RBI's Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India (from 2017-18 
to 2023-24),SCBs have recovered Rs. 96,325 crore through various channels. The 
IBC remained the dominant mode of recovery and alone contributed Rs. 46,340 crore, 
which is 48.1% of the total recoveries. The amount recovered by SCBs through 
various channels has been given below:- 
 Channel Amount recovered (in Rs. crore) 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-
24(P) 
Lok Adalats 1811 2750 4211 1119 2778 3774 3322 
DRTs 7235 10552 9986 8113 12035 39785 16202 
SARFAESI 
Act 
26380 38905 34283 27686 27349 30957 30460 
IBC 4926 66440 104117 27311 47409 54161 46340 
Total 40352 118647 152597 64229 89571 128676 96325 
 
The RBI's Financial Stability Report (FSR December 2024) indicates a decline in the 
Gross Non-Performing Asset (GNPA) ratio of SCBs to a 12-year low of 2.6% in 
September 2024.  
1.48  Observing the recovery figures, the Committee sought enlightenment from the 
representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs about the significance of IBC 
contribution in addressing non-performing assets and its relative  effectiveness 
compared to the other recovery channels like Lok Adalats, DRTs, SARFAESI Acts, the 
Ministry in their written submissions apprised as under:-  
“The IBC has significantly contributed to addressing NPAs by offering a 
structured and time-bound resolution process, leading to better resolutions. 

26  
While Lok Adalats, DRTs, and SARFAESI Act focused mainly on 
enforcement and recoveries rather than resolutions, IBC has enabled 
market driven resolutions with higher realizations and improved credit 
disciplines. The success story of IBC can be best captured in the following 
table which shows that IBC has come of age and is the most preferred 
channel in such cases as things stand today.” 
     (Amount in Crores) 
2022-23 2023-24 (P) 
Recovery 
Channel 
No. of 
cases 
referred 
Amount 
involved 
Amount 
Recovered 
% 
Recovery 
No. of 
cases 
referred 
Amount 
involved 
Amount 
Recovered 
% 
Recovery 
Lok Adalats 1,37,72,958 1,88,135 3,774 2.0 1,26,84,815 1,89,694 3,322 1.8 
DRTs 56,198 4,02,753 39,785 9.9 31,414 1,06,887 16,202 15.2 
SARFAESI 
Act 1,87,340 1,11,359 30,957 27.8 2,31,407 1,23,363 30,460 24.7 
IBC (FCs) 1,262* 1,38,715 54,161 39.0 1,004* 1,63,943 46,340  28.3 
* Total of Cases admitted by NCLTs under IBC 
          
1.49   In a pointed query Committee asked whether the RBI has ever looked into a 
different form of classification for assets based on credit and business growth and to 
discipline borrowers to understand the relevancy of NPA in today’s context, the RBI in 
their written submissions provided as under:- 
“The regulatory norms for classification of a borrower account as NPA 
constitutes the foundational elements of the prudential framework, not just in 
India but globally. Classification of an account in default as NPA is only a 
recognition of the continuing financial stress of the borrower. The desirable 
approach for a sustainable credit ecosystem would be to resolve the stress 
through appropriate interventions early on, much before it becomes NPA. 
Even under IBC, given its objective of resolution, a CIRP can be filed on a 
one-day default. Further, regulations do not restrict lenders from continuing to 
fund the borrower or provide additional/fresh credit facilities to a borrower 
classified as NPA. The same is left to the commercial discretion of the 
lenders, based on the viability considerations.  RBI’s existing NPA norms 
(primarily the 90-day overdue rule) are aligned with globally accepted 
prudential standards aimed at maintaining transparency, early detection of 
stress, and the health of the banking sector. Easing the classification or 
introducing subjective categories risks the recurrence of past problems 
(evergreening, delayed recognition) that previously masked bad loans and  
undermined the system.”                                                                                               

27  
 
1.50 Gross NPA ratio of scheduled commercial banks has significantly decreased 
from over the years. However, considering the evolving challenges in debt recovery 
and the broader financial ecosystem including risks of default, delays and liquidation 
under IBC, the Committee enquired about the sustainability of decline in GNPA in the 
long term, the SBI written replies informed as under:- 
“Reducing GNPA is indicative of the following:  
1. Fear of losing control of the CD in case of commencement of Insolvency 
Proceedings. The promoters are now effectively overseeing management 
function to rule out possible action under IBC.  
2. Close monitoring of delinquency and quick red flagging and corrective 
action.  
3. Out of court settlements.  
Sustainability of declining GNPA depends on continued effort to arrest 
slippage of accounts from standard asset to NPA by way of early detection of 
red flags and corrective action plan, maintaining robust credit assessment 
system and pre-and post-sanction follow up and adherence to regulatory 
guidelines.” 
                                                                                                 
1.51  On being asked about the availability of mechanism to repeatedly examine  the 
viability of project, the RBI submitted following reply:-  
“Banks are required to have a detailed credit risk management framework 
that includes provisions relating to pre-sanction appraisal as well as post-
sanction monitoring. The performance of any loan exposure is reviewed 
periodically to reassess its viability and adherence to loan covenants. There 
are guidelines in place’ that require banks to closely monitor early 
stress/default and take early resolution action.”                
    
1.52   When asked about the measures taken by SBI to ensure accurate and timely 
disclosure, especially in loan portfolios to prevent debt defaults, the SBI submitted 
following written reply:- 
“Banks are guided by strict disclosure norms as prescribed by RBI 
Directions as well as Bank’s Internal Control and Risk Management System. 
Besides Banks have technology driven Early Warning signals, automated 
reporting of debt and default as well as robust audit system. Bank has three 
layers of control. Each such business data is subject to review by 
Compliance Deptt., and Inspection & Audit Deptt., of the Bank. It is also 
reviewed by External Auditors and then by Audit Committee of the Board. 
As regards timely disclosure under IBC, Bank is reporting status of all IBC 
accounts to RBI on monthly interval through digital platform (CRIMMAR), 
besides reporting data/information to IBBI/DFS as when sought for.” 

28  
                                                                    
(E)   MSMEs 
1.53 MSMEs play a crucial role in the Indian economy, driving employment, 
entrepreneurship, and innovation. However, these businesses often face unique 
challenges, particularly during financial distress. The IBC, enacted in 2016 which 
aimed to provide a structured and time-bound process for resolving insolvency and 
bankruptcy cases significantly impacted these MSMEs. In this connection the 
Committee observed that as IBC has a creditor-centric approach, it appears to be 
heavily tilted in favour of creditors and thus queried if this approach has in any manner 
adversely impacted MSMEs and safeguards put in place to protect interest of MSMEs, 
the IBBI in their written submissions stated the following:- 
“The Code includes specific legal provisions, exemptions, and policy 
relaxations tailored for MSMEs to encourage resolution and continuity of the 
businesses of the MSMEs. 
1. Section 240A – Special Provisions for MSMEs, introduced via the IBC 
(Amendment) Act, 2018, through which the Code is applied to MSMEs. 
The key benefits under this are MSMEs are exempted from disqualification 
under Section 29A(c) and 29A(h) of the IBC, which means existing promoters 
can participate in rescuing their business. 
2. Threshold Relaxation for MSME Default – Section 4 (read with MCA 
Notification dated 24.03.2020) 
The minimum default threshold to initiate insolvency proceedings was raised 
from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 1 crore to protect MSMEs. 
3.  Pre-Pack Insolvency for MSMEs (Sections 54A–54P of IBC, 2016) 
Through the sixth amendment (2021) to the Code, a specific provision exclusive 
for corporate MSMEs was introduced. Pre-Packaged Insolvency Resolution 
Process (PPIRP) has been introduced for MSMEs to fast- track resolution of 
cases for MSMEs. 
          4.       Section 29A Exemptions for MSMEs under Pre-Pack 
Under Section 29A read with 240A, promoters of MSMEs are not barred 
from submitting plans even in pre-pack proceedings.”              
 
1.54 When asked what specific due diligence practices does the State Bank of India 
(SBI) employ during the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) to prevent 

29  
barred promoters from re-acquiring control through a Resolution Applicant (PRA), and 
what is the bank's formal position on supporting limited exemptions to Section 29A of 
the IBC for MSMEs or first-time defaulters, subject to safeguards, the SBI in their 
written reply stated as follows:-    
“Since IBC is an evolving process, in the initial period there have been 
instances where promoters have resumed control of the company. However, 
after Section 29A was made applicable, the checks are in place to not let 
either the erstwhile promoter or a related party have control of the entity.  
IBC 2016, through Section 29A clearly spells out the entity/persons who are 
not eligible to apply as Resolution Applicant.  
To further strengthen the process, our suggestion would be as under:  
a. CD shall be MSME at least at the time of NPA to be eligible for any 
exemption under 29A. Subsequent certification as MSME shall not allow 
exemption.  
b. At present Section 29A (g) states ineligibility only if the PUFE transactions 
are adjudicated. Since disposal of PUFE petitions are very low and delayed, 
promoters and related parties are still able to apply as Resolution applicant in 
case the CD is an MSME, on the plea that the PUFE transactions are not 
adjudicated. Act shall be modified to provide that if PUFE transactions are 
identified against the promoter/related party, then such person shall become 
ineligible irrespective of whether the PUFE petition is adjudicated or not.” 
 
1.55 In this regard, the Chairman, IBBI has stated the following in his oral 
submission before the Committee:- 
“There is a Supreme Court order which says that MSME registration under 
IBC can be obtained at any stage. A lot of people are misusing this. What this 
means is that the bids have been invited, and then someone takes an MSME 
registration and then wants the MSME concession. What we are proposing is 
that before admission, whoever is MSME should be MSME. But, after 
admission, after the IBC case has been admitted, then this should not 
change. This Supreme Court order came two years back”. 
 
1.56   As regards the impact of Preferential, Undervalued, Fraudulent, and 
Extortionate (PUFE) transactions over recoveries and realisations, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs submitted following written reply:- 
“The primary objective of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) is to 
streamline and expedite the insolvency resolution process for corporate 
persons, partnerships, and individuals. IBC fosters good corporate 
governance by creating a framework that promotes transparency, 
accountability, creditor empowerment, and the protection of stakeholder 
interests. This leads to a more responsible and ethical business 
environment. It may be of interest that under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code (IBC), the Adjudicating Authority (AA), typically the National Company 
Law Tribunal (NCLT), can claw back (recover) the value of assets that were 

30  
transferred in certain types of transactions, known as Preferential, 
Undervalued, Fraudulent, and Extortionate (PUFE) transactions, prior to the 
initiation of the insolvency process. The Resolution Professional (RP) or 
Liquidator has a duty to identify and file applications with the AA to ensure 
that these assets are returned to the Corporate Debtor's estate for the 
benefit of creditors. Hence even in cases of closely held companies the law 
permits the Adjudicating Authority to claw back transactions which would 
have been done to divert resources of Companies showing stress before 
they ultimately become insolvent. These include preferential, undervalued, 
fraudulent, and extortionate transactions, covered under sections 43, 45, 
50, and 66 of the IBC.....” 
                      
1.57 The Pre-Packaged Insolvency Process (PPIRP) was introduced in India in 
2021 specifically for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) to provide a 
faster, more cost-effective, and less disruptive alternative to the standard Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process. The objective was to help financially distressed but 
viable MSMEs recover, preserving jobs and business continuity. It was designed to be 
faster and more cost-effective than the traditional Corporate Insolvency Resolution 
Process.  Unlike CIRP where default  amount is at least ₹ 1 crore, it is also available in 
where minimum default is ₹10 lakh. The Committee specifically asked about the 
experience and achievements with the implementation of pre-pack insolvency for 
MSMEs and sought details about improvements that are required to enhance its 
efficacy, the IBBI in their written replies submitted the following:- 
“Pre-Packaged Insolvency Resolution Process (PPIRP) was 
introduced during the Covid-19 pandemic to provide an efficient alternative 
insolvency resolution process for corporate persons classified as MSMEs. It 
seeks to provide quicker, cost-effective, and value- maximising outcomes 
for all the stakeholders in a manner that is least disruptive to the continuity 
of their business and helps in preserving jobs. 
The discussion paper issued by MCA on 18.01.2023 proposed that the 
following modifications and relaxations be made to the procedures stipulated 
under Chapter IIIA of Part II of the Code: 
 
(a) The PPIRP framework may involve a diverse range of FCs who 
will be required to approve its initiation at the pre-commencement stage by 
confirming the proposed RP under section 54A (2) (e). Thus, to facilitate 
quicker and more efficient decision-making at this stage, the sixty- six per 
cent threshold for unrelated FCs may be lowered to fifty-one per cent. 
Similarly, under section 54A (3), the sixty-six per cent threshold for 
unrelated FCs may be replaced by an enabling provision for the IBBI to 
specify the appropriate threshold, not being less than fifty- one per cent of 
the unrelated FCs, for approving the filing of an application. 
(b) In practice, it is observed that the MSME CDs face challenges in 
furnishing a declaration regarding avoidance transactions or improper 
trading under section 54C (3) (c). Such transactions or trading may not be 

31  
easy to identify as it is often not the nature of the transaction or trading but 
the zone of insolvency, which renders transactions or trading suspect. 
Further, in the case of larger companies too, this may be a cumbersome 
requirement. Such a requirement should not discourage bona fide CDs from 
utilising the PPIRP for insolvency resolution. Accordingly, it is being 
considered to omit clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 54C. The 
possibility of abuse of this relaxation is mitigated by the CoC’s power to 
terminate the PPIRP or direct the initiation of separate proceedings where it 
is made aware of such transactions or trading. Notably, during the CIRP, 
where an application is filed by the CD, such declaration is not required to 
be furnished before and after the commencement of the process. 
 
(c) Further, bona fide CDs attempting to resolve insolvency through 
this process should not be concerned about the possibility of a change of 
management pursuant to section 54J or conversion to CIRP or liquidation 
under sections 54O or 54N (4). Stakeholders’ feedback also highlights 
similar concerns. Hence, it is being considered that these provisions may be 
omitted. Since the CoC has the discretion to terminate the PPIRP at any 
stage if it believes that the continuation of PPIRP is not viable or the 
management is involved in any fraudulent activities, this discretion should 
serve as a sufficient safeguard against abuse of the process. 
 
        Experience with Pre-pack mechanism: 
As per the information available with the Board, 14 applications have been 
admitted as on March 31, 2025, out of which one has been withdrawn, and 
resolution plans has been approved in eight cases.” 
 
1.58 On being pointed out that adoption of PPIRP by MSMEs has been very limited; 
and the Committee asked about the key reasons for low uptake by MSMEs under IBC, 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written reply provided the following:- 
“The IBBI has been asked to do a study on the reasons for low uptake  and 
recommend how the same can be improved. It is also proposed to amend 
certain procedural aspects to make the process more attractive for MSMEs.” 
 
1.59  The RBI Governor, in his address in January 2024, had stated that there is 
hesitancy on the part of the Financial Creditors in approving the proposal under the 
mechanism where the haircut is perceived as voluntary. On being asked about the 
views of RBI on proposing PPIRP for non-MSMEs, the RBI submitted following written 
reply:- 
“In principle, we are agreeable to the expansion of the prepack scheme for 
corporates as it further strengthens the approach towards resolution of 
stressed assets. Further, given the institutional capabilities of corporate 
debtors, they may be better placed than MSMEs to negotiate a resolution 
plan under PPIRP with the creditors. This also enables lenders to dovetail 
their resolution mechanism under the Prudential Framework on Resolution 
of stressed assets with that of the IBC Framework.”       

32  
 
1.60  When the Committee interrogated about the feasibility of RBI driving banks to 
implement Pre-Packaged Insolvency Resolution Process other than MSMEs, the 
Committee was apprised by RBI in their written submissions stated as below:- 
       “ Pre-packaged Insolvency Resolution Process (PPIRP) 
Central Government enacted the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2021 introducing the PPIRP for corporate MSMEs. 
Subsequently rules and regulations on the same were notified by Central 
Government and IBBI respectively. As per the information made available 
by IBBI , 14 applications have been admitted as on March 31, 2025, out of 
which one has been withdrawn, and resolution plans has been approved in 
eight cases. However, resolution and the choice of resolution vehicle is a 
commercial decision of the lender, and thus RBI can only play a facilitative 
role in providing an enabling framework and cannot direct the lender to 
choose a particular resolution vehicle.”                               
1.61  As regards the impact of the insolvency process and Pre-pack mechanisms on 
the MSME sector, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs stated the following 
during the course of evidence:- 
“regarding the impact of the insolvency process on the MSME sector and 
what will be its impact, the point about having a study on that.  It is noted.  
We will do a separate study on that.  However, regarding the pre-pack 
insolvency framework set up for the MSMEs, only six or seven of them have 
actually come forward.  So, when we tried to analyze the reason for it, the 
first reason was that most of the MSMEs do not have a multi-bank kind of 
credit facility.  They obviously have one bank giving them all the facilities.  
So, banks prefer going for the SARFAESI or the DRT route rather than the 
IBC route.  The second point that came was, it was very complicated for 
them to file all the applications.  The entire thing is very complicated.  So, 
now in the proposed amendments, that is being crunched completely.  We 
are leaving it to the IBBI rather than specifying in the code.  So, it becomes 
a dynamic process.  These are the two points regarding the MSME part.”                                                       
                                                                                     
     
1.62 Regarding creation of awareness amongst MSMEs for taking advantage of 
PPIRP, SBI has submitted the following written response:- 
“Steps which can create awareness may include: 
 Financial literacy program 
 Collaboration with other businesses and organization. 
 Participation in Industry even/Conclave 
 Use of technological platform for marketing their product 
 Ease of doing business and ease of credit availment.” 

33  
1.63 The Code provides an order of priority to distribute assets during liquidation, 
that is, (i) secured creditors will receive their entire outstanding amount, rather than up 
to their collateral value, (ii) unsecured creditors have priority over trade creditors, and 
(iii) government dues will be repaid after unsecured creditors.  In this regard, the 
Committee wanted to know about the ways this 'waterfall mechanism' prioritize certain 
classes of creditors over others, and specific consequences of this hierarchy for 
MSMEs, in their capacity of operational creditors, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in 
their written reply furnished following information:-  
“The preamble of the Code gives a clear indication of the objective that the 
Code seeks to achieve: to maximise the value of assets, to promote 
entrepreneurship, to promote availability of credit and to balance the 
interests of all the stakeholders. The overarching intention of the Code to 
provide for a waterfall mechanism, detailing the order and priority of 
distribution of proceeds from the sale of liquidation assets among the 
stakeholders, flows from the Preamble to the Code. In this regard, the 
Report of the BLRC Volume 1 (2015) (BLRC Report) states as follows: 
“The Committee has recommended to keep the right of the Central and 
State Government in the distribution waterfall in liquidation at a priority 
below the unsecured financial creditors in addition to all kinds of secured 
creditors for promoting the availability of credit and developing a market for 
unsecured financing (including the development of bond markets). In the 
long run, this would increase the availability of finance, reduce the cost of 
capital, promote entrepreneurship and lead to faster economic growth. The 
government also will be the beneficiary of this process as economic growth 
will increase revenues. Further, efficiency enhancement and consequent 
greater value capture through the proposed insolvency regime will bring in 
additional gains to both the economy and the exchequer”. 
The waterfall mechanism under section 53 of the Code inter alia provides 
that  
…the proceeds from the sale of the liquidation assets shall be distributed in 
the following order of priority and within such period and in such manner as 
may be specified, namely: - 
(a) the insolvency resolution process costs and the liquidation costs paid in 
full; 
(b) the following debts which shall rank equally between and among the 
following: 
(i) workmen’s dues for the period of twenty-four months preceding the 
liquidation commencement date; and 
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event such secured creditor has 
relinquished security in the manner set out in section 52; 
(c) wages and any unpaid dues owed to employees other than workmen for 
the 
period of twelve months preceding the liquidation commencement date; 
(d) financial debts owed to unsecured creditors; 
(e) the following dues shall rank equally between and among the following: - 

34  
(i) any amount due to the Central Government and the State Government 
including the amount to be received on account of the Consolidated Fund of 
India and the Consolidated Fund of a State, if any, in respect of the whole or 
any part of the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement 
date; 
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount unpaid following the 
enforcement of security interest; 
(f) any remaining debts and dues; 
(g) preference shareholders, if any; and 
(h) equity shareholders or partners, as the case may be. 
 
Furthermore, before the enactment of the Code, the provisions of the Bill 
‘Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2015’ were also examined in detail by the 
Joint Committee of both the Houses of Parliament. The waterfall as 
provided under section 53 of the Code is also in line with the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Report of the Joint Committee on the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2015. 
The constitutionality of the provisions pertaining to waterfall mechanism and 
other provisions of IBC has been upheld by the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
(SC) in the matter of Swiss Ribbons Private Limited vs. Union of India. 
Further, in the matter of Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. President 
Mahesh Chand Sharma vs. Union of India and Ors., the Hon’ble SC has 
stated that the waterfall mechanism prescribed in the Code is a well-
considered and thought-out decision, align with the overall objective of the 
Code and in economic matters, conflicting interest of stakeholders needs to 
be balanced rather than adopting a one-sided approach. It also observed 
that non-obstante clause in section 53 of the Code override the rights of 
parties, including the secured creditor. It further stated that waterfall 
mechanism is based on a structured mathematical formula and rearranging 
the hierarchy in the waterfall mechanism may lead to several trips and 
disrupt the working of the equilibrium. Further, the guiding principle for the 
Code in setting the priority of payments in liquidation was to bring the 
practices in India in line with global practices.  
With regard to recovery of operational creditors including MSMEs under 
IBC, 22,477 applications initiated by Operational Creditors (OCs) having an 
underlying default of ₹4,68,432 crore, have been settled before admission,. 
Notably, OCs achieved a realization of 11.3% against their admitted claims, 
outperforming Financial Creditors under the category of Unsecured 
Financial Creditors (USFCs), who realized 10% in 1194 cases yielded 
resolution plans as on 31st March 2025. Further, since October 2022, 622 
cases have been resolved, including 208 cases involving Corporate Debtors 
(CDs) classified as MSMEs. In these 208 MSME cases, creditors realized 
₹5,474 crore, amounting to 21.5% of the admitted claims, 95.0% of the fair 
value, and 134.9% of the liquidation values.”     
                                                                                 

35  
1.64     When Committee asked whether any directions or training have been issued to 
authorities concerned to clear the pending claims of the income tax and GST following  
post approval of resolution plan, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs submitted following 
written response:- 
 “The Government dues are given a lower priority in the waterfall 
mechanism (Section 53) of the IBC. The awareness sessions are being 
held for different ministries by IBBI, and the regulator has been requested 
to hold more such awareness sessions.”         
         
1.65 When asked the Committee whether RBI contemplate to treat institutory dues 
as a secured creditor, the Deputy Governor, RBI has responded as follows during oral 
evidence:- 
“No, Sir. The point you have raised is very valid and this was taken in 
cognizance immediately. We had deliberated and the banks had flagged 
these concerns. So, what our view at that time, was conveyed to the 
Government and it will be ideal if an amendment is brought to the Code 
where under Section 53, it should be qualified explicitly that the 
Government dues, whether unsecured or secured, should be below the 
secured creditors”.                                                           
 
1.66 In the present context, when asked whether, the present order of priority meets 
the ends of fair-play and equity or there is a need for its modification, the Reserve 
Bank of India in their written reply stated as below:- 
“The intent of the waterfall mechanism prescribed under Section 53 was to 
give top priority to insolvency process costs, then secured creditors and 
workmen, followed by unsecured creditors, government dues, and finally 
shareholders. However, certain recent legal pronouncements have resulted 
in some ambiguity relating to Government dues. The Supreme Court 
judgement in Rainbow Papers case elevated certain government dues by 
recognizing statutory “first charge” claims as secured creditors. Although in 
a subsequent judgement (July 17, 2023) of Supreme Court in Paschim 
Anchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited vs. Raman Ispat Private Limited and 
Others, the court had confined the applicability of Rainbow Papers verdict 
to its own factual circumstances, it would be desirable to clarify the status 
and ranking of government dues to prevent any ambiguity in the 
interpretation.”           
                                              
1.67 In this regard, SBI has submitted written reply as follows:- 
“After the decision in Rainbow Papers, division bench of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd. Vs. Raman 
Ispat Pvt. Ltd. & Ors., held that Rainbow Papers judgment did not notice the 
‘waterfall mechanism’ under Section 53 – the provision had not been 
adverted to or extracted in the judgment. The dues payable to the 
government are placed much below those of secured creditors and even 

36  
unsecured and operational creditors. This design was either not brought to 
the notice of the court in Rainbow Papers or was missed altogether. 
Further, the Hon’ble Court held that in any event, the judgment has not 
taken note of the provisions of the IBC which treat the dues payable to 
secured creditors at a higher footing than dues payable to Central or State 
Government. 
Impact on Government Dues: The developments post Rainbow Papers 
have clarified that while government dues are important, they do not 
automatically override the established priority of secured creditors under 
the IBC.  
Ongoing Debate: Despite the clarifications, the treatment of government 
dues under the IBC remains a topic of discussion and debate, with ongoing 
considerations on how to balance the interests of various stakeholders, 
including the government, secured creditors, and operational creditors.  
Way forward: To bring amendment in IBC, 2016 to remove the ambiguity on 
this.”         
1.68    When the Committee sought to know whether any impact assessment study 
has been conducted on the consequential effects of waterfall mechanism on the 
MSMEs, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written reply stated as under:- 
“MCA has already issued directions to IBBI to conduct a study on this topic 
and suggest remedial measures, if any, to facilitate better recoveries by 
MSME’s vis-à-vis other creditors.” 
                       
1.69 In PPIRP, the existing management (debtor) remains in control of the company, 
while the Committee of Creditors (CoC) provides oversight.  In this background the 
Committee sought to understand as to how does the 'debtor-in-possession' model 
balance the need for speed and business continuity with the creditors' need for 
security and transparency, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has submitted written 
response as follows:- 
“PPIRP "seeks to provide quicker, cost-effective, and value-maximising 
outcomes for all the stakeholders in a manner that is least disruptive to the 
continuity of their business and helps in preserving jobs." The said paper 
also observed that "Since the CoC has the discretion to terminate the 
PPIRP at any stage if it believes that the continuation of PPIRP is not viable 
or the management is involved in any fraudulent activities, this discretion 
should serve as a sufficient safeguard against abuse of the process.". The 
“debtor-in-possession” model is followed in a large number of countries for 
resolution of distressed assets.””                                                
      

37  
1.70 It has also been informed by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs that no such 
proposal for expansion of PIRP to include other Corporate debtors is under 
consideration.       
            
 
F. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund 
1.71 In this connection, the Committee also enquired about the status of pending 
operationalisation of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund provided for under Section 
224 of the Code for which IBBI had also requested the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
in 2019. The Committee probed into the specific challenges in areas like 
contributions, utilization, and governance needed to be addressed to make it a 
functional part of the insolvency ecosystem, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their 
written submission stated as below:- 
 
“The Insolvency Law Committee (ILC) Report (2022) considered the 
revisions to Section 224 to enable its use for the purposes of insolvency, 
liquidation and bankruptcy processes under the Code.  
The Committee noted that:  
“2.98. The Committee noted that the current design of the IBC Fund does 
not incentivise contributions to it and provides very limited ways of utilising 
the amounts contributed. Firstly, contribution to the Fund is voluntary and 
may be made by the Central Government in the form of grants and by any 
person who voluntarily wants to make such contribution. The Committee 
discussed that incentives may need to be built or mandates may be required 
for contributions to the Fund, as it may not be feasible to expect voluntary 
contributions otherwise. Secondly, the purposes for which the IBC Fund will 
be utilised are limited. Section 224(3) allows persons who have contributed 
to the Fund to withdraw it, to the extent of their contribution. 
2.99. Consequently, the Committee agreed that suitable amendments may 
be made to Section 224 to allow the Central Government to prescribe a 
detailed framework for contribution to and utilisation of the IBC Fund. For 
this purpose, the Government may undertake a review of the design of 
funds in other statutes like the Investor Protection and Education Fund 
under Section 11(5) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 
1992 and the Investor Education and Protection Fund under Section 125 of 
the CA, 2013.  
2.100. Further, the Government may consider building incentives or 
mandates in order to enable regular contributions. Sources for contributions 
to the Fund may also be expanded. Additionally, the utilisation of the Fund 
may be bolstered and wider uses may be identified. For instance, the Fund 
may be used to meet the expenses of resource-strapped insolvency 
proceedings, including payment of workmen’s dues; pursuing avoidance 
action proceedings, etc.” 

38  
Accordingly, the discussion paper issued by MCA in 2023 proposes to     
make  suitable modifications to Section 224 to effectively  operationalise the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund. The same has been addressed in the 
proposed Amendment Bill introduced in the Parliament and referred to the 
select Committee.”                                           
 
(G) Capacity Building  
1.72  The Insolvency Professionals (IPs) are central to the insolvency resolution 
process. They are responsible for managing the affairs of the Corporate Debtors, 
ensuring compliance with the IBC/Code, and acting impartially in the best interests of 
all stakeholders. The overall regulatory framework of IPs is designed to ensure entry 
of qualified professionals through a competitive entry level examination, undergoing 
pre-registration educational course and continuous professional education, specialised 
trainings, peer review mechanism and independent performance review particularly for 
high stake cases. 
  As the principal regulator of the insolvency profession, the IBBI is entrusted to 
promote the development of, and regulate, the working and practices of, IPs, in 
furtherance of the objectives of the Code. The IPAs, as the front-line regulators are 
mandated to lay down standards of professional conduct for its members, develop the 
profession of IPs and promote their continuous professional development. To maintain 
the integrity of the insolvency process, only compliant IPs can obtain or renew their 
Authorisation for Assignment (AFA) with the IPA in which they are enrolled and thus 
become eligible to take up insolvency assignments under the Code.  
 The IBBI has also institutionalized the concept of IPEs whereby several IPs can 
come together and pool their resources and capabilities to form an IPE so as to 
handle insolvency proceedings involving high stakes or where complex issues or law 
or practical difficulties are involved. An IPE can take the form of a company, a limited 
liability partnership or a registered partnership firm having minimum net worth of Rs. 1 
crore.                                                                                           
1.73 The details of IPA-wise, AFAs (Authorisation for Assignment) held by registered 
IPs as on 31st March 2025 are given below: 
  
City / Region Registered IPs IPs having AFA 
IIIP 
ICAI 
ICSI 
IIP 
IPA of 
ICMAI 
Total IIIP 
ICAI 
ICSI 
IIP 
IPA of 
ICMAI 
Total 
New Delhi 506 294 97 897 242 145 48 435 
Rest of Northern 
Region 
516 219 88 823 
228 109 34 371 
Mumbai 444 157 42 643 211 81 18 310 
Rest of Western 
Region 
380 141 54 575 
203 73 22 298 
Chennai 157 90 24 271 69 39 13 121 
Rest of Southern 
Region 
453 237 95 785 
189 111 52 352 
Kolkata  243 43 28 314 134 18 17 169 

39  
Rest of Eastern 
Region 
80 35 12 127 
35 20 7 62 
Total (Individual) 2779 1216 440 4435 1311 596 211 2118 
Total (IPE as IP) 51 16 25 92 49 15 16 80 
Grand Total 2830 1232 465 4527 1360 611 227 2198 
 
1.74 The details as provided by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs/ Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Board of India of IPEs recognised with the Board as on 31st March 2025 
are presented in Table below: 
 
Quarter No. of IPEs 
Recognised Derecognised At the end of the 
Period 
2016 - 17 (Jan – Mar) 3 0 3 
2017 – 18 73 1 75 
2018 – 19 13 40* 48 
2019 – 20 23 2 69 
2020 – 21 14 0 83 
2021 – 22 10 2 91 
2022 – 23 17 1 107 
2023 – 24  15 0 122 
2024 – 25 7 2 127 
Total 175 48 127 
Note (*) There were higher derecognitions due to introduction of additional eligibility 
requirements like sole objective, minimum net worth, etc.  
 The tables above indicates that as on 31st March 2025, there were 4,527 IPs 
registered with the Board, out of which 2,198 (about 49%) are holding AFA issued by 
their IPAs. The number of IPEs as on 31st March 2025 stood at 127. Out of these, 92 
IPEs (about 72%) are also registered with the Board to carry on the activities of an IP 
and 80 of these IPEs (about 87%) are holding AFA to undertake assignments as an 
IP. Further, till 31st March 2025, IPEs registered as IPs have undertaken 161 
assignments under the Code in various capacities as IRP, RP, Liquidator involving 
admitted claims to the tune of Rs. 1,19,132 crore. 
1.75 When the Committee asked the Ministry to critically examine the current state 
of domain and sector-specific expertise within India's IBC network to identify major 
challenges posed by a potential knowledge deficit in effectively handling complex 

40  
corporate insolvencies, outlining the proactive steps and capacity building initiatives 
being undertaken by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to address these gaps, the 
Ministry in their written submission provided the following details:-   
“Continuous skill upgradation of the professionals is undertaken by the IBBI, 
being the regulator of Insolvency Professionals. The IBBI actively engages 
with IPs through diverse formats such as advocacy programmes, 
workshops, webinars, and specialised training sessions, focusing on both 
foundational and advanced aspects of insolvency practice.  Efforts to 
augment IPs' expertise include workshops targeting niche areas of 
insolvency, alongside encouraging IPAs to offer similar educational 
opportunities. Through Indian and international experts, Train-the-Trainers 
programmes, aimed at expanding the pool of knowledgeable professionals 
within the insolvency ecosystem, are being organised regularly.   
IBBI and IPAs, independently as well in consultation have been issuing 
communications facilitating conduct of process by an IP, issuing best 
practices on recurrent complex issues and releasing publications for 
guidance of the IPs and other stakeholders. The IPAs are also including 
case studies of large cases in their pre-registration education course and 
CPE programmes.  
In FY 2024-25, the IBBI conducted 22 Workshops, 3 Webinars, 2 
roundtables, 1 Insolvency Professionals' Conclave and 1 train-the-trainers 
program for capacity building of IPs.  
The IPAs also undertake several capacity building measures to augment the 
capacity of IPs. These include pre-registration educational courses (PREC) 
for prospective IPs, CPE programmes, trainings, workshops, roundtables, 
and webinars. IPAs also conduct and monitor CPE credits of their member 
IPs. In FY 2024-25, the IPAs have conducted 3 pre-registration courses, 
250 CPE programmes, 92 training workshops, and 161 other events. 
Thus, the framework of IBBI, as laid down above, has been evolving 
regularly for meeting post-registration professional development needs of 
IPs in a comprehensive manner, enabling them to meet the emerging 
challenges of insolvency resolution, particularly in large and complex 
cases.”                                                                         
 
1.76    On being enquired, if there is lack of specialization in any specific required field 
in any way which is posing hindrance in handling big cases, the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs further clarified in their replies:- 
 “IPs are qualified and experienced professionals who are engaged in the 
nuances of insolvency law and resolution mechanics continuously. The IBBI 
has also institutionalized the concept of Insolvency Professional Entities 
(IPEs) whereby several IPs can come together and pool their resources and 
capabilities to form an IPE so as to handle insolvency proceedings involving 
high stakes or where complex issues or law or practical difficulties are 
involved.” 

41  
                                                                        
1.77   Addressing Committee’s concern regarding the unbridled power at the hands of 
IPs/RPs and possible misuse thereof, the Chairperson, IBBI deposed the following 
before the Committee:- 
 
“Sir, the Standing Committee in its 10thReport had also directed us to look 
at RPs because there is a perception that RPs have become very powerful, 
and the system of RPs needs to be improved. We have taken note of that 
suggestion, and we are trying our best to improve the insolvency profession. 
All IPs have to pass an exam before becoming an IP, and our pass 
percentage is about 17 per cent.  
Sir, we have also registered firms as IPs because individuals cannot work. I 
mean, it is difficult for an individual to do the work of a large company. So, 
we have registered 92 firms to act as IPs. We conduct workshops and 
training programs. We have prescribed that all IPs have to do continuing 
professional education. They have to do 60 hours in three years. So, we are 
trying to improve the quality of the insolvency professionals.  
We are adapting a carrot and stick policy. So, we also have a very strong 
disciplinary mechanism. As you can see, last year we did about 73 
disciplinary orders against RPs, and 45 RPs were suspended. Monetary 
penalty was imposed on 13, and registration of three RPs was cancelled. 
So, we have a carrot and stick policy. If we find that an RP is doing wrong, 
we start disciplinary proceeding. This is a quasi-judicial proceeding. We try 
to be very strict against the RPs.“      
      
          
1.78   A Resolution Professional under IBC sometimes face potential conflicts of 
interest due to their various acquaintances with stakeholders, including creditors, 
related parties, and even the corporate debtor itself. The IBBI emphasizes the 
importance of avoiding conflicts of interest and maintaining objectivity in professional 
dealings. When the Committee sought to understand the import and extent of the 
interest, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs made the following oral 
submission before the Committee:-  
 
“RP’s conflict of interest.  A lot of issues have come as to what should be 
the conflict of interest?  Which RP should not be appointed and in what 
case?  Here again, I believe that there is a very transparent system of a 
conflict of interest which is being used for the arbitration where right now 
IBBI simply says that there should be no conflict of interest.  But we have 
not specified what is the permissible one.  Where you have to disclose?  
This kind of a regimen which is there for arbitration which has been 
accepted across for arbitration is what we are proposing to fine tune and 
get into the IBC system.”                                                                                
          
 

42  
1.79  In this connection the Committee specifically asked about the Registration and 
Authorization of Resolution Professionals and ways to check and control over misuse of 
their office, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has stated the following in their written reply:- 
“Registration under the IBC is the basic process by which an individual becomes 
eligible to act as a Resolution Professional (RP) after meeting prescribed 
qualifications. Authorization, however, is a higher level of approval granted by 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) , allowing the RP to 
undertake specific cases, usually allotted by the Adjudicating Authority. For 
being granted an authorization, it is envisaged that these RP’s attend the 
trainings and pay the requisite fees and remain informed about current 
developments and best practices in the IBC ecosystem.  
The IBBI has laid down Code of Conduct for the RP’s under Regulation 7(2)(h) 
of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Professionals) 
Regulations, 2016. Strict enforcement and monitoring by the IBBI, specifically 
Disciplinary Committee keeps a check on such misuse. Moreover, to prevent 
insider information leaks by Resolution Professionals (RPs) a secure digital 
platform is in the early stages of development by the MCA with the aim to ensure 
balance of transparency and security of information.” 
1.80   In this connection the Committee sought to know about the measures in place to 
monitor the functioning of IPs and disciplinary action taken against errant IPs, the IBB 
submitted their written replies as below:-  
“The IBBI is the regulatory body responsible for overseeing the insolvency 
profession in India. It has established a comprehensive regulatory 
framework to ensure the integrity and professionalism of IPs. Pursuant to 
the authority granted by Section 196 of the Code, the IBBI has established a 
robust oversight mechanism on IPs under the IBC. IBBI has established a 
comprehensive regulatory framework, including a detailed Code of Conduct, 
to govern the behaviour and practices of IPs. The key regulations framed for 
this oversight mechanisms are outlined below: 
 
(i)   IBBI (Insolvency Professionals) Regulations, 2016 
(ii)  IBBI (Grievance and Complaint Handling Procedure) Regulations, 2017 
(iii) IBBI (Inspection and Investigation) Regulations, 2017 
To ensure timely reporting and analysis of the performance, the IPs are 
mandated to submit progress of the processes to the Board. For CIRPs and 
liquidation processes, Forms are required to be submitted to the Board after 
completion of a certain stage of the process. The Board closely monitors 
these filings on parameters like timeliness, completeness, etc. Based on the 
analysis of these Forms, cases are identified for further administrative or 
regulatory intervention by the Board in areas like delays in filing avoidance 
applications, delays in approval of resolution plans, etc. 
Complaints and grievances received by the Board provide important inputs 
for proceeding with investigation and investigation which in turn provide 
feedback loop for effective oversight of Ips. The Board has put in place IBBI 
(Grievance and Complaint Handling Procedure) Regulations, 2017 for 

43  
effective functioning of this mechanism. 
Inspection and Monitoring: The IBBI also conducts investigations and 
inspections of IPs to ensure adherence to regulations, which aids in 
identifying any lapses or issues in their conduct during the insolvency 
process. On noticing any prima facie contravention as a result of the 
investigation and inspection, disciplinary proceedings are initiated against 
the IP by issuing Show Cause Notice (SCN) to such IP. When an SCN is 
issued, the IP is prevented from undertaking any new assignments until the 
SCN is disposed of by the Disciplinary Committee as per provisions of the 
Code. This suspension serves as an interim measure to uphold the integrity 
of the insolvency process and ensures that only qualified, compliant 
professionals are actively engaged in cases. 
 
Role of IPAs: Under the Code, IPAs play the role of frontline regulator and 
are responsible for registering and regulating the conduct of their members 
(IPs), ensuring they adhere to the ethical and professional standards set by 
the IBBI. 
Disciplinary Committees: As prescribed under Section 220 of the Code, the 
IBBI has the authority to set up disciplinary committees to consider the 
report of investigating authority formed to investigate the complaints against 
Ips. The disciplinary committee assesses the allegations and if an IP is 
found to have contravened the provisions of the Code or Regulations made 
thereunder, it can impose penalties, which may include suspension or 
cancellation of the IP’s registration, along with other disciplinary actions. The 
disciplinary committee operates as a quasi-judicial body, following a due 
process to uphold natural justice principles. The orders of the disciplinary 
committee can be challenged before the higher judicial forums.” 
 
Grievance, complaints handling and disciplinary actions 
  
    The IBBI has set up a system for receiving, processing, and 
investigating the complaints and grievances received against Ips. IBBI 
received a total of 8670 complaints and grievances in 1590 assignments 
against the conduct of 935 IPs. Out of these, 8431 (97.25%) complaints and 
grievances have been dealt with as on 31st March 2025. 
 
With regards to the disciplinary action as on 31st March 2025, the Board has 
issued 159 advisories and 303 show cause notices. Out the 303-show 
cause notice issued, 275 SCNs have been disposed of by the board as on 
31st March 2025, resulting in imposition of penalties in 158 cases, as 
follows: 
Cancellation of registration of IPs - 13  
Suspension of registration of IPs -  97 
Monetary penalties -  48 
 
During the last three years, 194 SCNs have been disposed of by the Board, 

44  
resulting in imposition of penalties in 116 cases, as per the following details: 
 
Cancellation of registration of IPs 08
Suspension of registration of IPs 73
Monetary penalties      3 ”
                                                                                                                    
 
1.81   The year-wise details of the disciplinary action taken against erring IPs as 
submitted by IBBI is given below:-  
 
  2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
Disciplinary 
Committee 
Orders Issued 
70 52 73 
Advisory & others 28 17 12 
Suspension 25 22 45 
Monetary Penalty  15 10 13 
Cancellation 2 3 3 
 
 
1.82   Asked about the internal action banks initiate against IPs those who fell short in 
exercising due diligence, the SBI in their written reply stated as below:- 
 
“Bank has SOP on “Empanelment & Monitoring of IPs” and have separate 
SOP on “Engagement of IP” which takes care of the due diligence before 
financing IPs.  
Timely review process at half yearly intervals is done based on reviews 
received from operating units and IBBI order.  
RP is accountable to the Adjudicating Authority (AA) and the CoC. CoC 
supervises the RP's functioning and can replace them if dissatisfied with 
their conduct. RP's actions are also subject to scrutiny by the AA.  
IBBI (Insolvency Professionals) Regulations, 2016 outlines the framework 
for the registration, conduct, and oversight of Insolvency Professionals (IPs) 
in India.  
Besides, there is IBBI Grievance and Complaint Handling Procedure, 
Regulations, 2017. Under these regulations disciplinary proceedings against 
IP can be initiated for misconduct.” 
 
 
1.83   In this regard, when asked about the action required to be taken against 
Resolution Professionals if they do not work in accordance with the law and  remedial 
measures needed for fastening the accountability, the SBI furnished following written 
response :- 
“In the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP), Resolution 
Professional (RP) and the Committee of Creditors (CoC) have distinct roles, 
powers, and responsibilities, with accountability mechanisms in place to 

45  
ensure fair and efficient proceedings. The CoC, as the primary decision-
making body, supervises RP's actions and can replace them if necessary. 
RP, as a facilitator, manages the day-to-day affairs of the Corporate Debtor 
(CD) and assists the CoC in making informed decisions.  
 
Resolution Professional (RP):  
 
Competence: The RP, an Insolvency Professional (IP), is entrusted with 
various statutory and legal duties under IBC, 2016. They manage the CD's 
affairs, exercise the powers of its Board of Directors, and comply with 
applicable laws etc. Accountability: RP is accountable to the Adjudicating 
Authority (AA) and the CoC. CoC supervises the RP's functioning and can 
replace them if dissatisfied with their conduct. RP's actions are also subject 
to scrutiny by the AA.  
IBBI (Insolvency Professionals) Regulations, 2016 also outlines the 
framework for the registration, conduct, and oversight of Insolvency 
Professionals (IPs) in India. Besides, there is IBBI Grievance and Complaint 
Handling Procedure, Regulations, 2017. Under these regulations 
disciplinary proceedings against IP can be initiated for misconduct. The 
IBBI, whenever its findings prove any mala-fide or infringement by RP, it 
suspends the AFA of that particular RP and thus debars him/her to take up 
any further assignment  
 
Committee of Creditors (CoC): 
  
The CoC, primarily composed of financial creditors, is the decision-making 
body during CIRP, and approve or reject the agenda item put forth by RP for 
voting. CoC is governed by the guidelines of conduct, brought out by IBBI. 
The CoC members work on the principles of collective wisdom in the 
interest of the resolution of CD. Moreover, in case of CoC members from 
financial sector like Banks, they are also governed by the respective service 
condition and all the decisions are taken and/or ratified through a laid down 
policy for IBC.” 
 
1.84   SBI has further stated as under:- 
“IBBI has structured system of attending to complaints against RPs 
contravening any act/regulations and it initiates disciplinary action 
depending on the gravity of contravention. However, penalty could be more 
severe and there should be cooling period after which only they can take 
any new assignments.  
While the Insolvency Professional bodies are taking steps to train RP, 
individual IPs, at times, fail to meet the skills required to run a full-fledged 
company during the CIRP.  
To address the issues, IBBI has suggested appointment of IPEs who have 
the AFAs to bring in teams having required skills.” 
 
1.85   As regards the process for removing RP under the Code, the Committee was 
informed that under the Code, an RP, appointed to manage the corporate insolvency 
resolution process, can be replaced by the CoC. The CoC can decide to replace the 

46  
RP by a vote of 66% of their voting shares. The CoC then proposes the replacement to 
the AA.    
1.86 On being asked whether it is necessary that the persons who appoint the RP 
should be empowered with the decision to remove him and replace him or should it be 
as it is; and what impact is it having on resolution mechanism, the Chairman, IBBI has 
clarified the following during his oral submission before the Committee:- 
“About the RPs being appointed and changed, RPs are appointed by the court 
actually. The RPs are appointed by NCLT. What actually happens is when an 
application is made, the creditor recommends an RP. That is what the law 
allows him to do. The creditor recommends an RP and based on the 
recommendation of the creditor, the adjudicating authority or the NCLT 
approves the RPs.Now if the CoC finds the conduct of the RP unsatisfactory 
and if the CoC wants to change the RP, the CoC again passes a resolution by 
51 per cent majority and then sends that new name to the NCLT. The NCLT, 
who is the appointing authority, actually changes the RP. The RP is appointed 
by the NCLT and the RP is changed by the NCLT on the recommendation of the 
creditor or the CoC or the Committee. This is about appointment of RP. It takes 
time because you need a meeting of the CoC. The meeting of the CoC 
recommends a change, then it goes to NCLT, and then the NCLT approves it. 
So, it takes some time”. 
 
1.87 In this regard, SBI in their post-evidence reply has stated as under:- 
“IBBI has a system of reviewing performance of each RP and to decide on 
continuation or otherwise of AFAs. However, there is no system as yet, for 
recording data on change of RPs in a given IBC case. 
Banks are guided by such continuation or otherwise of AFA by IBBI. IBBI, being 
regulator of Resolution Professionals, entertains complaints and has structured 
system of disciplinary proceedings wherein contraventions are examined and 
penalties, as and when required, are imposed.  
Resolution professionals are changed based on conduct of the RPs engaged 
for the purpose”.   
 
1.88   On being queried about the powers of CoC regarding Resolution Professionals 
(RPs) and the steps taken to empower CoC, the IBBI in their written submissions 
stated the following:-  
“ Appointment and Replacement Powers: 
 Recommendation of IRP: Financial creditors and operational creditors have 
the statutory right to recommend the name of Interim Resolution 
Professional (IRP) to the NCLT at the time of filing the application. While the 
NCLT formally approves the appointment, this is based on 
recommendations from creditors. 
    Confirmation/Replacement of RP: The CoC has the power to recommend 

47  
replacement of the RP or confirmation of the IRP as the RP during the 
CIRP. 
 
     Operational Control Powers: 
    Section 28 Powers: Under Section 28 of the Code, the RP cannot take any 
significant actions without prior approval of the CoC, including decisions 
related to legal proceedings, disposal of assets, raising of interim finance, 
and other material decisions affecting the corporate debtor. 
 
The CoC thus has comprehensive powers spanning appointment and 
operational oversight regarding RPs. 
 
Initiatives by IBBI to empower CoC and foster timely decision making: 
    Guidelines for Conduct of CoC: IBBI has issued guidelines dated 6th August, 
2024 to the CoC to foster more effective, transparent, coordinated and time 
bound decision making by the CoC members. The guidelines encompass 
provisions covering critical areas including objectivity and integrity, 
professional competence, independence and impartiality, cooperation, 
supervision and timeliness, confidentiality and active participation in the 
resolution process. 
    Monthly meetings of the committee of creditors (CoC): Under the amended 
dispensation, the RP is mandated to convene a CoC meeting at least once in 
every thirty days, with a provision to extend the interval between meetings to 
a maximum of one meeting per quarter, if CoC so decides. 
    Approval of insolvency resolution process costs: With a view to enhance the 
oversight of the CoC over going concern costs, the amendment provides 
that the RP to seek approval from the CoC for all costs including going 
concern costs related to the insolvency resolution process. 
    Disclosure of valuation methodology: With an aim to increase transparency 
and reduce disputes over valuation related issues, the amendment provides 
for explaining the valuation methodology to the members of the CoC before 
the computation of estimates. 
    Flexibility in inviting resolution plans in real-estate cases: With a view that 
each project in a real estate case may need different treatment in terms of 
resolution, the amendment clarifies that after due examination, the CoC may 
direct the RP to invite separate plan for each project. 
    Monitoring committee for implementation of resolution plan: The 
amendment enables the CoC to decide for constitution of a monitoring 
committee for overseeing the implementation of the resolution plan. 
    Handing Over Possession: The RP, after obtaining approval of the CoC and 
upon fulfilment of all obligations by the homebuyer, can now hand over 
possession of plots, apartments, or buildings to the homebuyers while the 
resolution process is still ongoing. Thus, the distressed homebuyers would 
not have to wait for long periods in order to get possession of their 
properties. 
    Participation of Competent Authority in Real Estate Projects: CoC can now 
invite relevant land authorities such as NOIDA, HUDA etc. to their meetings 
for inputs and perspectives on regulatory and land development related 
matters. Participation of land authorities would not only enhance the viability 
and feasibility of resolution plans but also build confidence among 

48  
homebuyers and other stakeholders in the resolution process. 
Institutional Coordination: DFS (Department of Financial Services, Ministry 
of Finance) regularly reviews large ongoing cases under IBC, with banks. 
IBBI participates in such review meetings and facilitates expediting the 
processes. In addition, IBBI also organises training sessions for CoC 
members and senior bank officials. 
These measures aim to foster informed decision-making while maintaining 
commercial wisdom of the CoC.”       
1.89  Regarding the major issues with the Committee of Creditors, Bank of Baroda 
has submitted the written response:-     
“The Committee of Creditors (CoC) plays a crucial role in the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP). Key problems include delayed 
decision-making, potential manipulation of claims, and challenges in 
ensuring fair treatment of all creditors, particularly dissenting 
ones. Furthermore, issues like information asymmetry for interim finance 
providers. Specific issues and challenges related to the CoC in CIRP: 
(i) CoC can face delays in decision-making, sometimes due to a lack of 
proper delegation of authority. 
(ii) Financial creditors (FCs) may inflate their claims during the CIRP, 
potentially increasing their voting share and influencing the CoC's 
decisions.  
(iii)  Unequal Treatment of financial creditors i.e., voting share based on 
the claims and no differentiation between secured/ unsecured and first 
charge holders and second charge holders. Some times unsecured/ 
second charge holders because of their voting share dominating in the 
CoC, affecting the interest of secured/first charge holders. 
 (iv) Lack of understanding between the members of CoC leads to filing of     
Interlocutory applications and appeals, which can significantly delay the 
CIRP.”                                                                                      
   
(H)  Emerging Issues and Challenges 
 (a)  Timelines 
1.90    The IBC endeavours to close the various processes at the earliest. The CIRPs, 
which have yielded resolution plans by the end of March, 2025 took on average 597 
days (after excluding the time excluded by the AA) for conclusion of process, while 
incurring an average cost of 1.22% of liquidation value and 0.77% of resolution value. 
Similarly, the 2758 CIRPs, which ended up in orders for liquidation, took on average 
508 days for conclusion. Further, 1374 liquidation processes, which have closed by 
submission of final reports took on average 646 days for closure. Similarly, 1704 
voluntary liquidation processes, which have closed by submission of final reports, took 
on average 401 days for closure.  

49  
1.91   As regards the key challenges faced in implementation of IBC, the Deputy 
Governor, RBI during the Sitting, informed the Committee as stated below:- 
“Now looking at the key challenges in the IBC. Firstly, the major issue is the 
delay in the resolution of the processes. Out of the 935 cases resolved as of 
March 2024, the average time taken for resolution stood at 674 days. 
However, during 2024 to March 2025, 259 cases were resolved, where the 
average time taken had increased to 853 days. The Code envisages a time 
limit of 180 days, extendable by another 90 days and an additional 60 days 
specifically for completing the legal processes, that is, a total of 330 days. 
Though the actual time being taken for resolution is notably higher, which 
leads to significant value erosion. 
 The key challenges include appeals by the various stakeholders, lack of 
a formal Code of Conduct for the Committee of Creditors, and infrastructural 
limitations. The other important issues contributing to the delay in initiating 
the process of invoking IBC provisions include coordination among the 
lenders, the need for improvement in the performance of the Committee of 
Creditors, proper selection of the resolution professionals, and use of 
technology for faster resolution of the issues……” 
                                                                                                               
1.92    The RBI, in their post-evidence written replies, further stated as follows:- 
“Delays in liquidation process under the IBC often could stem from a 
combination of procedural, legal, and/ or market-related reasons. Procedural 
irregularities or disputes during the corporate insolvency resolution process can 
lead to approved plans being withdrawn or re-examined, forcing liquidators to 
revisit valuation, verification of claims, and stakeholder consultations, which 
significantly extends timelines. In our view, IBBI may be better placed to offer 
comments on this issue”.                   
 
1.93  In this regard, when the Committee asked for the steps taken to contain the 
delays in legal processes, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written reply 
added following details:- 
“MCA is proactively working to reduce the delay by increasing the number of 
benches of NCLT and NCLAT, a proposal in this regard has already been 
sent for consideration and the same is being examined. The contemplated 
notification of Adjudicating Authority Rules also aim at speedier redressal.  
All the vacancies at the NCLAT and NCLT has been filled up except the 
ones that may be arising out of recent retirements etc which too are being 
filled up proactively. While specific data on the total value of pending cases 
is not easily ascertainable as the value can only be ascertained on the 
receipt of claims and adjudication of the same by the Resolution 
professional.”  
                                                                                                            
1.94   Considering the alarming trend of increased timelines for filing applications, 
admitting cases, and completing resolutions or liquidations, the Committee sought to 

50  
know the strategy of RBI  to address underlying causes of these delays, such as legal 
challenges, inter-creditor disputes, non-cooperation from promoters, and incomplete 
financial information etc., the RBI stated as under:- 
“Section 7 of IBC deals with the process for admission of CIRP application 
when the same is initiated by a Financial Creditor. Presently, under Section 
7(4), which prescribes timeline of 14 days for the adjudication authority (AA) 
to admit the application, there is a proviso which states that “….if the 
Adjudicating Authority has not ascertained the existence of default and 
passed an order under sub-section (5) within such time, it shall record its 
reasons in writing for the same”. Further, section 7 (5)(a) and 7 (5)(b) had 
the words “…may, by order, admit/ reject such application”. Amendment of 
Proviso to Section 7(4) and amendment of ‘may’ to ‘shall’ in Section7(5)(a) 
and Section 7(5)(b) will help in reducing delays at admission stage. This has 
already been flagged by RBI in multiple forums. On the aspect of 
Intercreditor disputes, a statutorily enforceable code of conduct would help in 
addressing inter-creditor disputes arising during the CIRP process. Having 
said that, it may be appreciated that each creditor’s assessment may lead to 
a different conclusion of the same problem statement and thus consensus is 
not something which is envisaged in all cases. The same has also been 
appreciated in the Code which only requires decision by majority of creditors 
and not all creditors. In any case, delinking distribution from resolution would 
ensure that delays on account of inter-creditor disputes pertaining to 
distribution of resolution proceeds, where consensus by majority has been 
reached on the resolution value, do not result in stalling the resolution 
process.”                 
                                                                                                              
               
1.95   When asked about the reasons, the NCLT is not able to provide judgment 
within allotted timeline of 90 days, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written 
reply stated as under:- 
“Despite the 180 days resolution timeline under Section 12 of the IBC 
(permitted to go upto 330 days under certain circumstances), courts often 
end up taking more time due to factors like frequent adjournments, 
complex litigation, and interim applications by stakeholders. The judicial 
authorities are bound to follow principles of natural justice for each 
stakeholder, which in certain complex cases leads to several applications, 
counter replies and consequent increase in time taken for judicial 
adjudication.”                                                                                            
           
          
1.96 The liquidation process yields an average recovery of 3-4% of admitted claims 
for creditors. Further, the extension of time period in passing liquidation order by the 
adjudicating authority leads to rapid deterioration in value of asset of CDs.  On being 
queried about the efforts taken to ensure minimising the delays in passing of 

51  
liquidation orders, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written submissions 
apprised as under:- 
 “Around 78% of the CIRPs ending in liquidation (2107 out of 2704 for 
which data are available) were earlier with BIFR and/or defunct. The 
economic value in most of these CDs had almost completely eroded 
even before they were admitted into CIRP. These CDs had assets, on 
average, valued at 6% of the outstanding debt amount.  
 
     To reduce delays during the transition from the CIRP to liquidation, the 
IBBI has clarified through CIRP Regulation that meetings of the CoC 
may be convened until a resolution plan is approved or a liquidation 
order is passed. This enables the CoC to receive regular updates on the 
status of the liquidation application and to issue instructions to the RP for 
expediting the matter before the Adjudicating Authority (AA), thereby 
ensuring continuity and avoiding procedural delays. Additionally, Form 
H, which accompanies the RP’s application for approval of the resolution 
plan or initiation of liquidation, has been amended to streamline and 
standardise the required disclosures. This facilitates faster decision-
making by the AA by providing consolidated and structured information.  
 
     Presently, there are no timelines for the Adjudicating Authority to pass a 
liquidation order. Further, to address systemic delays, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs (MCA) in its discussion paper had proposed 
considering a statutory timeline of 30 days for the AA to pass a 
liquidation order from the date of filing under section 33 of the Code. 
 
 The same has been addressed in the proposed Amendment Bill 
introduced in the Parliament and referred to the select Committee 
 Also, the proposed Integrated Technology Platform under the IBC will 
assist the Adjudicating Authority in early disposal of orders, thereby 
enforcing the time-bound nature of the IBC and preserving the value of 
the corporate debtor's assets. It is aimed at improving the overall 
efficiency and oversight of the insolvency framework.” 
                                                                                   
1.97  As regards the action being taken on the delay caused due to frivolous Interim 
Applications filed by the corporate debtor and other stakeholder, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs submitted following written information:- 
“Section 65 of the Code provides strong deterrent measures against 
fraudulent or malicious initiation of CIRP proceedings. This provision 
empowers the AA to impose substantial penalties ranging from one lakh 
rupees to one crore rupees on any person who initiates CIRP, liquidation 
proceedings, or pre-packaged insolvency resolution process fraudulently or 
with malicious intent for purposes other than genuine insolvency resolution. 

52  
Further, the issue is also under consideration of the MCA. In this regard, the 
MCA Discussion Paper 2023 stated as follows –  
“5.2. Further, it is observed that several proceedings are maliciously 
instituted before the AA to delay the conduct of processes. Proceedings are 
also initiated with no reasonable prospect of success or based on 
insufficient evidence submitted without any purpose to determine the actual 
issue. These proceedings take up a substantial time of the AA, which can 
be utilised for other matters, resulting in draining of resources for the 
concerned parties and causing delays in the conduct of insolvency 
resolution processes under the Code. Therefore, it is being considered that 
the Code should have a mechanism to discourage the initiation of such 
proceedings. Section 65 of the Code provides a penalty against fraudulent 
or malicious initiation of admission proceedings. However, no penalty is 
imposed on other proceedings filed before the AA. Hence, it is being 
considered that the AA should also be empowered to impose a penalty 
where it believes that such a person has filed frivolous or vexatious 
applications.  
5.3. Additionally, it is felt appropriate that considering the collective nature of 
 proceedings undertaken under the Code and the interdependence of 
interests of different stakeholders, the quantum of the penalty that can be 
imposed for the contraventions mentioned above should be linked to the 
loss caused to any person or the unlawful gain made by the concerned 
person responsible for such contravention. Therefore, the minimum penalty 
that the AA may impose for the contraventions mentioned above should not 
be less than one lakh rupees per day, which may extend to three times the 
loss caused or unlawful gain, whichever is higher. Since the precise type of 
contravention is not identified under the kind of wrongs discussed above, 
linking the penalty to the loss caused or unlawful gain made will ensure that 
the consequence of the contravention determines the extent of penalty that 
the AA may impose. Pursuant to this, the AA may determine an appropriate 
penalty within the given range based on the gravity of the contravention.”  
The same has been addressed in the proposed Amendment Bill introduced 
in the Parliament and referred to the select Committee”   
                    
(b)     Low realisation  
1.98    The realisation to the creditors is about 32.8% as against admitted claims and 
about 170.1% against the liquidation value. Delays in the CIRP can significantly 
decrease the realisation value under a resolution plan. These delays lead to the 
deterioration of assets, operational inefficiencies, market volatility, creditor fatigue, 
increased costs, interest accrual, investor aversion, damaged relationships, reputation 
loss, and potential legal and regulatory changes. Such factors collectively erode the 

53  
value of distressed companies, affecting creditors and stakeholders by reducing the 
funds available for distribution. Delays lead to deterioration in value of assets on the 
one hand and inflate the claims on the other hand because of accumulated interest 
and penal interest. Chances of stripping of assets also increase with delays. 
Therefore, the loss becomes steeper as the delays increase. Fast resolution is crucial 
to preserve asset value and maximisation of returns. The Figure below depicts that the 
realisation in the process is inversely proportional to the time taken in closure of the 
process. 
 
                
1.99   In this regard, the Chairman, IBBI during the course of evidence made 
following oral submissions:- 
 
“ There are two problems in IBC. One is delays, and the other is low 
recoveries. These are the two problems which are highlighted in IBC. Both 
of them are directly correlated. What we have seen is, if there is more delay, 
then the recovery comes less. We have done a study of all the resolutions 
that have happened so far. We find that if the resolution happens in less 
than 400 days, then we get a recovery of about 39 per cent. As the time 
increases, the recovery reduces. If we could somehow take control of the 
delays or reduce delays, recoveries will automatically improve. That is what 
our studies show. 
We have also done a study of about 1,093 cases. If you see, the claims of 
creditors were more than Rs.10 lakh crore. But when a company comes into 
IBC, a valuation is done. The valuation of these 1,000 cases was about 
Rs.3,48,000 crore. What did IBC give in return to the creditors? It is 
Rs.3,25,000 crore. 
The point that I want to make here is that the loss in value happens before a 
company comes into IBC. That means, the banks are delaying. Suppose, an 
NPA happens, by the time they come to IBC after one year or two years, 
there is an erosion in value during that period. Then, once the case is put up 

54  
before NCLT, it again takes a year to admit it. So, these two things, one, 
delay by banks in sending the case to IBC, and, two, delay in admission by 
NCLT, have led to the greatest loss in value. If we could somehow take care 
of these two things, if banks come to, or the creditors come to IBC earlier, 
and if we could somehow reduce the time taken in admission, the realization 
will automatically increase. This is what our study shows.” 
                                                                                   
1.100 The Committee further asked about the details of recoveries and haircuts 
experienced by the banks under IBC along with methods to decrease the excessive 
haircuts in IBC, the IBBI furnished following written response:- 
“ 1194 CIRPs have yielded Resolution plans as on 31st March, 2025. In 
the cases the creditors have realised Rs. 3.89 lakh crore under the 
resolution plans. In these cases, the realisation by creditors as against 
their admitted claims, fair value and liquidation value is 32.8%, 93.4% and 
170.1%, respectively. 
Additionally, this recovery figure excludes CIRP costs and potential 
future recoveries, such as equity, proceeds from corporate and personal 
guarantees, funds infused by resolution applicants, including capital 
expenditures, and recoveries from avoidance applications. Recoveries are 
a reflection of the underlying asset quality and the commercial viability of 
the distressed enterprise. The recoveries can be improved through: - 
 
(i) early admission of cases before value erosion; 
(ii) enhanced information availability and valuation discipline; and 
(iii) promotion of competitive bidding and wider participation in resolution.”
           
 
1.101   When asked whether the RBI has plans to review massive haircuts happening 
in high asset value, the written submission from RBI apprised as under:- 
“The recovery rates as a share of admitted claims may present a dismal 
picture of 30 to 33%. However, that may not be a fair measure of the 
efficiency of the process as the recovery rate as a share of fair value at the 
time of admission and recovery rate as a share of liquidation value would be a 
better estimate of the effectiveness of the process. The recovery rates for the 
recent three financial years are given below for comparison:- 
 
 Realisation 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
 Through resolution plans 
 As % of fair value 85% 95% 157%value 128% 136% 230% 
 Through Liquidations 
 As % of liquidation 
  value 90.24% 90.85% 86.97% 
Having stated the above, the reduction in recovery as a share of admitted 
claims may be partly attributed to the significant delay between a default and 
the completion of the insolvency process. The RBI guidelines on resolution 

55  
of stressed assets provide for a time-bound initiation of the resolution 
process, which may include filing of CIRP by the lenders under IBC. Even 
post-filing, significant delays have been observed in admission and 
completion of the resolution process under IBC. As of March 2024, for CIRPs 
yielding resolution, the average time taken between insolvency 
commencement and approval of resolution plan was 674 days. This timeline 
includes around 112 days, wherein there were delays caused due to courts 
granting a stay on the proceeding, orders reserved by the AA/courts, non-
appointment of RP etc.” 
 
          
1.102 Till March, 2025, 1374 CDs have been completely liquidated with submission of 
final report. Out of the 1374 CDs, 878 have been closed. In the closed liquidations, the 
creditors have realised Rs. 9330 crore which is nearly 90% realisation as against the 
liquidation value. The details regarding the filing and disposal of the cases is 
mentioned below:-                                                       
Particulars Number Impact 
Total Cases (1) 51,474  
Pre-admission case 
disposal* (2) 
30,745 ₹ 13,93,902 crore of underlying default 
addressed through behavioral change in creditor-
debtor relation 
Post-admission case 
disposal# (3) 
4,998 ₹ 5,08,873 crore realizable value of all the 
settled 
cases 
Resolution# 1,194 -Realisable Value- ₹ 3,88,904 crore 
-170.1 % of liquidation value – approx. 32.8 % of 
claims 
Settled/withdrawn/closed# 2,430 ₹ 1,05,625 crore 
Liquidation completed# 1,374 ₹ 14,344 crore realized (Assets re-allocated to 
better use) 
Total Disposal (2)+(3) 35,743 ₹ 19,02,775 crore 
Ongoing Cases (including 
admission) (1-2-3-4) 
15,731  
*NCLT’s Note for pad as on 31.03.2025 
# IBBI data as on 31.03.2025 
 
1.103  When asked about the reforms necessary to further improve creditor recoveries and 
incentivize resolutions of viable companies, particularly in light of the substantial gaps 
between claims and realization, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs  intimated the following:- 
“ IBC has a robust mechanism with time bound approach to preserve the 
value of asset of the Corporate Debtor. Therefore, it is proposed to ensure 
strict adherence to the time-bound resolution limiting delays, as was 
highlighted in the discussion paper issued by MCA. Improving asset valuation 
practices and ensuring better transparency in the resolution process will help 
bridge the gap between claims and realizations. Additionally, enhancing the 

56  
quality of resolution applicants through e-auction platforms like BAANKNET 
attracts more viable bids and will help align the IBC’s objectives of value 
maximization, timely resolution, and equitable creditor recovery. The rolling 
out of the platform integrating most of the IBC ecosystem which is in its early 
stages of development should give impetus to the above reforms.”  
 
1.104  In this connection, the Committee sought the implementation status of the 
recommendation of the erstwhile Standing Committee on Finance to allow flexibility in 
resolution Plan of a company to enable resolution applicants to bid for a part of the 
corporate debtor or some assets of the corporate debtor instead of the whole company 
to attract more options in RP, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written replies 
stated as under:-  
“The Explanation to section 5(26) “resolution plan” clarified that a resolution plan 
may include provisions for the restructuring of the corporate debtor, including by 
way of merger, amalgamation and demerger. Further, regulation 37 of the CIRP 
Regulations earlier provided that resolution plan includes sale of all or part of 
the assets whether subject to any security interest or not; or restructuring of the 
corporate debtor, by way of merger, amalgamation and demerger. It was 
amended in 2022 to clarify that the resolution plan may provide for sale of one 
or more assets of CD to one or more successful resolution applicants submitting 
resolution plans for such assets; and manner of dealing with remaining assets.  
The CIRP Regulations now permit that the RP with the approval of the CoC can 
invite expression of interest for submission of resolution plans for the CD as a 
whole, or for sale of one or more of assets of the CD, or for both. Subsequent to 
this, in one of the matters of CIRP, the NCLT has approved resolution plan for 
part assets of the CD.  
Additionally partial resolution also exists in the real estate sector. Amendments 
to the CIRP regulations have enabled significant flexibility for real estate cases, 
allowing the CoC to direct RPs to invite separate resolution plans for individual 
projects within a real estate company. This recognition acknowledges that each 
real estate project has unique characteristics, geographical locations, market 
dynamics, and completion requirements that may be better served through 
project-specific resolution approaches. 
By enabling concurrent invitations, the resolution process can reduce timelines, 
prevent value erosion in viable segments, and encourage broader investor 
participation. 
The same has been addressed in the proposed Amendment Bill introduced in 
the Parliament and referred to the select Committee.” 
 
(c)   Statutory Overlap 
 
1.105   The statutory conflict between the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) and 
the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) has consistently posed a challenge 

57  
to the timely and efficient conclusion of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 
(CIRP). This issue, primarily stemming from the Enforcement Directorate's (ED) 
authority to attach a corporate debtor's assets, often deters prospective resolution 
applicants and delays asset realization, thereby undermining the core objectives of the 
IBC. In this regard, the Committee wanted to know about the efforts undertaken to 
resolve this statutory overlapping, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs submitted the 
following written response:- 
“The IBC was enacted to provide a consolidated framework to resolve 
insolvency in a time-bound manner and to maximise the value of assets. This 
objective is further aided by a moratorium under section 14, that halts legal 
proceedings against the corporate debtor, and the immunity provision under 
section 32A, which offers a clean slate to resolution applicants upon plan 
approval. Section 32A of the IBC introduced through the IBC (Amendment) 
Act, 2020, grants immunity to the corporate debtor and its assets from 
prosecution for offenses committed prior to the commencement of the 
insolvency process, once a resolution plan is approved. However, this 
immunity is only granted to new management and unrelated resolution 
applicants and the provision bars (a) the erstwhile promoters or management 
or control of the  corporate debtor or a related party of such a person; and (b) 
person against whom the investigating authority, on material in its 
possession, has reason to believe that he abetted or conspired in the 
commission of the offence and has filed the requisite report/complaint. 
Accordingly, it continues to punish the offenders.  
This “clean slate” principle ensures that resolution applicants are not deterred 
from bidding for insolvent companies due to the fear of being burdened with 
the past criminal liabilities of the company. Section 32A thus aims to balance 
the objective of reviving stressed entities and ensures that criminal 
proceedings against former promoters or individuals who managed the 
company, along with their related parties, continues under PMLA. 
The judiciary, particularly the Supreme Court, has played a crucial role in 
clarifying and enforcing section 32A. In the matter of Manish Kumar Vs. Union 
of India and Another [WP(C) No. 26 of 2020 with 40 other writ petitions], the 
SC upheld the constitutional validity of section 32A, noting that its purpose 
was to strike a balance between prosecuting guilty individuals and facilitating 
economic revival. The Court stated that “…Having regard to the object of the 
Code, the experience of the working of the code, the interests of all 
stakeholders including most importantly the imperative need to attract 
resolution applicants who would not shy away from offering reasonable and 
fair value as part of the resolution plan if the legislature thought that immunity 
be granted to the corporate debtor as also its property, it hardly furnishes a 
ground for this this Court to interfere. The provision is carefully thought out. It 
is not as if the wrongdoers are allowed to get away. They remain liable...”. 
It is also in line with the doctrine of a clean or fresh slate, as was originally 
propounded by the SC in Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel Ltd v. Satish 
Kumar Gupta. The courts have consistently reinforced the ‘clean slate’ 

58  
principle and clarified that the immunity is for the corporate debtor, not for the 
individuals responsible for the offenses as they remain liable. 
The Delhi High Court in the matter of Rajiv Chakraborty RP of EIEL Vs 
Directorate of Enforcement held that no action can be taken against the 
properties of CD in respect of offences committed prior to commencement of 
CIRP. Once the resolution plan comes to be approved or when sale of 
liquidation starts taking place, the process of resolution or liquidation must be 
taken forward unhindered. This interpretation of section 32-A is in the larger 
interest of all the stakeholders. It is the imperative especially in the context of 
attracting resolution applicants who would otherwise be shy and not 
forthcoming if penalties arising out of offences are to affect the corporate 
debtor. 
The Bombay High Court in Shiv Charan & Ors. vs. Adjudicating Authority & 
Ors. [Writ Petition (L) No.9943 & 29111 of 2023] had also directed to release 
attached properties of a corporate debtor, once a resolution plan had been 
approved in terms of section 32A, ensuring a clean slate for the entity post-
insolvency resolution. However, an appeal from this judgment, involving 
issues between interplay of section 32A of IBC and PMLA, is pending before 
Hon’ble Supreme Court.”                                                 
 
1.106 Further, the Chairperson, IBBI has deposed the following before the 
Committee:- 
 
“There has been a recent order by the Supreme Court where it has 
mentioned that all resolution plans which are put up before the Committee 
of Creditors have to get approval of CCI. This will really delay the IBC 
process. What we have proposed to the Ministry is that only the approved 
plan should go to CCI before going to NCLT. If this is not done, perhaps it 
will lead to more delays in the approval process”. 
(d)      Homebuyer’s Rights 
1.107   The minimum threshold for filing of applications for the purpose of initiating 
CIRP under the Code was introduced vide IBC (Second Amendment) Act, 2018 to 
resolve the issue of single homebuyer/allottee initiating insolvency proceedings in 
NCLT based on minor or frivolous disputes which impacted the entire project and 
other homebuyers/allottees.  The Committee in their 32nd report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
inter-alia recommended that once a single homebuyer decides to initiate insolvency 
proceedings in NCLT, the real estate owner should be obligated in the Rules/ 
Guidelines to provide details of other homebuyers of the project to the concerned 
homebuyer so that the required 10% or 100 homebuyers can be mobilised. Though 
there are mechanisms outside the purview of the Code to enable initiating CIRP 
through Real Estate Regulatory Authority(RERA) and allottee specific action, there are 
no specific enabling provisions in the IBC. In this regard the Ministry of Corporate 

59  
Affairs have further submitted that as the issue pertains to the stage before admission 
under IBC,  therefore does not fall within the purview of Ministry of Corporate Affairs
                                        
1.108 The MD & CEO, Bank of Baroda has inter-alia stated the following on 
hombuyers’ rights as follows during the oral evidence before the Committee:- 
“....Through a different judgment, it has also given huge protection to the home 
buyers which has been one of the point that is debated in the system. Actually, 
homebuyers have now been recognized as financial creditors and have the 
voting right also in COC, the 66 per cent approval to be put through a 
resolution. There is a transparency involved therein”. 
 
1.109 To facilitate resolutions in the real estate sector, following recent amendments 
have been undertaken in the IBBI (Insolvency Resolution of Corporate Persons) 
Regulations, 2016 (CIRP Regulations):- 
(i)  Handing Over Possession: RPs can now hand over possession of plots, 
apartments, or buildings to homebuyers during the resolution process, with CoC 
approval and upon fulfilment of obligations by homebuyers. 
(ii) Appointment of Facilitators: Facilitators can be appointed for sub-classes (e.g.,    
homebuyers) to aid communication with the authorised representative and support 
creditor understanding of the resolution process. 
 
(iii)  Participation of Competent Authorities: CoC may invite land authorities (e.g., 
NOIDA, HUDA) to meetings for regulatory inputs, improving resolution plan feasibility 
and stakeholder confidence. 
 
(iv) Report on Development Rights: RPs must prepare a report within 60 days on 
development rights, approvals, and permissions in real estate projects to guide 
creditor decision-making. 
 
(v) Relaxations for Homebuyer Groups: CoC can relax eligibility criteria, 
performance security, and deposit requirements to enable homebuyer groups to 
participate as resolution applicants 
 
(vi) Separate Bank Accounts for Real Estate Projects: Requires opening separate 
bank accounts for each real estate project to ensure financial transparency and 
accountability.                                                     
 
(e)  Cross-Border Insolvency Framework 
1.110  The Committee in the 32nd Report (17th Lok Sabha) had inter alia 
recommended for expeditious adoption of the provisions of the Cross-border 
Insolvency framework had been recommended, when asked about the progress in the 

60  
matter, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs deposed before the Committee the 
following:- 
“………we are considering having an enabling provision in the proposed 
amendments. However, there have been concerns raised, especially in the 
revised scenario of trade talks and all of that, whether we should be adopting 
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law(UNCITRAL) Model 
at all in the first place because it may lead to a situation where the foreign 
creditors have a priority in certain cases vis-à-vis the domestic creditors.  So, 
this is being analyzed right now, although we are trying to have an enabling 
provision in the proposed amendments.”            
                           
1.111   In this regard it has been informed that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), 
vide Notice dated 23.12.2021 had invited comments from the public on changes being 
considered to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 via ‘MCA Discussion Paper 
2021’ which included the cross-border insolvency framework and the same has been 
addressed in the proposed “Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code( Amendment) Bill, 2025 
introduced in the Parliament and referred to the select Committee.     
                                                    
(f)      Technological integration aka Digitization 
1.112 The Government has announced setting up of an Integrated Technology 
Platform under the IBC. It will provide for an integrated case management system for 
processes under the IBC, automated processes to file applications with the AA, 
delivery of notices, enable interaction of IPs with stakeholders, storage of records of 
the corporate debtor, and incentivise effective participation of stakeholders. The 
Integrated Technology Platform would lead to better transparency, minimisation of 
delays, effective decision making and better oversight of the processes by the 
authorities.                                                                                    
 
1.113 In this regard, the Chairman, IBBI, has deposed before the Committee as 
follows:- 
“Sir, in the 10th Report of the Standing Committee, which came early this year, 
the Standing Committee had directed us to implement a direct submission 
system. So, for liquidation, we have already done it. We are using the Banknet 
platform, which is promoted by the PSB alliance. In the next four or five months, 
all resolution plans will also be tried to bring it on this platform, as was directed 
by the Standing Committee. An integrated technology platform is being built by 
MCA”. 
 

61  
1.114   The Committee was curious to know as to how this platform would streamline 
existing IBC procedures, and what ongoing or anticipated challenges may prove 
critical to its successful operationalization, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their 
written reply submitted following information:- 
“The institutions forming pillars of the Code, including the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs, the Adjudicating Authority (“AA”), the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board 
of India (“IBBI”), information utilities (“IUs”) and service providers, operate on 
separate technological platforms. However, there are challenges posed by the 
fragmented nature of this approach.  
 
In order to integrate all the stakeholders of the IBC ecosystem on a single 
platform, the Government is working on an Integrated electronic Platform for 
Insolvency Ecosystem (iPIE). The proposed platform will provide for an 
integrated case management system for processes under the IBC, automated 
processes to file applications with the Adjudicating Authority, delivery of 
notices, enable interaction of IPs with stakeholders, storage of records of the 
corporate debtor, and incentivise effective participation of stakeholders. The 
work on this platform is ongoing.”      
 
1.115  On the extant issue the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs during the oral 
evidence apprised the Committee as stated below:- 
 
“The second point which is again fairly factual is the technical system which we 
have set up, which you are asking us.  We are going to be setting up ‘the single 
source of truth’…… 
…..So, a lot of the issues which you are raising in terms of information 
asymmetry, or the information which is coming in the information memorandum 
and its non-disclosure to all the important stakeholders, I think a lot of it will be 
addressed through that.  In case of timeline, I think, knowing how IT projects 
take time and the scope of the project and the design is very important, I would 
say that a reasonable time would be between 12 to 14 months before this is 
actually put on the ground.  This is because a lot of it would go to the design 
component of it.  We want to be absolutely in tune with what the stakeholders 
want.  So, the first process is on.  We are hiring a PMU.  We are showing an 
RFP for the system integrator.  But the real thing will be when we start 
preparing the system’s requirement study and the FRS.  So, my assessment is 
that it will take 12 to 14 months”.                                               
 
1.116  The Committee wanted to know as to how iPIE would deter manipulations and 
misconducts of IP/RP for creating an efficient IBC ecosystem, the IBBI in their written 
reply submitted the following:- 
“The government has proposed that an Integrated Technology Platform 
will be set up for improving the outcomes under the IBC, thereby 
ensuring the consistency, transparency, timely processing and better 
oversight for all stakeholders. The proposed iPIE platform will include a 
comprehensive Case Management system that will serve as a 

62  
centralized platform to handle the end-to-end lifecycle of cases, 
providing a structured framework for activity tracking, collaboration, 
communication, and documentation. This system would incorporate 
security measures, such as access controls, encryption, and user 
authentication, to protect sensitive case information, while maintaining 
detailed audit trails and logs that capture all activities related to the case 
and actions taken by users. The system will also include secure Virtual 
Data Room (VDR) capabilities and resolution plan submissions, ensuring 
that sensitive documents like resolution plans are handled with security 
measures, thereby preventing manipulation and unauthorized 
information leaks while maintaining the integrity of the resolution 
process. As such, the issue raised will be taken care upon 
operationalisation of the iPIE platform.”   
 
 
(g) Judicial Scrutiny of CIRP 
 
1.117  In the Bhushan Power and Steel Limited CIRP, the Supreme Court, in a 
significant decision had ordered the liquidation of the company despite the prior 
approval and implementation of a resolution plan by JSW Steel The court had found 
procedural lapses and non-compliance with the IBC in the resolution 
process. However, later, in a recent significant development, the Supreme Court  
recalled  its controversial verdict that had ordered liquidation of Bhushan Power & 
Steel Limited (BPSL) while setting aside a resolution plan of JSW Steel Limited for the 
ailing firm. The matter albeit is still sub-judice and the earlier decision of quashing 
down the implemented resolution plan has been overturned, the court's earlier 
decision emphasizes the need for strict adherence to IBC regulations during the 
resolution process. Taking into account the developments relating to the order of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the CIRP of Bhushan Power and Steel Limited, IBBI 
submitted the following written response:-  
“(i) Reinstating CIRP in case of failure of plan implementation:  
 If a resolution plan fails, the CD should be placed back into CIRP rather 
than being sent directly into liquidation. This amendment was part of the 
MCA’s discussion paper dated 18th January, 2023 inviting public 
comments on proposed amendments to the Code and is currently under 
consideration by the Government.  
 
(ii) Recommendation to provide certainty to resolution plan:  
The law should expressly provide that, once the CD has been handed 
over to the resolution applicant pursuant to the approval of the resolution 
plan and the resolution plan value has been duly paid to the creditors, 
the outcome of the resolution process shall attain finality and shall not be 
reversed by any judicial authority. 
 

63  
(iii) Ensuring compliance with moratorium under Section 14 and release 
of attachments post-approval of resolution plan:   
Under IBC, the properties of the CD are attached by the investigating 
Authorities either prior to or during CIRP. This severely limits the value 
recovery for creditors, as valuable CD assets remain locked under 
attachment despite the resolution process under IBC being time-bound 
and market-driven.  
 
Thus, the Code may be amended to provide that moratorium under 
Section 14 of the Code will be respected by all Government agencies 
and no seizure, confiscation or attachment can be done after moratorium 
comes into force. Also, all attachments, if any, made before the 
moratorium will be released in favour of the successful resolution 
applicant on approval of the resolution plan”.                  
 
1.118 In this regard, the Chairman, SBI inter-alia made the following submission 
before the Committee:- 
“...Hon. Supreme Court in its recent decision to set aside the resolution plan by 
JSW has raised significant questions regarding the efficiency and scope of the 
IBC. While the matter is still sub judice, but we can give some emerging 
perspective to avoid recurrence of such a situation. One is clear legislative 
provisions to deal with situation arising out of appeal filed against plan already 
voted upon by CoC and approved by the NCLT; ensure paramountcy of the 
commercial wisdom of the Committee of Creditors; safeguard interest of 
assenting creditors -- while there is a safeguard for dissenting creditors, the 
creditors who have approved the plan and then moving on have no safeguards 
available with them; timeline for appellate court to act on appeal -- this is also 
something which we have been presenting to various legal forums that quick 
decision-making is extremely important in this particular case as it went on for 
almost four years; and limit Appellate Tribunal / Court from intervening unless 
there is a fundamental violation of the law or if the process of resolution has 
been flawed to undermine objective of IBC. These are some of the suggestions 
and things which have emerged out of the Bhushan Power case. 
 
 1.119  In this connection, the Deputy Governor, RBI deposed the following before the 
Committee:- 
“20. The Hon’ble Court had raised concerns around non-adherence to the 
procedural aspects and non-conformity with resolution timelines envisaged 
in the Act. The Court also flagged concerns related to governance 
framework, compliance culture and recovery architecture of lenders and 
thereon passed Orders for liquidating BSPL, instead of resolution. While the 
concerns flagged by the Court undoubtedly remain valid, the Orders to 
make the Resolution Plan void and thereon liquidate the borrower will have 
significant implications for the lenders. Going forward, this may also create 
uncertainty regarding the finality of resolution plans approved under IBC.  
 
21. IBC, being a major enabler facilitating the resolution of stressed assets, 
the RBI shall continue to engage with the stakeholders to ensure an 
effective leveraging of the Code by the regulated entities.” 

64  
 
1.120  In this context the Committee sought to know the grounds that the promoter or 
other interested parties are invoking to persuade the High Court to exercise its 
jurisdiction under Article 226, the SBI in their written submission informed the 
Committee as stated below:- 
“• The objective of IBC was to bring all litigation under NCLT’s jurisdiction. 
Section 60(5) ensures that NCLT is the sole authority for application and 
proceedings related to corporate debtors.  
• Article 227 of the Constitution of India gives the High Court, power to 
oversee all courts and tribunals within its jurisdiction. However, this power 
does not extend to NCLT cases.  
• But it is frequently observed that various litigants, mostly Corporate Debtor 
(CD)/unsecured creditors approach Hon’ble High Court to obtain 
stay/injunction by filing IAs, while proceedings are underway in 
NCLT/NCLAT.  
• The grounds of approaching High Court is not very justifiable as we 
believe that NCLT/NCLAT are competent enough to ensure judicious 
disposal of all matters.  
• Main intention of the litigants appear to be to stall or derail the process to 
cater to their own vested interest.” 
 
1.121 In this regard, the Chairman, SBI has made the following oral submission 
before the Committee:- 
“There are IBC cases in High Court. If this process of NCLT, NCLAT and 
the Supreme Court is followed, then that would be better. But a lot of cases 
are also filed in the High Court and the High Court giving stays is 
completely derailing the process of NCLT. We have been submitting to 
various Committees and the Government of India to ensure that NCLT, 
NCLAT and finally the Supreme Court should be the adjudicating 
authorities in the IBC process. This is something that we have been 
requesting”. 
 
1.122  When the Committee raised concern as to how can insolvency and bankruptcy 
processes be seen as reliable when its fully implemented resolution plans are 
challenged and what protection does the Government plans to offer to resolution 
applicants  from Judicial reversals, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written 
submissions provided following information:- 
“Once order is issued under Section 31 of the IBC by the Adjudicating 
Authority approving the resolution plan, it is binding on all parties including 
the Central Government, the State Governments, and attains finality.  The 
Ministry proposes to further streamline the implementation of the code to 
reduce delays and also introduce timelines for approvals by the 
Adjudicating Authority. The right to appeal is a statutory right enshrined in 
the Constitution of India, therefore the Ministry has no comments to offer in 
this aspect.”                                                                             
 

65  
1.123   When asked about the suggestions in contemplation of Government to 
improve the system so that certain officers can be made accountable for the 
misconducts to avoid such decision from the Supreme Court, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs in their written submissions provided the following:- 
“The Government is looking at a number of measures to ensure stricter 
compliance of the Code and amendments in the Act as well as regulations 
are being contemplated. IBBI has also issued guidelines for the Committee 
of Creditors on 6th August, 2024 aiming to improve the efficiency and 
timeliness of the corporate insolvency resolution process. Section 235A of 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) addresses punishment for 
violations where no specific penalty is provided within the Code. It 
mandates that any person who violates the IBC, its rules, or regulations for 
which no specific penalty is defined shall be punished with a fine, ranging 
from a minimum of one lakh rupees to a maximum of two crore 
rupees. This section was inserted by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2018, effective from November 23, 2017. “  
                                                                                          
       
1.124   In this connection, the Chairperson, IBBI during the Sitting made following 
oral submissions:-  
 
“In April, just 2 months back, the Reserve Bank has changed the 
provisioning now for ARCs. So, this has created an arbitrage between ARCs 
and IBC. So, we are requesting the Reserve Bank to look at it again. We 
would request the Committee also to recommend that there should be no 
arbitrage between ARCs and the IBC. There was a recent decision by the 
hon. Supreme Court in the Bhushan Power case where a resolution plan 
which was approved several years back is being reversed to liquidation. So, 
we are requesting the Committee to look at this, and we are saying that if a 
resolution plan has been approved and the creditors have been paid, then it 
should not be reversed. If something has gone wrong, then action can be 
taken against whoever has done wrong. But, if we do this, then we will not 
get bids because there will be confusion in the market and there should be a 
certainty to the resolution plan. Once a person has bid and then he has paid 
to the creditors, perhaps he should not be allowed to…” 
          
1.125  On being asked about the extent, the 2024 amendments to the Committee of 
Creditors (CoC) guidelines address the specific procedural and governance concerns 
highlighted by the Supreme Court in the Bhushan Power and Steel case, the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs in their written reply stated the following:- 
“The Hon’ble Supreme Court on 31.07.2025 has allowed the Review 
Petition and has recalled its Judgement dated 02.05.2025 in the Bhushan 
Power and Steel case. However, the observations made by Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in this case, are addressed by the Guidelines dated 06th 

66  
August 2024 issued by IBBI. The key highlights of the Guidelines for CoC 
members, as issued by IBBI, are as follows: 
 Objective and Integrity: Members should follow the provisions of the IBC 
and its regulations, maintain integrity and objectivity in their functions, and 
foster informed decision-making. They should also proactively share 
relevant information with the IP. 
 Independence and Impartiality: Members must immediately disclose any 
existing or potential conflicts of interest arising from pecuniary, personal, or 
professional relationships with any stakeholder. 
 Professional Competence and Participation: Members are expected to stay 
updated with the Code, rules, and regulations. They must nominate 
representatives with the proper authorization and a sufficient mandate to 
participate effectively in meetings. 
 Cooperation, Supervision, and Timeliness: Members are to supervise and 
facilitate the IP in their duties and help with the timely appointment of other 
professionals. They should also try to resolve disputes among themselves 
through non-adversarial means to avoid litigation. 
 Confidentiality: Complete adherence to confidentiality of information is 
required at all times. 
 Costs: Members must ensure that the insolvency resolution process cost is 
reasonable. They should also quickly decide on the expenses to be incurred 
by the Insolvency Professional, including their fee and the fees for a 
liquidator if a liquidation is decided upon. 
 Meetings of the CoC: Members are required to regularly monitor the 
Insolvency Professional’s activities, seek the rationale for their decisions, 
and actively participate in presentations by Registered Valuers. They must 
also ensure that meetings are held at regular intervals as specified in the 
regulations. 
 Sharing of Information: Members must proactively share financial 
statements and audit extracts with the Insolvency Professional. They should 
also seek details of any litigation involving the corporate debtor and 
recommend necessary actions to safeguard its interests. 
 Feasibility and Viability of Corporate Debtor: The guidelines instruct 
members to carefully review the information memorandum, contribute to the 
marketing strategy, and ensure that all resolution plans are placed before 
the CoC for consideration. They should also consider the requirement of a 
monitoring committee for the implementation of the resolution plan.” 
      
1.126  On being asked about the RBI views on the introduction of institutory 
enforcement power for IBBI to penalize or correct the behaviour by Committee of 
Creditors, corporate debtors or insolvency professionals when they impede time-
bound resolution and  safeguards on such institutory powers the RBI furnished 
following response:- 
 

67  
“Code of Conduct for Committee of Creditors 
Since, CIRP under IBC involves various stakeholders such as Corporate 
Debtor, 
Insolvency Professional, CoC, Resolution Applicant etc., their conduct 
during the 
CIRP has a significant bearing on the smooth and successful completion of 
process. Through the regulations framed under the Code, a Code of 
Conduct for IPs have been specified by IBBI. While certain principles have 
been issued by IBBI to CoC, there is no clear Code of Conduct which is 
legally enforceable in case of any violation. Thus, RBI would welcome 
empowering IBBI to enforce a uniform Code of Conduct across all CIRP 
stakeholders (CoC members, Insolvency Professionals, Corporate Debtors). 
It is also observed that often there is overlapping of roles and lack of co-
ordination amongst stakeholders, which causes delay in the process. 
Therefore, there is a need to bring clarity in the respective roles of each 
stakeholder in the process and the rules of participation to be followed by 
each of them in the process. While the Code empowers IBBI to make 
regulations to carry out the provisions of the Code under section 240 (1), it 
does not explicitly provide for laying down a Code of Conduct for all 
stakeholders and the enforcement mechanism in respect of the same.  
 A Code of Conduct, including with regard to conflict of interest, for all 
stakeholders in a CIRP may be provided as guidelines or by way of 
Regulations. 
  IBC may explicitly provide for laying down of Code of Conduct, including 
with regard to conflict of interest, for all stakeholders in a CIRP and for 
enforcement of such Code of Conduct.  
 Where the contravention is committed by members of the stakeholders, in 
respect of which IBBI is not the primary regulator, the Code may provide 
enforcement powers to either IBBI or the Adjudicating Authority. 
 Market Based Compensation Model  
RBI supports marked based compensation for resolution professionals 
along with incentive system for quicker resolution, as in case the resolution 
process gets delayed, the value deteriorates sharply. As highlighted by DG, 
RBI during the SCOF discussions, there were some instances where the 
compensations were pretty larger than what is warranted or what the 
company could pay. If the pay is large, there is no incentive for him to come 
to a quicker resolution. Then he is left to handover the company to 
somebody else. So, he may not have an incentive. So, it should be time-
bound, there should be adequate compensation. It should be for limited time 
so that he is encouraged to resolve the issue quickly because that is the 
critical aspect.”               
                                    
1.127  In this regard, Chairman, SBI inter-alia suggested the following during oral 
evidence before the Committee:- 
“....proactive engagement by all stakeholders, mainly resolution 
professionals, resolution applicants, and financial creditors, to remove 
hurdles in resolution. IBBI which actually frames the regulations and rules 
for IBC, has come out with detailed guidelines on how to conduct its 

68  
proceedings. Similar guidelines for resolution professionals will also 
streamline the process”.                                             
1.128 Considering the increasing judicial activism and strides in IBC arena, the 
Committee asked whether there is need to define boundaries for commercial wisdom of 
CoC and allow judicial review in cases of extreme haircuts, the SBI furnished following 
written reply:-  
“The Committee of Creditors holds a determinant position in the CIRP as it 
is subject to the commercial wisdom of CoC to decide whether Corporate 
Debtor (CD) is to be revived or liquidated. It is a heterogenous body made 
of financial creditors having varied interests. The CoC is solely responsible 
for actions and decisions accordance with Section 28[6] of the Code. As 
above-mentioned, the approval threshold by CoC under Section 30(4) 
showcases the powers of CoC in determining the fate of corporate debtor. 
Hence, it is undoubtedly clear that the commercial wisdom is a substantial 
factor which needs to serve the purpose as entailed in Preamble of the 
Code. We do not see any limitation of commercial wisdom of CoC. 
Moreover, CoC is a representative set of major Banks/FIs/Corporate 
bodies/ARCs etc. who all have a robust and compliant system of taking 
commercially sound decisions at an appropriate authority structure.” 
 
(I)  Suggestions for Strengthening IBC Ecosystem  
 
1.129  The IBBI in their background note submitted suggestions for strengthening the 
IBC ecosystem. These are as follows:- 
(a) Expediting the proposed amendments as per the discussion paper of MCA 
dated 18th January, 2023  
It has been informed that the Government and the Board are contemplating measures 
to take all proactive steps in reducing the delays caused in the CIRP process. In this 
regard, the MCA has issued a consultation paper dated 18th January, 2023 seeking 
comments from the public on the proposed changes in the IBC, suggesting, inter alia 
for faster admission of CIRP applications, and streamlining the insolvency resolution 
process.  
(b)    Additional NCLT benches for dealing with huge backlog of cases 
As of March 2025, about 30,600 IBC cases are currently pending before the NCLT. 
The current strength of about 30 benches is not sufficient to deal with the above 
backlog in a time-bound manner. IBBI suggested that 50 additional benches may be 
set up for 5 years to deal with this backlog. It is expected that creditors would realise 
additional Rs. 3 to 5 lakh crore from this exercise. 
(c)  Dedicated benches in AA and strengthening institutional capacity 

69  
The NCLT was initially established to exercise and discharge the functions under the 
Companies Act, 2013. Thereafter from 1st December, 2016, the jurisdiction of NCLT 
was extended to discharge the functions of AA under the Code. Subsequently, with 
effect from 1st December, 2019, when the provisions relating to PGs to CDs came into 
force, the additional jurisdiction under sections 94 and 95 of the Code were also 
entrusted to NCLT.  As seen from above, overtime the ambit of jurisdiction of the 
NCLT has increased manifold. To facilitate efficient disposal of cases, separate 
benches and verticals may be created in the AA for dealing with matters pertaining to 
each legislation separately. It is suggested that dedicated benches of the AA solely for 
insolvency matters may be created and institutional capacity of AA benches be 
enhanced accordingly.                                                                       
1.130  On the issue of creation of additional benches, the Chairperson, IBBI, during 
the sitting gave following elaborate reply :- 
“NCLT today disposes about 250 to 300 cases in resolution, about 200 
cases in liquidation, and about 100 other cases. The capacity of NCLT 
today is about 500 to 600 cases. That is what they are deciding. But we 
have 7,000 cases just pending for admission, and a large number of other 
cases also. Even if no new cases come, I think it will take 10 years for NCLT 
to just dispose of the backlog. It will be very difficult to give an exact figure, 
but I think they will take about 10 years to just dispose of. So, my request to 
the Government is that we need fast track additional benches. We are 
requesting for 50 additional NCLT benches for five years to deal with huge 
backlog of cases. And, if we do not do this, then it will take more time for 
resolving these cases. The value will go down. Now, we try to find out as to 
what amount is involved in these cases, but it is very difficult because we do 
not know the number of applications. But our assumption is that around Rs. 
10 to 15 lakh crore is stuck up in these cases which are pending in NCLT. 
And, if we can have these additional benches, even if we get 20, 30 percent 
recovery, I think we will be able to recover Rs. 3 to 4 lakh crore to the 
creditors in four, five years. The NCLT was established for the Companies 
Act. That is what NCLT was basically established for. But we have not 
increased the strength of NCLT when IBC was given to them. I would 
submit that the strength of NCLT needs to be reviewed, and we should have 
a separate NCLT for IBC and a separate NCLT for the Companies Act 
because merger cases in the Companies Act are also getting delayed 
because of low strength in NCLT.”        
                   
                     
 1.131  He supplemented further as follows:- 
 
“About the strength of NCLT,  we have recommended two things. One is 
special benches of fast-track benches to take care of backlog because there 
is a huge backlog. If we do not take care of backlog, then it will take a long 
time and the value will decline. So, once we have asked to set up benches 

70  
to take care of backlog. The second point we have said is to review the 
strength of NCLT because NCLT was set up for Companies Act, and 
perhaps we need to review the strength of NCLTs, so that they can take 
care of Companies Act also and they can take care of IBC also. One thing I 
have not mentioned, but NCLAT also has to take care of Competition Act. 
The appeals under Competition Act also go to NCLAT. So, they are also 
overburdened there.”              
                           
                              
1.132  On being enquired about the role of RBI in establishment of the Fast-Track 
Benches of NCLT in High Value Insolvencies, the RBI submitted following written 
response:- 
“Fast Track Benches of NCLT in High Value Insolvencies 
 
RBI supports the suggestion on setting up of dedicated fast-track benches 
in NCLT for handling high value insolvencies. This would allow for faster 
adjudication and resolution of high value insolvencies which are often 
complex and involve large number of stakeholders. Faster resolution would 
also preserve asset value and improve recovery prospects thus 
strengthening the overall insolvency ecosystem. However, the decision on 
setting up of dedicated benches of NCLT falls within the purview of 
Government.” 
             
 
1.133   During oral evidence before the Committee, the Deputy Governor, RBI 
suggested the following to further strengthen IBC 2016:- 
 
“…….Although the IBC has proved to be an invaluable tool for creditors, 
certain amendments, if carried out in the Act, would enhance its potential 
and contribute to improvement in the resolution prospects. 
 The first we are suggested is amendment to Section 75(a) and Section 
75(b) of the Code to make it binding on the adjudicating authority to admit 
an insolvency application filed by a financial creditor without getting into the 
reasons for default and reducing the grounds for appeal. It will considerably 
reduce the scope for excessive litigation at the admission stage and thereby 
reduce overall delays. 
 Second is to empower the IBBI (Insolvency Banking Bankruptcy Board) 
to issue and enforce Code of Conducts for stakeholders involved in the IBC 
process. This includes the resolution professionals, the Committee of 
Creditors, the professionals engaged by the resolution professional, and the 
corporate debtors, which will ensure maintenance of the process credibility. 
 Third would be modifying and notifying the fast-track resolution process 
as a creditor-led out of court workout mechanism, similar to the pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process available for MSMEs, in line with 
the recommendations of the Expert Committee constituted by IBBI. This will 
help in dovetailing the IBC with the out of court resolution mechanisms put 
in place by the Reserve Bank of India. This will lead to a faster resolution 
and better realization for the stakeholders. 

71  
 Then comes the Amendment to Section 53(i) of the distribution waterfall 
to provide clarity on the treatment of statutory dues of the Government. This 
includes the State Government and the Local Bodies as well as the rights 
created through the attachment orders of law enforcement agencies, which 
will help to address the concerns of the stakeholders. By this, there would 
be upfront clarity in the order of settlement of claims. 
Then, Empowering Committee of Creditors and the Adjudicating Authority to 
reinitiate the resolution in cases where the successful resolution applicant 
has failed to bring in the capital as committed in the resolution plan will 
enhance recovery prospects for the stakeholders as presently such cases 
are mechanically ordered for liquidation as envisaged in the court. Then, we 
can also consider a proportionate approach by creating dedicated fast track 
NCLT benches for handling high value accounts which will help in quick 
resolution of such accounts which may otherwise see accelerated value 
destructions. These are my submissions at this stage.”       
                                                  
1.134  The GST regime uses an advance ruling mechanism to provide certainty and 
pre-empt post-litigation disputes.  The Committee when asked whether, in the context 
of the IBC, which prioritizes time-bound resolution, such a pre-admission clarity 
mechanism feasible or applicable to the IBC process to provide stakeholders with 
binding clarity on key issues before the initiation or admission of an insolvency petition; 
Chairman, IBBI has made the following oral submission before the Committee:- 
“We do not have an advanced ruling mechanism under IBC. The IBC legal 
community has been demanding this for quite some time but as of now we 
do not have an advanced ruling mechanism under IBC”.  
 
(d)    Adjudicating Authority Rules for IBC 
 
1.135 The current adjudication process under the IBC suffers from protracted delays 
at the pre-admission stage, primarily caused by repeated adjournments, multiple 
replies and rejoinders, and procedural ambiguity. The existing Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016 refer to the NCLT 
Rules, which were not designed specifically for insolvency matters. This overlap has 
led to confusion, lack of clarity, and judicial inefficiency, significantly blocking the 
adjudicatory bandwidth of the NCLT and the NCLAT. In order to address procedural 
delays and confusion in the proceedings before the NCLT and NCLAT, IBBI suggested 
for notification of dedicated Rules of Procedure specifically for IBC matters before the 
NCLT and NCLAT. These rules should ensure procedural clarity, provide timelines for 
filing responses and rejoinders, enhance the role of Registry so that judicial officers 
can concentrate on judicial work etc.  

72  
 
1.136 The Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs during the course of evidence 
apprised the Committee as stated below:- 
.“All of you have raised the issue regarding accountability of the adjudicating 
authorities and their performance accountability.  
 So, I would mention it here that we have the rules for the adjudicating authority 
which we are coming up with, Sir. We are trying to come up with the suitable 
formations so that the working of the adjudicating authority can be assessed in a 
way which does not impinge on the judicial independence.  However, it holds 
them accountable in a fashion which can be handled at both the levels. So, we 
are trying to do that. If the Committee can also in its recommendations mention 
this point about accountability.”  
 
1.137  As regards the CIRP getting affected due to less than required number of 
benches of NCLT & NCLAT, the Committee sought to know the measures taken to 
contain pendency and improve overall resolution timelines, the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs informed that:-  
“ The filling up of vacancies is a continuous process. As against a sanctioned 
strength of 63, as of today 58 members are in position. The process for filling up 
the existing and upcoming vacancies is ongoing.”    
 
1.138   As regards the functioning of e-courts, the Chairperson, IBBI in the oral 
submissions informed as mentioned below:- 
“…NCLT has got e-courts, and the Government is thinking of introducing e-
courts, too, in NCLT. But, when we go and see the functioning, we find that the 
judges are not technologically so fluent. I think we need a new cadre of IT 
professionals in NCLT who will help them in implementing the e-court system. 
Mr. Amitabh Kant had recently spoken at one of our functions. He had 
recommended that we should have something like the passport system in 
NCLT. The basic groundwork, the basic IT work can be done by a technology 
firm. It can be done by some firm, and the decisions can be taken by the NCLT 
members or judges. We need a technological backbone in NCLT. The e-court 
system says that everything is online. But papers are taken for everything 
because the members are not technically trained to do it online. (H)    
Repercussions of Supreme Court Judgment in the Bhushan Power and Steel 
Case….”                                                                                    
  
 
 
 

73  
                                                                    PART II 
      OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Impact of IBC, Successes, and Systemic Challenges 
1. The Committee acknowledge the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), 
enacted in 2016, as having played a pivotal role in improving the ease of doing 
business in India by introducing a faster and more structured insolvency 
resolution process maximising the value of assets, promote entrepreneurship, 
availability of credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders. This 
efficacy is substantiated by the fact that as of March 31, 2025, a total of 1,194 
companies have been successfully resolved under the IBC framework. Through 
these cases, creditors have realised an amount of ₹3.89 lakh crore which is over 
170% of the liquidation value and more than 93% of the fair value of these 
companies, as assessed at the time of admission into the IBC process. The 
Committee, further, note that the enactment of the IBC led to a significant 
improvement in the "Resolving Insolvency" parameter in the World Bank's Ease 
of Doing Business Report 2020, moving India's rank up to 52 from 136 in just a 
few years.  
Despite these undeniable successes, the Committee express profound 
concern over persistent and systemic challenges that significantly undermine 
the Code's optimal performance. These challenges include protracted delays in 
proceedings, an excessive burden of litigation straining adjudicating 
authorities, contentious issues surrounding excessive haircuts for creditors, 
and the incomplete implementation of key frameworks, specifically the 
individual insolvency framework and the pre-packaged mechanism for MSMEs. 
The Committee particularly note that slow admission of insolvency applications 

74  
continues to impede rapid value realisation and leads to asset deterioration, and 
significantly dilutes the Code’s objective of time-bound resolution. 
In this context, the Committee commend the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
for constructively responding to their earlier reports and for incorporating their 
recommendations into the formulation of key reforms proposed in the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill 2025. The Committee note 
that the Bill provides for time-bound admission of insolvency cases, introduces 
a framework for creditor-initiated insolvency framework, establishes a statutory 
structure for group insolvency resolution, and empowers the Central 
Government to prescribe rules relating to cross- border insolvency 
proceedings. The Bill further clarifies critical definitions, including those of 
resolution plan and resolution applicant, strengthens procedures relating to 
liquidation and distribution of proceeds, enhances scrutiny of avoidance 
transactions, and provides for more robust regulatory enforcement. The 
Committee note that while new dynamics have emerged in the corporate and 
financial environment consequent upon changes in borrower behaviour 
influenced by the IBC, the impact of digitization and the IBC’s performance 
relative to other recovery statutes, the unwavering strategic focus must be the 
consistent optimisation of the IBC’s efficiency. This sustained commitment is 
essential to ensure a prompt, time-bound resolution of default cases, maximize 
recovery, and ultimately fulfill the Code's potential in significantly enhancing the 
ease of doing business in India.  
 
 

75  
Efficacy and Post-Resolution Challenges 
2. The Committee note that the IBC has demonstrated significant success in 
reviving firms, 1,322 corporate debtors (CDs) rescued through resolution plans 
and a total of 8,715 CIRPs admitted until October 31, 2025. This efficacy is 
substantiated by resolved companies achieving a 76% increase in sales and the 
Code's deterrent effect leading to the resolution of approximately ₹13.94 lakh 
crore of debt outside the formal process, with 1,154 CDs having been withdrawn 
under Section 12A. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs emphasized the objective of the IBC is Resolution, and that the CoC is 
expected to strike a "fine balance" between viability and commercial wisdom by 
not deciding on liquidation in cases where revival is possible. The Committee 
also observe from the report of IIM Ahmedabad that despite these 
achievements, post-resolution difficulties persist, including delays in obtaining 
necessary clearances from other government agencies and significant difficulty 
in obtaining fresh bank financing due to the corporate debtor being labelled  a 
defaulter.  
 The Committee recommend the establishment of a transparent, online 
mechanism for issuing “no dues” certificates and statutory clearances 
immediately upon completion of a resolution plan, ensuring that revitalised 
corporate debtors truly start with a clean slate. The Committee also note that 
the IBC Amendment Bill 2025 seeks to strengthen post-resolution 
implementation by mandating strict timelines and regulatory oversight, further 
enhancing accountability for successful resolution applicants. The Committee 
therefore emphasise that early intervention in stressed cases should continue 
to be promoted to preserve enterprise value, and that once a resolution plan is 
approved by the NCLT, its implementation should be prompt and monitored, 

76  
with clear provisions to penalise non-compliance and ensure maximum 
recovery for all stakeholders. 
Delays, Backlogs, and Judicial Capacity 
3. The Committee note that the average time taken for closure of the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) is 713 days, far exceeding the 
mandated 330-day timeline. The Committee observe that these excessive delays 
are primarily caused by a severe shortage of NCLT benches, vacant judicial and 
administrative staff positions, and widespread frivolous litigation and appeals 
by promoters or unsuccessful resolution applicants, which erodes asset value. 
The Committee further observe that to streamline the adjudicatory process and 
reduce delays, a modus operandi should be adopted, involving a three-part 
checklist. This checklist would track compliance by the Resolution Professional 
[under Section 30(2)], compliance by the Committee of Creditors (CoC), and 
finally, examination by the NCLT to ensure only those issues contained in 
Section 30(2) are argued, thereby preventing arguments that go beyond the 
mandate of the Act.  
 The Committee note that an amendment has been brought in the IBC 
Bill,2025  to ensure that the adjudicating authority admits an insolvency 
application filed by a financial creditor without getting into the reasons for 
default, thereby reducing the grounds for appeal and cutting down 
consequently the scope for excessive litigation at the admission stage to 
reduce overall delays .The Committee, strongly, recommend that the 
establishment of additional NCLT benches be expedited and that the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs accelerate the operationalisation of the proposed Integrated 
Technology Platform (iPIE) for centralised case management, which is vital for 
strengthening the capacity and efficiency of the NCLT and NCLAT. To deter 

77  
vexatious challenges, the Committee further recommend that the IBBI prescribe 
a mandatory upfront threshold deposit for unsuccessful resolution applicants 
filing appeals, and the minimum penalty for frivolous applications should be 
substantially raised. 
Creditor Realisation and Asset Valuation 
4. The Committee note that while creditors realise 170.1% of the liquidation 
value, the overall recovery is only 32.8% of the total admitted claims, indicating 
a significant shortfall largely due to firms entering the IBC when assets are 
already heavily stressed. The Committee observe that recovery is constrained 
by valuing assets based merely on liquidation potential rather than enterprise 
value, and by a limited pool of quality resolution applicants. The Committee 
further observe that valuation is a concern due to the lack of transparency and 
accountability in the process, sometimes leading to distress-sale prices. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the system be evolved to 
value assets based on enterprise value to better reflect the corporate debtor’s 
potential. The Committee further recommend that to reduce ‘haircuts’ the 
process for competitive bidding be expanded through global outreach to 
enhance competition. The Committee also recommend that the role of 
liquidators and registered valuers must be strengthened with clear Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs), audit trails, and post-resolution valuation 
reviews, and that the option for fresh valuation to be carried out again after 
specific intervals should be explored. The Committee note that the IBC 
Amendment Bill, 2025 introduces provisions aimed at enhancing transparency 
and accountability in liquidation and valuation processes. The Committee 
believe that implementing these reforms, together with improved institutional 

78  
checks, will help maximise value for all stakeholders and make the recovery 
process more robust.  
Integrity of the IBC Process and Accountability 
5. The Committee note that the statutory overlap between the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) and the Prevention of Money Laundering Act 
(PMLA) is posing a great challenge. The simultaneous application of the IBC 
and the PMLA often creates a conflict, as the attachment of assets by the 
Enforcement Directorate can undermine the immunity granted to the new 
management under Section 32A of the IBC. The Committee further note that for 
giving them protection from any past misconducts of the outgoing 
management, the confiscation of property under PMLA is unknowingly pushing 
away the Resolution Applicants and affecting the revival prospects of 
distressed corporate debtors, thereby defeating the very purpose of IBC to 
resolve insolvency in a time-bound manner.  
 In this regard, the Committee while noting that IBBI has recently issued a 
circular providing that in cases where assets of the corporate debtor are 
attached by the ED under the provisions under PMLA, the Insolvency 
Professional may file an application/undertaking before the Special Court under 
sections 8(7) or 8(8) of the PMLA for restitution of such assets hope that 
expeditions disposal of such applications by the Special Courts will  
significantly enhance the value of the Corporate Debtor thereby leading to 
higher realization. 
The Committee observe that concerns exist regarding the competence 
and possible misuse of power by some Resolution Professionals (RPs), despite 
IBBI following a “carrot and stick policy” involving mandatory professional 

79  
education and a strong disciplinary mechanism, with 73 disciplinary orders 
issued against RPs in the last year. It is important to remember that though the 
law is credit-driven, the success of this law practically depends on the RP, as it 
is basically the RP which drives it. However, the Committee are of the view that 
this long process of accountability, requiring Committee of Creditors (CoC) 
action under Section 25 before approaching the NCLT, needs revisiting. The 
Committee also express concern regarding the instances where the conduct of 
the RP is collusive with the erstwhile promoter or interested parties, and the 
suspected allegations of round-tripping of ownership. The Committee further 
note that the IBC Amendment Bill, 2025 strengthens the accountability of 
Resolution Professionals (RPs) by prescribing higher penalties and enabling 
enhanced regulatory oversight for instances of misconduct. In view of these 
developments, the Committee recommend that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Board of India (IBBI) mandate and expand specialized training programs for 
RPs, and consider the introduction of an additional internal auditor or similar 
monitoring mechanism to ensure compliance and improve oversight. The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs revisit the 
provisions governing the appointment and removal of RPs to empower the 
Committee of Creditors (CoC) more effectively, and streamline the process for 
establishing accountability of RPs and CoC members in cases of any 
infringement of statutory provisions.  
Homebuyers Rights 
6. The Committee note that the IBC's intent to empower homebuyers, a 
concession formalized by authorizing the Committee of Creditors (CoC) to relax 
eligibility criteria for homebuyer associations to submit a resolution plan. 
However, the Committee observe that this relief is significantly undermined by 

80  
the high requirement of a 66% voting share for the CoC to approve this 
relaxation, effectively negating the intended concession. While the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs has viewed the procedural challenge of meeting the minimum 
threshold (100 or 10% of total homebuyers) to initiate CIRP as being outside its 
purview, the Committee nonetheless believes that Government functionaries 
must coordinate across jurisdictions to operationalize laws effectively. The 
Committee are of the considered opinion that despite the empowering move, 
homebuyers remain reliant on the CoC’s discretion and lack an absolute right to 
relief independently. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that to give effective 
implementation to the granted concession, the eligibility criteria for homebuyers 
must be reconsidered to make the concession meaningful and enable resolution 
plans from these groups. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs explore ways to coordinate with other nodal Ministry/Department (like 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs/RERA) to facilitate the inclusion of the 
necessary provisions to help homebuyers and also to address regulatory 
overlaps with other statutes. 
Cross-border insolvency Framework 
7. The Committee note that the establishment of Cross-border insolvency is 
the need of the hour in a developing nation like India, as an increasing number 
of corporate entities are operating internationally with assets spread across 
multiple jurisdictions. The Committee further note that the current vacuum in a 
well-established framework to handle cross-border insolvency disputes under 
IBC, 2016, is causing significant losses in high-value cases and making asset 
recovery and settlement tedious. 

81  
 The Committee also note that their 32nd Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended the incorporation of the United Nations Commission on 
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency 
and the expeditious adoption of a framework. While concerns have been raised 
that adopting the UNCITRAL Model may inadvertently grant foreign creditors 
priority over domestic creditors, the Committee duly understand these looming 
concerns. The Committee further note that the IBC Amendment Bill 2025 
proposes to insert a new enabling provision for empowering the Central 
Government to prescribe Rules relating to Cross-border Insolvency 
proceedings, which is currently under active consideration of the Select 
Committee. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that for making IBC 2016 
instrumental in addressing the resolution of cross-border insolvency cases, the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs may consider selective adoption of the UNCITRAL 
Model with some modifications, well suited for India's financial and legal 
framework to avoid the attached shortcomings. The Committee would also like 
to be informed about those specific instances which are posing a challenge in 
the implementation of the UNCITRAL Model to have a better understanding of 
the specific issues. 
Advance Ruling Mechanism and Mediation 
8. The Committee note that a mechanism for advance ruling, such as the 
one used in the GST regime to provide certainty and pre-empt post-litigation 
disputes, is currently absent in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC). The 
Committee observe that the IBC legal community has been demanding the 
introduction of such an advanced ruling mechanism for some time. Given that 
the IBC prioritizes time-bound resolution, the lack of a system that can provide 

82  
stakeholders with binding clarity on key issues before the initiation or 
admission of an insolvency petition contributes to procedural ambiguity and 
subsequent litigation. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs and the IBBI should urgently explore the feasibility and 
applicability of introducing a suitable advance ruling mechanism within the IBC 
framework. This mechanism should aim to provide stakeholders with pre-
admission clarity on key legal or factual issues, thereby significantly reducing 
unnecessary litigation and safeguarding the time-bound nature of the resolution 
process. 
The Committee also note that mediation under IBC, 2016 is in an early 
evolution stage, and an expert Committee constituted by IBBI recommended for 
pre-institutional mediation to help resolve disputes outside the formal court 
process. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the integration of 
mediation as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism, drawing from 
international best practices, must be sufficiently promoted and its importance 
not to be undermined, as this would considerably reduce the burden on 
Adjudicating Authorities and expedite resolution. 
Diversion or Siphoning of Funds 
9. The Committee note that the issue of diversion or siphoning of funds, 
along with avoidance transactions, is a critical concern, evidenced by the fact 
that out of 1,326 applications filed for avoidance transactions valued at ₹3.76 
lakh crore, the recovery was only about ₹7,500 crores. This vast gap highlights 
the apparent diversion of funds and its severe undermining effect on asset 
quality and subsequent recovery for lenders. 

83  
The Committee observe that RBI views the diversion or siphoning of 
funds as a "critical concern for REs" (Regulated Entities). To address this, 
regulations require REs to adopt a comprehensive approach combining strong 
credit appraisal with end-use monitoring mechanisms. Further, the RBI 
observed that diversion of funds is subjected to checks such as credit audits 
and that the RBI's supervisory examinations also focus on diversion and end-
use of funds. The RBI further note that the primary responsibility of monitoring 
large borrower accounts lies with the banks. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that given the significant value 
erosion caused by these activities, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and IBBI 
must enhance their coordination with the RBI and the Enforcement Directorate 
ED to strengthen forensic audit capabilities during the Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process (CIRP). Specifically, the Committee recommend that the IBC 
framework should be amended to explicitly empower Resolution Professionals 
(RPs) to conduct deeper, time-bound investigations into avoidance transactions 
and diversion of funds, ensuring that the claw-back process is expedited and 
effectively contributes to maximizing the value of the corporate debtor's assets. 
The existing legal provisions related to avoidance transactions (PUFE petitions) 
must be adjudicated without "undue delay" by the NCLT to ensure that the 
recovery is not compromised. 
Impact of IBC on MSMEs and the Pre-packaged Insolvency Resolution Process 
(PPIRP) 
10. The Committee note that the Pre-Packaged Insolvency Resolution 
Process (PPIRP) was introduced through the Sixth amendment in 2021 to the 
IBC Code specifically to bail out and ameliorate distressed MSME corporates, 

84  
envisioning a quicker, cost-effective, and value-maximizing outcome for all 
stakeholders. The Committee observe that the outcomes of the PPIRP have 
been "not so encouraging". As of March 31, 2025, only 14 applications had been 
admitted, with only 8 cases seeing an approved resolution plan. The Committee 
albeit note that the IBC Amendment Bill 2025 has proposed for certain measures 
for streamlining the PPIRP which is under consideration of a the Select 
Committee.  
The Committee further observe that the low uptake is attributed to various 
infrastructural and procedural gaps, such as the complicated procedure for 
filing applications, the lack of liquidity, trust deficit amongst financial creditors, 
sophistication required by MSMEs to navigate the entire complexities of the 
process etc.. Consequently, these drawbacks are cumulatively pushing banks 
toward alternate routes like the SARFAESI and DRT Acts. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a "less complicated procedural set up" be evolved to 
truly help distressed MSME corporates. The Committee further recommend that 
the effective implementation of the PPIRP framework be supported through 
greater awareness, the provision of appropriate incentives, and the issuance of 
clear guidelines for Banks and Financial Institutions to facilitate timely 
resolution, and maximize the intended benefits of the PPIRP under the amended 
Code.  
Adjudicating Authority Rules 
11. The Committee note that the current adjudication process under the IBC 
suffers from protracted delays at the pre-admission stage, driven by factors like 
repeated adjournments and the filing of multiple replies and rejoinders. The 
Committee observe that the fundamental issue is the procedural ambiguity 

85  
arising because the existing Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to 
Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016 only refer to the general NCLT Rules, which 
are not specifically designed for insolvency matters. This reliance has led to 
confusion, a lack of clarity, and judicial inefficiency, which significantly block 
the adjudicatory bandwidth of the NCLT and NCLAT. The Committee note that 
the IBBI suggested the notification of dedicated Rules of Procedure specifically 
for IBC matters to ensure clarity, provide fixed timelines, and enhance the role 
of the Registry. The Committee also observe that the IBC Amendment Bill, 2025, 
underscores the need for procedural streamlining to expedite the resolution 
process. In view of these considerations, the Committee recommend that 
immediate action be taken to notify dedicated Rules of Procedure specifically 
tailored for IBC matters. 
Part settlement of Resolution Plan 
12. The Committee note that in compliance with its previous 
recommendation, CIRP Regulation 37 had been accordingly amended in 2022, 
which clarified that a resolution plan may provide for the sale of one or more 
assets of the Corporate Debtor (CD) to one or more successful resolution 
applicants. The Committee are pleased to note that the MCA adopted a 
proactive approach in amending Regulation 37 to clarify the scope of a 
'Resolution Plan' defined under Section 5(26), and the NCLT has also approved 
the implementation of a resolution plan in parts. The Committee also take note 
of the IBC Amendment Bill 2025 which proposes to further amend Section 5(26) 
to explicitly clarify that the restructuring of the CD may include the sale of one 
or more of its assets. 
The Committee, however, desire that in addition to the amendment in the 
CIRP regulation, a consolidated administrative order clearly citing the scope 

86  
and extent of the enabling provision/regulation authorizing the part settlement 
of the Resolution Plan in clear, unambiguous regional language should be 
issued. This is necessary to avoid any misinterpretation and ensure that any 
corporate entity or individual, irrespective of their resources or level of 
erudition, can easily reach out and comprehend this important aspect of CIRP, 
thereby making the legal position clear. 
Waterfall Mechanism and Stakeholder Claims 
13. The Committee note that a major issue that plagues the resolution 
process is the ambiguity surrounding the waterfall mechanism (Section 53 of 
the IBC), which defines the priority of claims during liquidation. This mechanism 
dictates that secured creditors take priority over unsecured creditors, and 
operational creditors are ranked below financial creditors, often resulting in 
minimal recovery for the former. The Committee observe that the MCA has 
already issued directions to the IBBI to conduct a study on the consequential 
effects of the waterfall mechanism on MSMEs and suggest remedial measures 
to facilitate better recoveries by MSMEs vis-à-vis other creditors. This action 
acknowledges the potential unintended consequences of the current priority 
structure on certain stakeholder groups. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs must expedite the review of the waterfall 
mechanism’s impact on vulnerable stakeholder groups, particularly MSMEs and 
operational creditors, whose lower recovery often undermines their ability to 
sustain business. The Committee further recommend that based on the findings 
of the IBBI study, the Ministry should propose targeted amendments to the 
waterfall mechanism to strike a better balance, maximizing value while ensuring 
that the distribution framework does not unduly disadvantage MSMEs, which 
are critical to the economy. 

87  
Strengthening the Capacity and Efficiency of NCLT 
14. The Committee note that one of the major issues in the efficient 
implementation of IBC is the delay in the resolution of processes. The average 
time taken for resolution as of March 2024 stood at 674 days, which jumped to 
853 days during 2024-2025, significantly traversing the mandated 330-day 
timeline. The Committee observe that this concerning delay, which is 
diminishing asset value, is primarily attributable to the inadequacy of legal 
institution infrastructure, as the NCLT capacity needs to be scaled up to get an 
optimal outcome. The Committee also note that currently, 30,600 IBC cases are 
pending before 30 NCLT Benches that would take at least a decade to dispose 
of this huge backlog with the current strength. The Committee further observe 
that these excessive delays are compounded by widespread frivolous litigation 
and appeals by promoters or unsuccessful resolution applicants. The 
Committee note that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs is proactively working to 
reduce the delay by increasing the number of benches of NCLT and NCLAT, and 
a proposal in this regard is already under consideration. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government must 
review the strength of NCLT & NCLATs for the creation of additional Benches 
and consider enhancing the efficiency of existing NCLT benches, beside filling 
up the existing vacancies. Special designated fast track courts for a fixed time 
period may also be established to shoulder the burden and ensure expeditious 
disposal. To deter vexatious challenges, the Committee further recommend that 
the IBBI prescribe a mandatory upfront threshold deposit for unsuccessful 
resolution applicants filing appeals, and the minimum penalty for frivolous 
applications should be substantially raised. 

88  
E-Court System  
15. The Committee note that the presently operating e-court system under 
IBC has a vital role to play in case management and streamlining the process. 
However, the Committee further note that one of the functional challenges in 
making e-courts a success is the lack of technological fluency among some 
Judges. The Committee therefore, recommend that to make the e-court system 
effective, the Adjudicating Officers must be adequately trained and made 
comfortable in navigating the e-court platform. The Ministry, in this regard, may 
explore options for tying up with capacity building institutions for imparting the 
requisite training. 
The Committee further recommend the creation of a dedicated cadre of IT 
professionals to support NCLT operations, the engagement of specialized 
personnel for the digital infrastructure and groundwork, and the adoption of 
international best practices to build a robust technological backbone, ensuring 
the e-court system functions efficiently. 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund 
16. The Committee note that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund provided 
for under Section 224 of the Code remains pending operationalisation, despite 
the IBBI having requested the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) to 
operationalize it as early as 2019. Given the critical and documented need to 
strengthen the capacity and efficiency of the Adjudicating Authorities 
(NCLT/NCLAT) by filling vacant judicial and administrative posts, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the IBC Fund be immediately operationalized. The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry must ensure that the Fund is 
suitably utilized for enhancing the human resources and efficiency of the NCLT 

89  
and NCLAT to help reduce the excessive delays plaguing the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP). 
Conclusion 
17. The Committee conclude that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 
by offering a clear and time-bound framework for revival, has strengthened 
creditor confidence and encouraged both domestic and foreign investment. 
However, the Code's potential remains hampered by persistent systemic 
challenges. The primary issues are the protracted delays stemming from 
inadequate judicial infrastructure, the uncertainty regarding the finality of 
resolution plans (exacerbated by judicial reversals and the statutory overlap 
with PMLA), and a lack of accountability among resolution professionals (RPs), 
whose role is critical as they drive the success of this credit-driven law. To 
address these issues, the Committee is resolute that the primary strategic focus 
must be the unwavering optimization of the IBC's efficiency. This requires 
immediate and targeted intervention across all fronts: judicial capacity must be 
scaled up with new benches and a review of the NCLT's strength; accountability 
for RPs must be fixed by empowering the CoC and streamlining disciplinary 
actions; the finality of approved plans must be guaranteed through express 
legislative amendment; and procedural ambiguity must be removed by notifying 
dedicated Rules of Procedure for IBC matters. The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to ensure expeditious implementation of these 
reforms in a manner that fully realizes their intended impact, leveraging the IBC 
Amendment Bill, 2025, to realize the full potential of the Code, maximizing 
enterprise value, safeguarding stakeholder interests, promoting financial 
stability, and reinforcing India’s position as a favourable destination for 
business. A sustained, integrated, and time-bound approach is essential to 

90  
ensure that the IBC delivers on its promise of effective, equitable, and efficient 
insolvency resolution. 
 
NEW DELHI; 
26 November, 2025 
05 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 

91  
Appendix – I  
 
 
Minutes of the Twenty Second Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(2024-25)  
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29th May, 2025 from 1100 hrs.to 1315 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.          Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
 3.          Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
 4. Shri K. Gopinath 
5. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
6. Thiru Arun Nehru 
7. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
8. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
11. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri P. Chidambaram 
13. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy 
14. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
15. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
16. Smt. Darshana Singh 
17. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal                          -         Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa        -  Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana    -  Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri T. Mathivanan               -  Deputy Secretary  
 

92  
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs  
 
1. Ms. Deepti Gaur Mukerjee, Secretary 
2. Ms. Anita Shah Akella, Joint Secretary (Insolvency) 
3. Shri Hemant Kumar Patil, Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the witnesses to the sitting of the 
Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses the Chairperson 
opened the discussion on the subject ‘Review of working of Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’. The major issues deliberated upon include 
effectiveness of the resolution process in balancing creditor’s interest vis-à-vis revival 
of distressed debtors, delays in the initiation and closure of insolvency proceedings, 
application of pre-packaged insolvency mechanism to MSMEs and small businesses, 
need to improve the individual insolvency framework, legislative changes necessary 
to optimize the efficiency and effectiveness of the IBC, need for revival of companies 
instead of liquidation and total obliteration, recovery rate against liquidation value 
under the IBC, effectiveness of IBC compared to other recovery channels like Lok 
Adalats, DRTs and SARFAESI Act, timelines for adjudication by NCLT/NCLA, factors 
affecting recovery rate and shortfall therein against total claims, reliability and 
steadfastness of IBC proceedings, impact of Supreme Court Judgment in Bhushan 
Power& Steel Limited (BPSL) case on IBC and emerging perspectives, timeline for 
giving commercial decisions and finality of the decision. steps to improve the IBC 
system for fixing accountability of persons/officers concerned with the implementation 
of IBC, IB proceedings by NCLT and other parallel processes under separate 
laws/Agencies, ‘loss of choice’ for the consumers in consequence to winding up of 
large number of corporate entities, extinguishment of claims against the Corporate 
Debtor under Section 31 of the IBC post approval of the Resolution plan and 
compliance thereof  by IT/GST/Bank officials, feasibility of barring revocation of 
claims after admittance, delays caused during the adjudication proceedings, lack of 
comprehensive framework for Cross-Border Insolvency cases, vacancies in NCLT 
and NCLAT benches etc.  
 
3.    Beside the issues mentioned above, the Committee also discussed, provision 
for stay of implementation of resolution plan, reassessment of Section 32A to define 

93  
the scope of immunity granted to corporate entities post-resolution, setting up of an 
integrated technology platform under IBC for an integrated case management 
system, incorporation of  the  United Nations Commission on International Trade Law 
(UNCITRAL) model law into the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, best global 
practices needed to be incorporated in insolvency and bankruptcy processes and 
ecosystem, regulation and oversight over the working of the Resolution Professionals 
to ensure their integrity and righteous conduct etc. 
 
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members. The 
Chairperson then directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the points 
raised by the Members which could not be readily responded to by them during the 
discussion, within a week’s time to the Secretariat. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
* * *  

94  
Appendix – II 
 
Minutes of the Twenty Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(2024-25)  
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29th May, 2025 from 1400 hrs.to 1545 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.          Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
 
 3.          Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
 4. Shri K. Gopinath 
 5. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
6. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
7. Thiru Arun Nehru 
8. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
9. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
10. Prof. Sougata Ray 
11. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri P. Chidambaram 
14. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy 
15. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
16. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
17. Smt. Darshana Singh 
18. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal                          -         Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa      -  Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana    -  Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri T. Mathivanan               -  Deputy Secretary  
 

95  
WITNESSES 
 
Union Bank of India 
 
1. Ms. A. Manimekhalai, MD & CEO 
2. Shri Ravindra Babu, CGM (SAMV) 
3. Shri Dharmendra Meena, Senior Manager 
 
Punjab National Bank  
 
1. Shri Ashok Chandra, MD & CEO 
2. Shri E. Rajagur, CGM Recovery 
Canara Bank  
 
1. Shri K. Satyanarayana Raju, MD & CEO 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh, Chief General Manager 
3. Shri Abhay Kumar Malviya, General Manager 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the witnesses to the sitting of the 
Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses the Chairperson 
opened the discussion on the subject ‘Review of working of Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’. The major issues deliberated upon include 
balancing out the interest of creditors vis-a-vis Corporate debtors(CD),requirement of 
Notice to CDs under Section 7 before admission of claim, delay in admission of CIRP 
applications and in approval of Resolution plan, suggestions by Indian Bank 
Association for amendment to IBC, regulation and oversight of Committee on 
Creditors on Resolution Professionals to ensure their integrity, excessive haircuts of 
banks against the outstanding credits, collaboration among the Resolution applicant 
and CDs for duping Banks out of their due and rightful claims, working of NCLT& 
NCLAT and need to make them more functionally efficient and productive, quality of 
the Resolution Professionals, disproportionate voting power to the secured creditors 
at the cost of marginalizing other stakeholders, discretionary power of liquidators 
without regulatory approvals thereon, risk of undervaluation of assets by liquidators, 
diminishing value of assets caused due to delay in settlement of claims, withdrawal of 
application under section 12A due to coercion, feasibility of easing the severity of IBC 
procedures for small entrepreneurs and MSMEs. 
 

96  
3.   In addition to the issues mentioned above, the Committee also discussed 
preconditions for the approval of Resolution plan under section 30, fraudulent 
dealings by RPs and action taken against delinquents, ‘Waterfall mechanism’ under 
Section 51 and application thereof to the MSMEs in capacity of operational creditors, 
adherence to procedural norms in CoC decisions to prevent legal setbacks, gaps in 
the provision coverage ratio and actual recoveries under IBC valuation methodology 
of CoC for assets valuation, sector specific insolvency patterns and adoption of 
sector specific strategy or unit for handling IBC-linked exposures in case of capital 
intensive industries, best recovery law and achievements among the DRT, 
SARFAESI Act & IBC, lack of reach of Banks to the rural Community/Districts for 
providing Mudra Loans and impact of Supreme Court Judgment in Bhushan Power& 
Steel Limited (BPSL) case over banks and consequential haircuts realized etc. 
 
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members. The 
Chairperson then directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the points 
raised by the Members which could not be readily responded to by them during the 
discussion, within a week’s time to the Secretariat. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
* * *  
 

97  
Appendix – III 
 
Minutes of the Twenty Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(2024-25)  
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 30th May, 2025 from 1100 hrs.to 1315 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
5. Shri Kishori Lal 
6. Thiru Arun Nehru 
7. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
8. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
11. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
12. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy 
14. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
15. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
16. Smt. Darshana Singh 
17. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri Gaurav Goyal                          -         Joint Secretary 
2.       Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa      -     Director 
3.     Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana      -     Deputy Secretary  
4.       Shri T. Mathivanan                          -        Deputy Secretary 
 

98  
WITNESSES 
 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) 
 
1. Shri Ravi Mital, Chairperson 
2. Shri Jayanti Prasad, Whole-time Member 
3. Shri Sandip Garg, Whole-time Member 
4. Shri Bhushan Kumar Sinha, Whole-time Member 
5. Shri Satish Sethi, Executive Director 
6. Shri Jithesh John, Executive Director 
 
2.    At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the witnesses to the sitting of the 
Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses the Chairperson 
opened the discussion on the subject ‘Review of working of Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’. The major issues deliberated upon inter alia 
include need for legislative changes to strengthen and improve the overall functioning 
of IBC; Supreme Court Judgment in Bhushan Power & Steel Limited (BPSL) case 
and emerging perspectives therefrom; delays in resolution plan and its impact on 
recovery rate and steps taken to improve the same; appropriateness and implications 
of reversal of resolution plan; moratorium under section 14 and compliance thereof 
by Government authorities; factors attributed to delays in Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process (CIRP); measures for disposal of backlog of cases pending 
before National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT); role of IBBI in selection of 
Insolvency Professionals/Resolution Professionals and their regulations, fair 
treatment, disciplinary proceedings, etc. 
 
3.      Beside the issues mentioned above, the Committee also discussed overall 
impact of IBC proceedings on the consumers and market dynamics post-resolution; 
new modus operandi and suggestions to reduce excessive haircuts experienced by 
bank; Pre- packaged insolvency process for MSMEs; feasibility of timely public 
disclosure of case data such as timelines, recovery rates, and resolution outcomes 
on IBBI portal; cross-border insolvency framework proposed by IBBI, impact of the 
IBC on different stakeholders of the financial ecosystem namely MSMEs, financial 
institutions and individual investors or home buyers; measures for protecting the 
rights of operational creditors in the Committee of Creditors; Protection of debtors 
against creditor’s coercive tactics to acquire their assets at distressed prices; 

99  
implementation of direct submission system and improvement of performance of 
Resolution Professionals, as recommended by the Standing Committee on Finance 
in their earlier Report; difference in the requirement of voting percentage for 
withdrawal of application and approval of resolution plan under section 12; feasibility 
of entrusting power to appoint and remove RP with the same authority; fixing the 
accountability of actual wrongdoers i.e., the errant corporate defaulters instead of 
surrounding stakeholders and components of economic ecosystem etc. 
 
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members. The 
Chairperson then directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the points 
raised by the Members which could not be readily responded to by them during the 
discussion, within a week’s time to the Secretariat. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
* * *  
 
 

100  
     Appendix– IV 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th July, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3.  Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
4.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
5.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
6. Shri Kishori Lal 
7. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
8. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
9. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy 
10. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
11. Shri Manish Tewari 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy 
13. Shri Sanjay Seth 
14. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal                          -         Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa    -  Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana    -  Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri T. Mathivanan               -  Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 

101  
WITNESSES 
 
State Bank of India  
1. Shri C. S . Setty, Chairman  
2. Mr.  Kshitij Mohan- DMD (SARG)  
 
Bank of Baroda 
1. Shri Debadatta Chand, Managing Director & CEO 
2. Shri Dinesh Pant, Chief General Manager 
 
Indian Overseas Bank 
1. Shri Ajay Kumar Srivastava, MD & CEO  
2. Mr. Chandra Mohan Achary, General Manager 
3. Mr Sanjay Kishore, General Manager 
 
Indian Bank 
1. Shri G Rajeswara Reddy, CGM, Recovery 
2. Shri Ram Kumar Das, CGM, Chief Compliance Officer and former GM of 
Recovery 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the witnesses to the sitting of the 
Committee. After the customary introduction of the Witnesses, the Chairperson 
initiated the discussion on the subject ‘Review of working of Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’. The major issues discussed inter alia 
included impact of IBC on MSMEs, financial institutions, individual investors and home 
buyers; suggestions to reduce excessive haircuts of lenders; reasons for delay in 
CIRP and suggestions to check these delays; accumulation of NPAs and resolution 
thereof post-IBC; Pre-pack resolution plan for MSMEs under Section 29A and other 
restructuring mechanisms; priority and voting share of unsecured financial creditors 
over other creditors in Committee on Creditors; strict compliance of Section 32 for 
protecting the properties of Corporate Debtor from any attachment, confiscation and 
restraint connected to any offence committed prior to the approval of the resolution 
plan; measures for improvement in the working of NCLT and NCLAT and easing out 
their workload; perspectives emerging out of the Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd. 
adjudication; review petition filed by resolution application, applicant and the lenders in 
the case; progress and issues relating to  cross-border insolvency and group 
insolvency, achievements under IBC 2016 as per the true intent and objectives of the 
code i.e., the companies actually rehabilitated; action and remedial measures taken by 

102  
banks against officers fell short in exercising due diligence while sanctioning big loans 
and charge sheeted till date.  
3.  Beside the afore-mentioned issues, the Committee also deliberated upon the 
measures to ensure integrity and righteousness of the Resolution professionals to 
prevent collusion and plotting with resolution applicant or outgoing Promoter of the 
debtor Company; efficacy of pre-pack resolution process for MSMEs vis a vis  CIRP, 
excessive Haircuts and recovery rates under IBC versus other recovery mechanism 
like SARFAESI, Lok Adalat and DRT; reasons for delays and adherence to the 
stipulated timeline of 330 days in CIRPs: asset valuation system and role of Auditors 
in the entire process; competitive bidding in CIRP through digital platforms and global 
outreach for obtaining improved asset value; delay caused due to lack of coordination 
among the lender banks in a consortium, need for devising pre-emptive measures by 
banks in case of anticipated default; OTS Scheme and the success rate thereof; CDs 
indulging in repeated defaults with several lenders and impact thereof on the credibility 
of IBC and banks; sustainability in the GNPA  decline ratio; need of a professional 
code of conduct for the Committee of Creditors; bidding price mistaken as resolution 
plan marring  prospects of entrepreneurship and steps taken to check the distortion; 
asset devaluation due to attachment of assets by ED  under section 14 of IBC, 2016 
during the moratorium; mandate and rigors of section 31 of IBC, 2016 and implications 
thereof; grounds used by promoter and others for invoking jurisdiction under Article 
227 of the Constitution etc.. 
4.    The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson 
then directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the points raised by the 
Members which could not be readily responded to by them during the discussion, 
within a week’s time to the Secretariat. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
* * * 
 

103  
Appendix– V 
 Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 

104  
PART I 
WITNESSES 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
1. Shri M. Rajeshwar Rao, Deputy Governor 
 
2. Shri Kesavan Ramachandran, Executive Director 
 
3. Shri Vaibhav Chaturvedi, Chief General Manager 
 
4. Shri Sandeep Mahajan, GM and EA to Deputy Governor 
 
5. Shri Shivaji Radhakrishnan, General Manager 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the witnesses to the sitting of the 
Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses the Deputy Governor, 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) gave his opening remarks on the subject, “Review of 
working of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues”. The Chairperson 
then opened the discussion on the subject. The major issues deliberated upon inter 
alia included amendments needed for strengthening IBC and improving resolution 
aspects; role and  contribution of ARCs in resolving stressed assets and promoting 
Financial stability; feasibility of establishment of fast track benches in the case of high 
value evaluation; feasibility of implementing Pre-packaged Insolvency Resolution 
Process to other Corporate; provision of Code of Conduct for stakeholders in IBC; 
failure in adherence to the stipulated timeline during  various steps of CIRP; Trade 
Receivables Counting System and implementation thereof to MSME; unique NCLT 
order in case of Hindustan photo films mfg. Co. Ltd.; partial resolution and liquidation 
of remaining assets; justification for allowing a fresh CIRP instead of liquidation in 
disputes for preventing or halting other court proceedings;  re-opening of NCLT 
adjudicated resolution; extraordinary high percentage of haircuts on high value asset 
cases; practicality of Implementing PPIRP on other corporate due to lukewarm 
response in MSME Sector; effectiveness of the current resolution processes and the 
need for strengthening it; views of RBI on market based compensation model 
calibrated to reward faster turn around and higher recovery; status of implementation 
of Supreme Court Judgment in Bhushan Power and Steel case under the IBC etc. The 
witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then 
directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the points raised by the 
Members which could not be readily responded to by them during the discussion, 
within a week’s time to the Secretariat.  
The Witnesses then withdrew. 
     Record of the Verbatim Proceedings has been kept. 
 

105  
PART II 
 
3.      XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * 
 
X - matter not related to this Report. 

106  
Appendix– VI 
 
 
Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2025-26). 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 26th November, 2025 from 1230 hrs. to 
1310 hrs in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
3. Shri Kishori Lal  
4. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
5. Thiru Arun Nehru  
6. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
7. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
8. Shri Manish Tewari  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
10. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
12. Shri Sanjay Seth  
13. Smt. Darshana Singh  
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
15. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja  - Director 
2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T. Mathivanan   - Deputy Secretary 
  
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
i. Twenty-Seventh Report on ‘Performance review of National Statistical 
Commission (NSC)’; and  
ii. Twenty-Eighth Report on ‘Review of working of Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code and Emerging Issues’. 

107  
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports with 
minor modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
Reports to the Parliament in the upcoming Winter Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
* * * 
 