 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2022-23) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained in 
Fifty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-
24) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation’] 
 
 
 
 
SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2023 / Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)
65 


ii 
 
 
SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2022-2023) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained in 
Fifty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-
24) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27 July 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 July 2023 
 
 
 
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
July, 2023 / Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I Report        1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
       6 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
     22 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
    23 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited 
             24 
           ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 20 July, 
2023 
 25 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations Contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’.  
 
28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2022-23) 
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal 
4. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
5.  Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
6. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
8. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
9. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
10. Shri Pinaki Misra 
11. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
12. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
13. Shri Nama Nageshwara Rao 
14. Prof. Sougata Ray 
15. Shri P.V. Midhun Reddy 
16. Shri Gopal Chinayya  Shetty 
17. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh  
18. Dr. (Prof) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
19. Shri Manish Tewari 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Shri P. Chidambaram 
25. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
26. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
27. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
28. Dr.Amar Patnaik 
29. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
30. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari* 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan                                -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan                 -    Director  
3. Shri Puneet Bhatia                                        -    Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Abhiruchi Srivastava                              -    Assistant Committee Officer 
 
____________________________________ 
* Vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II no. 63014 dated 13.03.2023, Shri Pramod Tiwari was nominated to the 
Standing Committee on Finance (2022-23) on 13th March, 2023 vice Dr. Manmohan Singh, who resigned from 
the Committee w.e.f. 9th February, 2023. 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Sixty-Fifth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth 
Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.  
  
2. The Fifty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 23 March, 2023. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from the Government vide their 
communication dated 22 June, 2023.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on           
20 July, 2023.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                               Shri Jayant Sinha 
20 July, 2023                                                    Chairperson, 
29  Ashadha, 1945(Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Finance

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 58th Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation which was presented to Lok Sabha / Laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 23rd  March, 2023.  
2.  The Action Taken Notes were received from Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation on 22nd June, 2023.  The Action Taken Notes have been 
received from the Government in respect of all the 9 recommendations contained in the 
Report. The replies have been analyzed and categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9     
             (Total – 8) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
 
                         (Total - Nil) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 7 
  
                  (Total -1) 
 (Chapter- IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: Nil 
                  (Total - Nil) 
(Chapter- V) 
3.  The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 

2 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Shortage of Manpower 
4. The Committee have noted with concern the shortage of manpower in the 
Ministry, especially in the senior and junior statistical office cadre; on 30th November 
2022, 266 vacancies exist which is roughly 33% of the total sanctioned strength. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to pursue the matter of recruitment with 
Staff Selection Commission (SSC) vigorously so that the vacancies can be filled within 
this financial year. With regard to shortage of manpower in Field Operation Division in 
NSSO, the Committee would recommend for recruiting more field based staff on a 
mission mode basis for accurate and reliable data collection. 
 
5. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation has furnished the following written submission: 
“As regard to shortage of manpower in ISS, this Ministry has already initiated the 
process to fill up these vacancies at various grades of ISS through promotion and 
direct recruitment of ISS through ISS Exam, 2023. All the promotion proposals 
are in the process and hence, the corresponding vacancies are likely to be filled 
up shortly. Further, a proposal for amendment to ISS Rules is under process and 
Cadre review proposal of ISS has already been submitted to Department of 
Personnel & Training. 
  So far as the shortage of manpower in respect of Senior Statistical officers 
(SSOs) and Junior Statistical officers (JSOs) is concerned, following action has 
been taken to fill up the vacancies of JSO: 
i. ‘265’ Junior Statistical Officers (JSOs) have been recruited through CGLE-
2019 in July, 2022; 
ii.  ‘401’ Junior Statistical Officers have been recruited through CGLE-2020 
in January, 2023; 

3 
 
iii. Issuance of Offer of appointments of ‘110’ Candidates selected through 
CGLE-2021 is under process; 
iv.  ‘38’ Vacancies of JSO had been reported to SSC for CGLE-2022 and 
Final result for CGLE-2022 is awaited; and  
v. For CGLE-2023 ‘108’ vacancies have already been reported to SSC in 
February, 2023. 
          Further, in respect of higher number of vacancies in SSS Cadre, it is 
submitted that unfortunately, the Subordinate Statistical Service has been facing 
high attrition, at annual average of 42% during the last 5 years. Due to the 
significantly high attrition, the vacancy at the level of JSO as on 01.12.2022 is 
654 which are about 30% of the sanctioned posts. It is further informed that as on 
23.05.2023, 248 Offer of Appointments to willing candidates have been issued 
w.r.t. candidates selected through CGLE-2019 and 376 Offer of Appointments to 
willing candidates have been issued w.r.t. candidates selected through CGLE-
2020 which has reduced the vacancies from 654 to 30 at the level of JSO. 
Furthermore, Document Verification and Pre-Appointment Formalities have been 
done w.r.t. candidates selected through CGLE-2021 and Offers of Appointments 
to 84 candidates have been issued. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell  dated  21-06-2023]  
 
6. The Committee had expressed their concern about the shortage of 
manpower in the Ministry, specially in the Senior and Junior Statistical Officer 
cadre and recommended the Ministry to pursue the matter of recruitment with 
Staff Selection Commission.  
 The Ministry in its reply has stated that recruitment efforts through 
promotions and direct recruitment of the Indian Statistical Service (ISS) Cadre 
have been initiated. The reply also indicate that vacancies for Junior Statistical 
Officers (JSOs) have been filled through CGLE and offers of appointments are 
being processed. Vacancies reported for CGLE-2022 and CGLE-2023 also 
highlight the ongoing recruitment efforts by the Ministry.  

4 
 
  
The Committee acknowledge the efforts made by the Ministry to address 
the shortage of manpower. However, the Ministry should also furnish the details 
regarding the manpower requirement in the Field Operation Division of the NSSO. 
The Ministry must ensure a robust and adequately staffed work force for the 
effective implementation of its programmes and initiatives.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
Economic Census 
7. The Committee understand that Economic Census (EC) provides valuable 
insights into spread / clusters of economic activities, ownership patterns, source of 
finance etc. of all establishments in the country. Regarding the 7th EC, which was 
launched in 2019, the Ministry informed that using advanced ICT tools, 7th EC was 
completed in March 2021. The Ministry further informed that 7th Economic Census data 
collection and supervision were affected due to several operational challenges including 
the COVID-19 pandemic. 7th EC results are yet to be finalized as approval of provisional 
results is yet to be obtained from various state level coordination committees. The 
Committee note that the release of the 7th Economic Census has been delayed.   The 
Committee thus recommend that the Ministry take a proactive approach to expedite the 
process of data collection at state level and work closely with the states to overcome 
any obstacles they may be facing in providing the required data. The Ministry should 
also provide additional resources to the states that are facing statistical capacity 
constraints in terms of providing data.  
8.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation has furnished the following written submission: 
“7th EC data quality concerns raised by State/UTs have been shared with the 
implementing agency (Common Service Centres-CSC) for their appropriate and 
earliest redressal. Rigorous coordination is being done with CSC and State/UTs 
for early approval of 7th EC provisional results by their respective State Level 
Coordination Committee (SLCC). 
  

5 
 
As on 30th April, 2023, 13 States/UTs SLCCs have communicated the approval 
on 7th EC provisional result.”   
  
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023] 
 
9. The Committee had expressed their concern about the delay caused in the 
release of 7th Economic Census and recommended that Ministry take a proactive 
approach to expedite the process of data collection at state level. The Committee 
further recommended that the Ministry also provide additional resources to the 
states that are facing capacity constraints in term of providing data.   
 The Ministry’s response falls short in providing proactive approach to 
address the delays in releasing the 7th Economic census. Moreover, the response 
highlights that as of April 30, 2023 only 13 states / UTs have communicated their 
approval on the 7th Economic Census provisional results, indicating lack of 
progress in obtaining approvals from the State Level Coordination Committees. 
The response of the Government also does not provide clear information on how 
it plans to implement these recommendations.  
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire that 
the Ministry accelerate data collection, foster close collaboration with states and 
ensure timely approval of the provisional results by the State Level Coordination 
Committee. The Committee should also be apprised about the details related to 
the states that are facing statistical capacity constraints in terms of providing 
data.  
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       JAYANT SINHA, 
20 July, 2023                                                       Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that under the Capacity Development (CD) scheme there 
have been a shortfall in fund utilization by Rs.357.66 crore in 2021-22 against the BE of 
Rs.598.36 crore and Rs.344.27 crore in 2022-23 against the Budget allocation of 
562.10 crore (62.24% shortfall). The reason furnished by the Ministry for the shortfalls 
include such factors as expenditure ceilings / restrictions / guidelines issued by Ministry 
of Finance, issues arising out of Covid 19 pandemic which curtailed tours, training of 
officers, workshops/seminars etc. The Committee observe that many projects under the 
CD Head have been left dormant.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and actual expenditure in 
Capacity Development Scheme of Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MoSPI) during FY 2021-22 and 2022-23 are as under: 
 (Rs. in Crore) 
  
  
  
Name of the 
scheme 
2021-22 2022-23 
  
  
BE 
  
  
RE 
  
  
Actual 
expenditure 
  
  
BE 
  
  
RE 
  
Actual 
expenditure  
Capacity 
Development 
(CD) Scheme 
598.36 347.00 241.70 
  
  
562.10 347.50 327.67 
  
MoSPI has incurred an expenditure of 69.65% over RE 2021-22 and 40.39% over BE 
2021-22 of CD Scheme. Further, in FY 2022-23, an expenditure of 94.29% over RE 
2022-23 and 58.29% over BE 2022-23 of CD Scheme has been incurred. Therefore, as 
against FY 2021-22, utilization of the funds in FY 2022-23 has improved.  

7 
 
  
The shortfall in expenditure under CD Scheme was mainly due to the following reasons: 
  
● The savings in Economic Census (EC), a Sub-Scheme of CD Scheme, was 
mainly due to non-release of payment to the implementing agency (Common 
Service Centres-CSC) as they could not achieve the final payment milestone. 
Due to non-resolution of 7th EC data issues, several follow-up activities as 
envisaged could not be initiated during the period. 
● The Ministry is rigorously coordinating and following up with the States, CSC and 
MeitY for redressal of the quality issues flagged by the State Governments. 
Meetings have been held at various levels to expedite the approval of 7th EC 
provisional results by State/UTs. 
  
● The “Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS)” is an ongoing Central Sector 
sub-scheme of CD Scheme under which financial support is provided to the 
States/UTs for undertaking statistical activities as specified in the one – time 
MoU signed with them. Since inception in 2010, MoUs have been signed with 26 
States/UTs till date, out of which 11 States/UTs have completed the 
implementation of the SSS sub-scheme and 3 States are nearing completion. 12 
States/UTs are at various stages of implementation. Efforts to take remaining 8 
States/UTs on board are being made. 
● After signing of MoU, funds in the form of grants-in-aid are released to the 
concerned State/UT in the form of instalments. While the first instalment is 
released as advance, the subsequent instalments are released subject to 80% 
utilization of previous instalments and achievement of commensurate physical 
progress. The total requirement of funds under SSS Sub-Scheme in a particular 
FY is worked out after assessing the progress of States/UTs based on the 
physical and financial progress as reported in their Monthly Progress Reports 
(MPRs). The BE of Rs. 33.44 crore for the FY 2021-22 and the BE of Rs. 52.63 
crore for the FY 2022-23 was accordingly formulated. The expenditure under 
SSS Sub-Scheme is contingent upon raising of demands by the States / UTs 

8 
 
which are implementing the sub-scheme. The activities of many currently 
implementing States / UTs were badly affected due to the pandemic and they 
could not undertake delineated activities at requisite pace thereby leading to less 
than expected fund utilisation till 2021-22. The States resumed their major 
activities in 2022-23, and were thus expected to claim their second / third 
instalments. However, the resumed activities took time in gaining momentum as 
some time elapsed in reprioritising the set of activities, engagement of vendors 
for undertaking activities, etc. Thus, the States could not raise further demands in 
2022-23 as previously released funds were still available with them. Thus, the 
allocation in the FY 2022-23 was reduced from Rs.52.63 crore to Rs.7.55 crore 
at RE stage. 
● The Ministry has been rigorously following up with the States/UTs for smooth 
operations and successful implementation of the Sub-Scheme by way of holding 
Joint Review Meetings and regular communication. 
● Two of the survey activities of National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) planned 
during FY 2022-23, namely, Time Use Survey (TUS) and Annual Survey of 
Service Sector Enterprises (ASSSE) could not be commenced as finalization of 
survey instruments was under process. 
● The provisioned funds for National Integrated Information Platform (NIIP) are 
linked with achievement of milestones by the system integrator. As none of the 
milestones has been fully achieved for all of the modules, therefore funds 
allocated could not be utilized. 
 Further, outside training programmes for Indian Statistical Service (ISS) 
probationers as well as in-service officers could not be conducted due to the COVID-
19 pandemic conditions resulting in savings in FY 2021-22. 
 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H-11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023 
 
 

9 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
With regard to major Head 2552 - release of funds to the North-East region in 
respect of various activities by NSO and SSS sub scheme, the Committee note that 
there is a downward revision in the fund outlay to the extent of 57.8% in 2023-24. It has 
been submitted by the Ministry that the substantial reduction in fund was worked out 
based on the physical and financial progress of states and past trend of utilization of 
funds. The Committee, therefore, suggest that the Ministry should identify the reason for 
the non-utilization of funds and take appropriate measures to ensure that the allocated 
funds are utilized, schemes/activities be adequately provided for and nurtured 
systematically and implemented vigorously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under the Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS) sub-scheme of Capacity 
Development (CD) scheme, funds in the form of Grants-in Aid are provided to the 
States / UTs for undertaking statistical activities as specified in the MoUs signed with 
them. No further grant to the State / UT can be given once they exhaust their specified 
allocation.  
  After signing of MoU, funds are released to the concerned State/UT in the form of 
instalments. While the first instalment is released as advance, the subsequent 
instalments are released subject to 80% utilization of previous instalments and 
achievement of commensurate physical progress. Thus, the expenditure under SSS 
sub-scheme is contingent upon raising of demands by the States/UTs which are 
implementing the sub-scheme.  
  As far as North Eastern Region (NER) is concerned, MoUs have been signed 
with all 8 NER States. 3 States (Manipur, Mizoram and Sikkim) which had signed their 
revised MoUs in 2014 -15 and 2015 -16 have completed the implementation of SSS 
scheme and the remaining 5 States which have signed MoUs in 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 
2020 – 21 are at various stages of implementation.  
  The activities of the currently implementing 5 States were badly affected due to 
the pandemic and they could not undertake delineated activities at requisite pace 
thereby leading to less than expected fund utilisation till 2021-22. The States resumed 

10 
 
their major activities in 2022 – 23, and were thus expected to claim their second / third 
instalments. However, the resumed activities took time in gaining momentum as some 
time elapsed in reprioritising the activities, engagement of vendors for undertaking 
activities, etc. Thus, the States could not raise further demands in 2022-23 as 
previously released funds were still available with them.  
  
The downward revision of Budgetary Estimates of the SSS sub – scheme for the 
year 2023-24 is not restricted to the NER but has been done for the overall sub – 
scheme level after careful and thorough deliberations. It may be noted that, out of total 
allocation of Rs. 10.31 crores for SSS sub-scheme under BE 23-24, allocation made for 
NER in 2023-24 is Rs. 2.85 crores which is more than 10% of mandatory share for NER 
in fund outlay. Additional funds, if required, would be sought at the RE stage, after 
thorough scrutiny of the absorption capacity of the implementing States/UTs.  
   
The Ministry has been rigorously following up with the States for smooth 
operations and successful implementation of the Sub-Scheme by way of holding Joint 
Review Meetings (JRMs) and regular communications. Discussions held in JRMs have 
also deliberated upon the issue of expediting the pace of expenditure and States have 
been requested to review the activities for reprioritisation, as the case may be. 
  
In so far as the funds allocation under Grant-in-Aid (GIA) NER under CD(Main) 
Scheme to National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) is concerned, in accordance 
with the guidelines on revised procedure of flow of funds under central sector scheme, 
issued by the Ministry of Finance Govt. of India, expenditure under GIA through 
Regional Offices (NE) of Field Operations Division (FOD) of NSSO for survey 
operations may not be feasible. So, the fund allocated under the object head GIA in FY 
23-24 will be completely released to 5 NE states namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Tripura and Sikkim for utilization. Therefore, the demand under the object 
head GIA has been reduced from Rs. 22 crore in FY 2022-23 to Rs. 15.34 crore in FY 
2023-24. 
 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M.  No. H- 11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023 

11 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 The committee deliberated on a wide range of issues related to MPLAD Scheme such 
as: 
i. Reviewing of MPLAD guidelines without full consultations with the Members of 
Parliament. 
ii. The difficulty faced by MPs in submission of Utilization Certificates. 
iii. Delayed execution of recommended projects under the scheme. 
iv. Need to increase the MPLAD funds from 5 crore to 10 crore under the scheme. 
v. GST exemption for works executed under MPLAD Scheme. 
These issues are complex and would require careful consideration to Identify viable 
solutions that can effectively address them. The Committee has thus decided to 
examine the subject separately in detail. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Reviewing of MPLAD Guidelines without full consultations with the Members of 
Parliament. 
 
REPLY:  
1.  The Ministry considers Hon’ble Members of Parliament as the most important 
stakeholders in the MPLAD Scheme, and hence, their feedback is considered to be 
very critical for bringing qualitative improvement in the Scheme. Accordingly, right 
from the commencement of the exercise of comprehensive and holistic revision of 
MPLADS Guidelines, Ministry has consulted the Hon’ble MPs from time to time as 
explained below:- 
● In the year 2021, the Ministry instituted evaluation by a third party of the works 
done during the period from 1-4-2014 to 31-3-2019 under the MPLADS in 
selected 216 districts. During evaluation, the Ministry requested Hon’ble MPs of 
the selected nodal districts to give their suggestions/ feedback for improvement 
in MPLAD Scheme. As due to COVID 19 pandemic, the meeting of agency with 

12 
 
the Hon’ble MPs was not feasible, the agency had prepared a Questionnaire 
Performa which was to be filled by Hon’ble MPs. It was also advised that the 
Hon’ble MPs, if they, so desired, could have a meeting/ telephonic conversation 
for giving feedback. The copy of O.M., dated 24-6-2021 along with the 
questionnaire sent to the Hon’ble MPs through email is enclosed (Annexure-A). 
The suggestions of the Hon’ble MPs were incorporated by the third party in its 
final report of evaluation. 
● In December, 2021, the Ministry issued a D.O. No. E-4/2020-MPLADS, dated 9-
12-2021 under the signature of DDG (MPLADS), MoSPI seeking suggestions of 
all Hon’ble Members of Parliament for revision of MPLADS Guidelines. 
Thereafter, the Ministry organized interactive Workshops in different parts of the 
country [New Delhi, Hyderabad, Guwahati, Mumbai, Lucknow and Kolkata] with 
representatives of States/UTs handling MPLADS work to collect inputs and 
suggestions for revision of Guidelines. A copy of D.O., dated 9-12-2021 is 
enclosed for reference (Annexure-B). 
● The matter of revision of MPLADS Guidelines was also discussed at length in the 
sittings of Rajya Sabha Committee on MPLADS held on 12-11-2021 and 8-6-
2022. Copies of minutes of the sittings are enclosed (Annexure-C & D).  
● Based on the suggestions/ inputs received from various stakeholders, and based 
on the recommendations made in the report of the Third Party Evaluation, the 
Ministry had come-up with a draft Guidelines on MPLADS in October, 2022. 
These draft Guidelines were circulated by email amongst all Hon’ble MPs on 25-
10-2022 for their inputs. Copy placed at Annexure-E. These draft guidelines 
were also placed on MPLADS portal on mplads.gov.in (which is not password 
protected and can be viewed by anyone) for suggestions/ inputs of all 
stakeholders. The inputs were also sought from the Rajya Sabha Committee on 
MPLADS and Lok Sabha Sectt. (Annexure-E). 
● The response of the Rajya Sabha Committee on MPLADS and the Lok Sabha 
Sectt. is also enclosed, respectively (Annexure-F & G).  

13 
 
2.  Based on the inputs received from various stakeholders, including Hon’ble MPs, 
found feasible and aligned with the objectives of MPLAD Scheme, the Ministry has 
now released final Guidelines on 22-2-2023, to be effective from 1-4-2023.  
3.  It may be seen from the above that the Ministry has followed due and 
comprehensive process of consultation with stakeholders, including Members of 
Parliament, before finalizing MPLADS Guidelines. 
   
(ii) The difficulty faced by MPs in submission of Utilisation Certificates. 
 REPLY:  
Under the Revised Fund Flow Procedure, the Hon’ble MPs will be allocated 
authorization for entire annual entitlement at the beginning of each financial year 
subject to conditions laid down in Revised MPLADS Guidelines. The funds will 
actually flow directly to the vendor from the Central Nodal Agency Account on real 
time basis only at the time of payment based on the principle of ‘Just in time release’ 
and UC will be generated on real time basis. That is, the UC will be generated on 
real time basis at the time of payment of vendor and the authorization equal to entire 
annual entitlement of an MP will be allocated at the beginning of each financial year. 
   
(iii) Delayed execution of recommended projects under the Scheme. 
REPLY:  
 With the objective of making the MPLAD Scheme more efficient and effective and to 
expedite implementation of MPLADS projects, all redundant provisions of MPLADS 
have been done away with and several new provisions have been incorporated. 
  
The entire process of fund flow under the new Guidelines will operate on an 
IT platform which will allow all the stakeholders, including Hon’ble MPs, the Central 
and State Govt. agencies, the district authorities etc. to monitor in real time, the 
status of funds and works. The Utilization Certificates will also be generated on real 
time basis. Hon’ble MPs have been given the flexibility in choosing the works that 
can be taken up under MPLAD Scheme provided it leads to creation of durable 
public assets for larger public good of the society.  

14 
 
  
The Hon’ble MPs will not be required to wait for the actual fund to be released 
by the Ministry before recommending new projects as they will be allocated annual 
drawing limits at the beginning of each financial year subject to certain conditions. 
The actual fund will now flow directly to the vendors once payments have been 
authorized by the concerned implementing agencies.  
The above steps are likely to further expedite the implementation of MPLADS 
projects.  
 (iv) Need to increase the MPLAD funds from 5 crore to 10 crore under the 
Scheme. 
 REPLY:  
The Ministry receives and examines, on a continuous basis, the new suggestions 
from stakeholders, including suggestions for revision of entitlement of funds under 
Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS), following due 
process. 
  (v) GST exemption for works executed under MPLAD Scheme. 
  REPLY: 
As of now, there is no provision in the MPLADS Guidelines for exemption of 
works executed under the MPLAD Scheme. However, the Ministry receives and 
examines, on a continuous basis, the new suggestions from stakeholders, following 
due process. 
 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
The Committee have noted with concern the shortage of manpower in the 
Ministry, especially in the senior and junior statistical office cadre; on 30th  November 
2022, 266 vacancies exist which is roughly 33% of the total sanctioned strength. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to pursue the matter of recruitment with 
Staff Selection Commission (SSC) vigorously so that the vacancies can be filled within 

15 
 
this financial year. With regard to shortage of manpower in Field Operation Division in 
NSSO, the Committee would recommend for recruiting more based staff on a mission 
mode basis for accurate and reliable data collection. 
Reply of the Government 
As regard to shortage of manpower in ISS, this Ministry has already initiated the 
process to fill up these vacancies at various grades of ISS through promotion and direct 
recruitment of ISS through ISS Exam, 2023. All the promotion proposals are in the 
process and hence, the corresponding vacancies are likely to be filled up shortly. 
Further, a proposal for amendment to ISS Rules is under process and Cadre review 
proposal of ISS has already been submitted to Department of Personnel & Training. 
  So far as the shortage of manpower in respect of Senior Statistical officers 
(SSOs) and Junior Statistical officers (JSOs) is concerned, following action has been 
taken to fill up the vacancies of JSO: 
i. ‘265’ Junior Statistical Officers (JSOs) have been recruited through CGLE-2019 
in July, 2022; 
ii.  ‘401’ Junior Statistical Officers have been recruited through CGLE-2020 in 
January, 2023; 
iii. Issuance of Offer of appointments of ‘110’ Candidates selected through CGLE-
2021 is under process; 
iv.  ‘38’ Vacancies of JSO had been reported to SSC for CGLE-2022 and Final 
result for CGLE-2022 is awaited; and  
v. For CGLE-2023 ‘108’ vacancies have already been reported to SSC in February, 
2023. 
          Further, in respect of higher number of vacancies in SSS Cadre, it is submitted 
that unfortunately, the Subordinate Statistical Service has been facing high attrition, at 
annual average of 42% during the last 5 years. Due to the significantly high attrition, the 
vacancy at the level of JSO as on 01.12.2022 is 654 which are about 30% of the 
sanctioned posts. It is further informed that as on 23.05.2023, 248 Offer of 
Appointments to willing candidates have been issued w.r.t. candidates selected through 

16 
 
CGLE-2019 and 376 Offer of Appointments to willing candidates have been issued w.r.t. 
candidates selected through CGLE-2020 which has reduced the vacancies from 654 to 
30 at the level of JSO. Furthermore, Document Verification and Pre-Appointment 
Formalities have been done w.r.t. candidates selected through CGLE-2021 and Offers 
of Appointments to 84 candidates have been issued. 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated  21-06-2023  
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 6 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
The response of the Ministry highlights the significance of the Periodic Labour 
Force Survey (PLFS) launched by the National Statistical Office (NSO) in 2017. The 
Survey serves as a valuable tool in generating annual estimates of various employment 
and unemployment indicators for both rural and urban areas, providing essential socio-
economic insights. The Committee observe that the Ministry has taken initiatives 
towards leveraging advanced information technology to address the time-lag in 
releasing the PLFS reports. The Quarterly Bulletin of PLFS for the Quarter April-June, 
2021 was released in March 2022, for July-September 2021 in March 2022, for 
October-December 2021 was released in May, 2022, for January-March 2022 in June 
2022, for the quarter April-June 2022 was released in August 2022 and for July-
September 2022 was released in November, 2022. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry continues to prioritize the use of technology in the PLFS survey, such as data 
analytics tools and automation techniques to improve the efficiency of data processing 
and reduce manual errors. 
 
Reply of the Government 
For modernization/ digitization of NSS surveys, an Android based web enabled 
modular survey application named as e-Survey Instrument and Generalised Multimodal 
Application (eSIGMA) has been developed. Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) was 

17 
 
launched in eSIGMA platform on 13th September, 2021. The Computer Assisted 
Personal Interview (CAPI)  is the core Module of eSIGMA which enables data capture in 
field with in-built validation through hand-held Tablets in both online and offline modes. 
As envisaged, a CAPI under eSIGMA has converted the entire data collection process 
from paper schedules to digitize mode for faster processing. Data collection in eSIGMA 
platform was started from the Quarter July-September, 2021 onwards. The Latest report 
of Quarterly Bulletin September-December, 2022 was released on 24.02.2023.  
This Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Committee. 
 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
The Committee note that the publication of key statistical data and surveys by the 
Ministry has not been regular. The need for timely and reliable statistics for policy 
formulation and planning cannot be over emphasized. To address this issue, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry establish a predetermined calendar of specific 
dates for the publication of key statistical data. This calendar should be widely 
disseminated to all stakeholders and should include clear timelines for the publication of 
various data that are released under the MOSPI. The Committee further recommend 
that the Ministry ensure that the publication of statistical data adheres strictly to the 
predetermined calendar. Establishing a predetermined calendar for the publication of 
statistical data will provide greater predictability and transparency and enable 
stakeholders to plan better and make informed decisions.  The Committee believe that 
this is essential for promoting data-driven policy-making and effective implementation of 
development programs. The Committee therefore urge the Ministry to take immediate 
action to establish a predetermined calendar of specific dates for the publication of key 
statistical data and to ensure that this calendar is followed strictly.   
 
 
 
 

18 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The MoSPI has advance release calendars for National Accounts Estimates 
(annual as well quarterly). Copy of the advance release calendar, as available on the 
website of MoSPI, is at Annexure-I.  
  
Besides, MoSPI has already been maintaining a predetermined calendar for releasing 
Consumer Price Index and its corresponding Inflation figure through a Press Release 
Note and all the stakeholders are well familiar with its timeliness for the publication of 
CPI data. The predetermined calendar has 12 Consumer Price Index releases and 24 
planned Social Media tweets for a calendar year. The Ministry compiles and releases 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) numbers for Rural, Urban and Combined for all States/UTs 
and All India level figures on 12th day of the following month at 5.30 PM. If 12th is a 
government holiday, it is released on the next working day. This timeline is being 
adhered strictly as per predetermined calendar. 
  
Index of Industrial Production (IIP) is released on 12th of every month (previous working 
day if it is a holiday) with a time-lag of 42 days. 
  
The expected date of release of National Sample Survey (NSS) reports as per the 
Advance Release Calendar as available on the website of MoSPI, is at Annexure-II.  
  
MoSPI also has predetermined Annual Release Calendar for bringing out the 
Publications/reports on social statistics. The following publications have been brought 
out during 2022-23, as per Annual Release calendar:  
  
i. Sustainable Development Goals- National Indicator Framework Progress Report, 
2022  
ii. Sustainable Development Goals- National Indicator Framework, 2022  
iii. Data Snapshot on Sustainable Development Goals- National Indicator Framework 
Progress Report, 2022  
iv. Youth In India 2022  

19 
 
v. EnviStats India 2022 - Vol.II: Environment Accounts  
vi. Women and Men in India 2022  
vii.EnviStats India 2023 Vol.I: Environment Statistics and various publications/reports 
on social statistics.  
  
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
The Committee note a significant decrease in budget allocation for the support 
for statistical strengthening (SSS) sub-Scheme from Rs.52.63 crore in 2022-23 to just 
Rs.10.31 crore in 2023-24, indicating a downward trend of 80%. The reason furnished 
by the Ministry for the shortfall includes the existing pace of expenditure and the past of 
underutilization of funds. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
conduct a comprehensive review of the previous year's fund utilization and identify the 
specific reasons for underutilization of funds. The Committee also feel that Ministry 
should consider implementing measures to improve the monitoring and evaluation of 
the SSS sub scheme to track progress and identify areas for improvement. The 
Committee would like to further emphasize that schemes / activities should be 
adequately provided for and nurtured systematically and implemented vigorously so that 
desired objectives are fully achieved in the manner envisaged.  
Reply of the Government 
Under the Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS) sub-scheme, funds in the 
form of Grants-in Aid are provided to the States / UTs for undertaking statistical 
activities as specified in the MoUs signed with them. No further grant to the State / UT 
can be given once they exhaust their specified allocation.  
  
After signing of MoU, funds are released to the concerned State/UT in the form of 
instalments. While the first instalment is released as advance, the subsequent 
instalments are released subject to 80% utilization of previous instalments and 

20 
 
achievement of commensurate physical progress. Thus, the expenditure under SSS 
sub-scheme is contingent upon raising of demands by the States/UTs which are 
implementing the sub-scheme.  
  
The activities of many currently implementing States / UTs were badly affected due to 
the pandemic and they could not undertake delineated activities at requisite pace 
thereby leading to less than expected fund utilisation till 2021-22. The States resumed 
their major activities in 2022-23, and were thus expected to claim their second / third 
instalments. However, the resumed activities took time in gaining momentum as some 
time elapsed in reprioritising the set of activities, engagement of vendors for undertaking 
activities, etc. Thus, the States could not raise further demands in 2022-23 as 
previously released funds were still available with them.  
  
The BE 2023-24 of Rs.10.31 crore has been provisioned after careful and thorough 
deliberations. Additional funds, if required, would be sought at the R.E. stage, after 
thorough scrutiny of the absorption capacity of the implementing States/UTs.  
  
The Ministry has been rigorously following up with the States/UTs for smooth operations 
and successful implementation of the Sub-Scheme by way of holding Joint Review 
Meetings (JRMs) and regular communications. Discussions held in JRMs have also 
deliberated upon the issue of expediting the pace of expenditure and States / UTs have 
been requested to review the activities for reprioritisation, as the case may be. 
  
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
The Committee note that the Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division 
(IPMD) of the Ministry is mandated with monitoring of Central Sector Projects costing 
more than Rs.150 crore in 11 key sectors. The IPMD acts as an independent watchdog 
and monitor flagged slow /wayward projects. The Committee also note that as on 

21 
 
01.02.2023 there were 1454 ongoing central sector projects on the OCMS portal of the 
Ministry; approximately 60% of projects are having time overrun with average delay of 
approximately 40 months and 335 projects wore having cost overrun of Rs.4.46 lakh 
crore. The reasons furnished by the Ministry for the time and cost overrun in projects 
include factors such as underestimation of original cost changes in rates of foreign 
exchange and customs duty, high cost of environmental safeguards, spiraling land 
acquisition costs amongst others. The Committee do acknowledge that mechanisms are 
in place and some of the stated factors cannot be avoided 
 
Reply of the Government 
There are no additional comments. 
  
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.   H- 11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
The Committee understand that Economic Census (EC) provides valuable 
insights into spread / clusters of economic activities, ownership patterns, source of 
finance etc. of all establishments in the country. Regarding the 7th EC, which was 
launched in 2019, the Ministry Informed that using advanced ICT tools, 7th EC was 
completed in March 2021. The Ministry further informed that 7th Economic Census data 
collection and supervision were affected due to several operational challenges including 
the COVID-19 pandemic. 7th EC results are yet to be finalized as approval of provisional 
results is yet to be obtained from various state level coordination committees. The 
Committee note that the release of the 7th Economic Census has been delayed. The 
Committee thus recommend that the Ministry take a proactive approach to expedite the 
process of data collection at state level and work closely with the states to overcome 
any obstacles they may be facing in providing the required data. The Ministry should 
also provide additional resources to the states that are facing statistical capacity 
constraints in terms of providing data. 
Reply of the Government 
 
7th EC data quality concerns raised by State/UTs have been shared with the 
implementing agency (Common Service Centres-CSC) for their appropriate and earliest 
redressal. Rigorous coordination is being done with CSC and State/UTs for early 
approval of 7th EC provisional results by their respective State Level Coordination 
Committee (SLCC). 
  
As on 30th April, 2023, 13 States/UTs SLCCs have communicated the approval on 7th 
EC provisional result.   
 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No.  H- 11011/03/2021- 
Parl. Cell  dated 21-06-2023 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 

24 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       JAYANT SINHA, 
20 July, 2023                                                       Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance 

25 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-first sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2022-
23) The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th July, 2023 from 1500hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘2’, Parliament House Annexe Extension Block A, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri S.S Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
8. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
9. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
12. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
13. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
14. Shri Manish Tewari 
15. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
17. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
19. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
20. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
21. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Puneet Bhatia    - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
PART I 

26 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
PART II 
 
3. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Cyber security and rising incidence of 
cyber/white collar crimes’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services), Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Third Report on the subject ‘Anti-Competitive Practices by Big-Tech 
Companies’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.  
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Investment & Public Asset Management and Public Enterprises).  
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 

27 
 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
The Chairperson also appreciated the Committee Secretariat for putting their sincere 
efforts in drafting comprehensive reports within a short span of time. The Committee 
also decided to undertake a Study Tour during the third or fourth week of August, 2023. 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

28 
 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2023-24) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
9  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9) 
8 88.89% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies  
 
NIL  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee (vide 
Recommendation No. 7) 
 
1 11.11% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
 
 