 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2023-24) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)  
AND 
MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES   
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Forty-Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Strengthening Credit Flows to the MSME Sector’] 
 
 
 
 
SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
   NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
68 


ii 
 
SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2023-2024) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)  
AND 
MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES   
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Forty-Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Strengthening Credit Flows to the MSME Sector’] 
  
 
        
      Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 February, 2024 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06 February, 2024 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
     NEW DELHI 
 
 
              February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………     iv 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......              v  
 
CHAPTER I Report             1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
      14 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
       61 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
      62 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited 
       63 
   
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 22 December, 2023               64 
 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Strengthening Credit Flows to the 
MSME Sector’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
and Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
         66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2023-24) 
 
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal 
4. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
5.  Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
6. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
8. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
9. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
10. Shri Pinaki Misra 
11. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
12. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
13. Shri Nama Nageshwara Rao 
14. Prof. Sougata Ray 
15. Shri P.V. Midhun Reddy 
16. Shri Gopal Chinayya  Shetty 
17. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh  
18. Dr. (Prof) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
19. Shri Manish Tewari 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
25. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
26. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
27. Dr.Amar Patnaik 
28. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
29. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
30. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
31. Dr. Dinesh Sharma* 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan                                -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Puneet Bhatia                                        -    Deputy Secretary 
3. Ms. Yugma Malik                                          -    Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________ 
 
* Dr. Dinesh Sharma has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Finance (2023-24) w.e.f 25th October, 
2023.. 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized 
by the Committee, present this Sixty-Eighth Report on action taken by Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Forty-Sixth Report of the Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Strengthening Credit Flows to the MSME Sector’. 
  
2. The Forty-Sixth Report was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 8th April, 2022 
and presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 26 July, 2022. The 
updated Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were received from 
the Government vide their communication dated 03 August, 2023.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on           
22 December, 2023.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-Sixth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       JAYANT SINHA, 
22 December, 2023                                                Chairperson, 
01 Pausha, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I  
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Forty-Sixth 
Report on ‘Strengthening Credit Flows to the MSME Sector' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) and Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 26th July, 
2022. 
 2.  Updated Action taken notes (consolidated) have been received from Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) on behalf of Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Financial Services) and Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on 3rd August, 
2023 in respect of all the 25 recommendations/observations contained in the Report. The 
replies have been analyzed and categorized as follows: 
  
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25 
       (Total 24) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation No.  21 
                  (Total 1) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation No. NIL 
       (Total NIL)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL                  
(Total - NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 

2 
 
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the observations / recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
5. The Committee note that the Government has been very successful in 
implementing many schemes to provide collateral-free loans to the MSME sector, like the 
Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP), Credit Guarantee Fund 
Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), Emergency Credit Line Guarantee 
Scheme (ECLGS), Sahay GST, GeM Sahay, PSBloansin59 minutes portal etc. Yet the 
Committee found in its scrutiny that only a few MSME enterprises are managing to get 
collateral-free loans under the Government schemes, with majority being compelled to 
furnish adequate collateral even after being eligible for collateral-free loans. As more than 
99 percent of the MSMEs belong to the micro sector they typically have no collateral to 
offer to banks. The UK Sinha Expert Committee on MSMEs in its report suggested 
replacing physical collateral or guarantee requirements (asset-based lending) with high 
trust information on an MSMEs future cash flows called cash flow-based lending (CFL). 
The Committee are also of the view that credit flow to the MSME sector can be 
strengthened with the adoption of CFL with digitization of products and processes and an 
integrated digital ecosystem described above. This is expected to speed up the process of 
credit underwriting and faster disposal of credit proposal. The Committee would further 
like to add that since this form of lending is dependent upon cash flow information of the 
MSME entity, the role of adequate data acquires critical role. Here again, the Committee 
would like to reiterate that a portal like Udyam should be comprehensively developed in a 
user-friendly manner to function as a one stop central data repository for MSMEs. 
6. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows:- 
“With regard to collateral free lending, it may be mentioned that two of the Government’s 
flagship schemes viz. Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) and Credit 
Guarantee Trust Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) have benefitted the 
MSME sector to a great extent in the light of headwinds caused by Covid pandemic. 

3 
 
ECLGS was introduced by the Government, as a targeted policy response, to support the 
most vulnerable category of borrowers i.e. individual borrowers, small businesses and 
MSMEs and provided them liquidity support required in the wake of disruptions caused 
due to Covid-19 pandemic. As on 28.7.2023, loans amounting to ₹3.68 lakh crore have 
been guaranteed benefitting 1.19 crore borrowers under the scheme. Out of the total 
guaranteed amount, nearly 66% has gone towards benefit of MSMEs. In terms of 
guarantee numbers, nearly 95% has benefitted MSMEs. There has been a 52 % growth in 
guarantees approved under Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro & Small Enterprises 
(CGTMSE) in 2021-22 over 2020-21 figures. The amount of guarantee in CGTMSE in 
2021-22 crossed   Rs. 50,000 crore for the first time and reached Rs. 56,172 crore. The 
amount of guarantee in CGTMSE in 2022-23 crossed Rs. 1.00 Lakh crore for the first time 
and achieved Rs. 1,04,781 crore. 
DFS is also taking regular reviews for early launch of GST SAHAY app, which is 
cash flow-based lending model and uses GST invoices for providing credit. This app will 
be made operational after GSTN integration. Department of Revenue (DoR) has informed 
that GSTN has been allowed to join the AA framework as Financial Information Provider 
(FIP) with DoR as the regulator for GSTN. In a recent review meeting held by DFS on 
25.7.2023, the representative from GSTN apprised that GSTN as FIP will be live on AA 
framework shortly. Further, invoice-based lending app is similar to integration of TReDS 
platform with GSTN e-invoicing portal which requires amendment in GST Act of Centre 
and States. For this purpose, proposal to amend GST laws to enable such systems is 
being brought before GST Council.  
The Ministry of MSME is working towards developing UDYAM Portal into a one 
stop central data repository for MSMEs through its integration with other portals, through 
SIDBI’s proposal for developing an UDYAM Assist Platform, and storage on Digilocker 
platform. The Ministry of MSME has launched Udyam Assist Portal (UAP) on 11.01.2023 
for onboarding Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) for availing the benefit under Priority 
Sector Lending.” 
7. In response to the observation made by the Committee that only a few MSME 
enterprises were managing to get collateral-free loans under the Government 
schemes, with majority being compelled to furnish adequate collateral even after 
being eligible for collateral-free loans, the Ministry in their action taken reply has 
given a brief of the two flagship schemes of the Government viz. Emergency Credit 

4 
 
Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) and Credit Guarantee Trust Scheme for Micro and 
Small Enterprises (CGTMSE). Further, the Ministry has given an update on the 
launch of GST SAHAY app, which is cash flow based lending model and uses GST 
invoices for providing credit. However, the Ministry has remained silent on the 
highlighted issue of collateral requirement by lending institutions from even those 
MSMEs which are eligible for collateral-free loans. Therefore, the Committee would 
like to be apprised of the current status of the measures taken to ensure seamless 
flow of credit to eligible MSMEs. The Committee are also of the opinion that 
Department of Financial Services (DFS) should put in place a monitoring as well as 
a grievance redressal mechanism to ensure that the eligible MSMEs do not suffer 
on the issue of collateral. Further, the Committee had recommended that a portal 
like Udyam should be comprehensively developed in a user-friendly manner to 
function as a one stop central data repository for MSMEs. The Committee 
acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry to develop UDYAM Portal into a one stop 
central data repository for MSMEs through its integration with other portals. The 
Committee also note the launch of Udyam Assist Portal (UAP) for onboarding 
Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) for availing the benefit under Priority Sector 
Lending. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
8. The Committee feel that CIBIL rating for MSMEs can be improved because their 
credit rating mechanism is similar to the rating system of corporate entities. As a result, 
MSMEs in many cases, are assigned low scores. This makes it difficult for them to access 
formal credit. The Committee believe that lack of updated data about the MSME sector 
plays a big role in their poor credit ratings. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
timely data should be made available to the rating agencies so that ratings can be 
appropriately updated, as and when necessary. As suggested earlier, the Committee 
would like to reiterate the role that Udyam Portal can play in providing reliable data about 
MSMEs to the rating agencies, so that data silos in this sector is bridged. Further, MSME 
associations appearing before the Committee have pointed out that the basis of data 
collection and process of rating is not completely transparent. As a result, there are a 
number of wrong entries in CIBIL which change the company’s overall ratings and 
consequently their loan applications are held up indefinitely. It was further mentioned that 
MSMEs are forced to spend enormous time, energy and money in correcting the wrong 

5 
 
entries. Therefore, the Committee recommend that a physical and virtual contact 
mechanism be established with CIBIL for verification and clarification. This should be 
accompanied with an online ticketing system so that the anomalies can be corrected in a 
time bound manner.  
9. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows:- 
“With regard to the improvement in the CIBIL rating for MSMEs, the issue was taken up 
with TransUnion Cibil (TU Cibil), which has submitted as under: 
CIBIL MSME Rank (CMR) is a credit default-predictor model for Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSME). CMR provides insights into the credit behaviour of the 
borrowing entity (MSMEs) and predicts the probability of default in the next one year 
horizon. CMR is a robust model which risk differentiates borrowers in the smallest Micro 
segment having aggregate commercial credit exposure lesser than ₹10 Lakhs to the 
Medium segment having aggregate commercial credit exposure of ₹50 Crores. CMR is 
different from corporate ratings in many ways including its objective and coverage. The 
Company ratings are derived using parameters in the areas of Industry risk, financial risk, 
business risk and management risk. CMR on the other hand is a completely objective 
assessment of an MSME. CMR is completely based on the borrowers past credit 
performance and the rank is derived purely based on company’s performance on the 
loans taken. Company Ratings also considers broader industry factors whereas CMR is 
built purely on credit parameters enabling discrimination on assessment of probability of 
default. 
 It is further stated by TU Cibil that CMR has enabled Credit Institutions and 
Consumers take faster and better-informed decisions. CMR is the industry norm for 
MSME lending risk assessment. More than 1000 credit institutions use CMR in their 
decision-making process including all public sector banks and leading private sector 
banks, NBFCs and other financial institutions. CMR currently is available for more than 1 
crore MSMEs in India and has been well recognized by both lending Industry as well as 
the regulator. Credit flow to MSME entities can be further expanded by widening the risk 
underwriting parameters of MSMEs based on multiple data sources available in the 
marketplace. Continuing with the mission of supporting banks and financial institutions to 
sustainably grow MSME credit portfolios while driving access to finance for underserved 

6 
 
and unserved MSMEs, TU Cibil is working in partnership with a large fintech, on 
developing a Financial, Income and Trade data based Rank (FIT Rank) which leverages 
the power of Goods and Services Tax (GST), bank statements and Income Tax returns 
(ITR) information to provide a ranking model for MSME lending. FIT Rank shall benefit 
MSMEs with a strong track record of healthy GST payments, banking behavior and 
income tax returns to be able to become more credit eligible. FIT Rank shall be able to 
help India’s credit industry in significantly scaling portfolio growth while also supporting 
the government’s Atmanirbhar Bharat initiative by increasing access to finance for 
MSMEs. 
 Even RBI vide circular DBOD.No. CID.BC.127/20.16.056 /2013-14 dated 
27.6.2014 on ‘Data Format for Furnishing of Credit Information to Credit Information 
Companies and other Regulatory Measures’ has advised banks/FIs that the CIBIL 
method of calibrating credit score from 300 to 900 be adopted by the other Credit 
Information Companies (CICs) also, so that they have a common classification of credit 
scores. 
 With regard to the lack of updated data about the MSME sector, RBI has stated 
that Rule 22 of the Credit Information Companies Rules, 2006 - ‘Updating of the credit 
information by credit institution’ already provides the provisions for updation of credit 
information by Credit Institutions, the same is as under:  
“Without prejudice to the provisions of rule 21, if there is any change in the data, 
information or credit information, already furnished to a credit information company due to 
change in the liability of the borrower or his guarantor, on account of write off in full or in 
part of the amount of outstanding dues of the credit institution or the repayment thereof 
by the borrower or his guarantor, or release of the guarantor, or any scheme of 
arrangement entered into between the credit institution and the borrower, or the final 
settlement of the amount payable by the borrower pursuant to any scheme of 
arrangement with the credit institution, as the case may be, or on account of any such 
other reason, the credit institution shall,- 
a. continue to update such data, information or credit information promptly or in any 
event, by the end of each reporting period not exceeding thirty days until the 
termination of the respective account relating to such credit information; and 

7 
 
b. furnish an updated credit information to the credit information company at the 
earliest in this behalf.” 
 Further, RBI vide circular DBOD.No.CID.BC.127/20.16. 056/2013-14 dated 
27.6.2014 on “Data Format for Furnishing of Credit Information to Credit Information 
Companies and other Regulatory Measures” has detailed certain best practices to be 
followed by banks/ financial institutions (FIs)/ CICs, wherein it has been suggested that 
updation of credit information should take place on a monthly basis or at such shorter 
intervals as may be mutually agreed upon between the bank/FI and the CIC. 
 TransUnion Cibil has submitted that it has dedicated teams managing data 
governance and provide necessary support to lenders for improving their data 
completeness, accuracy, quality and freshness. Working closely with lenders in last 
couple of years, they have been able to make significant improvement in data reporting 
process for most lenders. All of the commercial bureau data is updated at a monthly 
frequency, out of which over 50% of the data is reported on a weekly frequency. On an 
average it takes 13 days for lenders to submit commercial data to TransUnion CIBIL. In 
cases of delays in data submission by lenders, TU Cibil follows the process for 
regularizing data from inconsistent data contributing lenders. If a lender fails to report 
data to TU Cibil within defined timelines, then, escalation procedure is followed by them. 
 With regard to the role that Udyam Portal can play in providing reliable data about 
MSMEs to the rating agencies, RBI has submitted that CICs operate under the framework 
of the Credit Information Companies Regulation Act, 2005 (CICRA), CIC Rules and 
Regulations, 2006 and instructions issued by RBI from time to time. It is pertinent to note 
the following provisions of CICRA, 2005, viz; 
i. Section 2(d) which defines credit information and generally includes information 
pertaining to loans and advances/any credit facility availed by a borrower or any 
information that determines the credit worthiness of the borrower 
ii. Section 14 which specifies the forms of business that a CIC can engage in. CICs 
can collect, process and collate information trade, credit and financial standing of 
the borrower of the credit institution which is a member of the CIC. 
iii. Section 17(1) which mandates that CIC can collect credit information from its 
member credit institution only. 

8 
 
 RBI has stated that on combined reading of aforementioned provisions, it can be 
inferred that the information in Udyam Portal is not Credit Information. Further, at present, 
Udyam Portal does not fall under the category of a ‘Credit Institution’ as defined under 
Section 2(f) of CICRA, 2005. Therefore, as per extant guidelines it may not be possible 
for CICs to collect data from Udyam Portal. 
 As regards the correction in Credit Information Report (CIR), RBI has stated that 
Section 21(3) of CICRA, 2005 already provides for updation of credit information within 
thirty days, subject to conditions stipulated therein. Further, necessary provisions with 
regard to grievance redressal has already been provided by RBI, wherein the 
complainant may lodge a complaint with the CIC, either through physical or online mode, 
for any correction in CIR. Complainant may also approach the concerned Credit 
Institution (CI) for correction. If the concerned bank /CI do not make the correction, 
he/she can approach the grievance redressal authority of the respective CIs and further if 
the complainant is not satisfied with the action taken by Grievance Redressal authority, 
then he/she can approach Centralised Receipt and Processing Centre, RBI for redressal 
of the complaint. 
 TransUnion Cibil stated that it does direct interaction with commercial entities to 
help them resolve their credit report concerns through three modes viz. online, email and 
walk in. It has an established & well-functioning Consumer Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism which is both physical & online. Consumers can log their grievances on the 
TU Cibil website or in person. If they find any information reflecting in their report to be 
inaccurate, they can raise dispute with TU Cibil. The dispute resolution process TAT is 30 
days’ time from the date the request was received as defined under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005.” 
10. The Committee take note of the measures which are being taken for 
improving the credit rating of MSMEs viz. CIBIL MSME Rank (CMR), Financial, 
Income and Trade data based Rank (FIT Rank), continuous CIBIL data updation, 
resolving credit report concerns through direct interaction with commercial 
entities, Physical and online mechanism for consumer grievance redressal etc. 
However, the Committee are of the view that inspite of these measures, many 
MSMEs, in particular, micro and small entities are not able to avail these benefits on 
time, which results in denial of much needed credit from lending institutions. The 
process of data updation and grievance redressal is costly as well as time 

9 
 
consuming for smaller entities. As a result, they refrain from accessing the services 
and continue to borrow from informal sources. Therefore, the Committee are of the 
view that apart from the systems in place, the authorities should make efforts for 
handholding and encouraging these entities to adopt formal rating processes. 
Creating awareness and spreading digital/financial literacy, particularly among the 
micro and rural entities could increase their confidence to utilize the CIBIL facilities 
that are specially tailor made for them. TransUnion Cibil stated that it does direct 
interaction with commercial entities to help them resolve their credit report 
concerns through three modes viz. online, email and walk in. The Committee are of 
the opinion that such direct interactions with the entities should be further 
expanded. The Committee also feel that the implementation of the rules are still not 
foolproof and there are some attitudinal issues on the part of lenders and credit 
agencies. Therefore, the Committee urge the Government to work on effective 
implementation of policies, sensitizing the agencies and their workforce for a more 
positive approach towards particularly micro and small enterprises. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
11. The Committee note that TReDS is an effective step for ensuring timely payment to 
MSMEs on reasonable terms. However, the Committee observe that many buyers are still 
reluctant to adopt this technology. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Government should increase TReDS usage by rolling out awareness campaigns to 
address stakeholders’ grievances so that companies are encouraged to join the platform. 
Further, the Committee note that it is mandatory for all CPSEs and companies with 
turnover of more than Rs. 500 crores to join TReDS. Yet, many such companies seem to 
be defying Government’s order by refusing to onboard TReDS. The Committee 
recommend the Government to penalize such errant companies. Further, the Committee 
are of the opinion that the Central Government and State Government entities should be 
given strict instructions with penal consequences to make prompt payments of MSME 
receivables so that the receivables remain short term and can be funded by banks under 
their working capital arrangement.  
12. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows:- 

10 
 
“The Ministry of MSME has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the three 
TReDS Platforms (M1xchange, Invoice Mart and RXIL) and been integrated with Udyam 
Portal for providing credit facilititation. Further, M/o MSME is in the process of amending 
the provisions related to delayed payments of MSMED Act. 
 With regard to penalising the companies which are still not boarded on TReDS 
platform, Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) has submitted that M/o MSME in exercise 
of powers conferred by Section 9 of the MSME Development Act 2006 and vide 
notification no. S.O. 5621 (E) dated 2.11.2018 had mandated all companies registered 
under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2012) with a turnover of more than ₹500 crore and 
all Central Public Sector Enterprises to get themselves onboarded on the Trade 
Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) platform set up as per the notification of 
Reserve Bank of India, and Registrar of Companies (RoCs) in each State shall be the 
competent authority to monitor the compliance of these instructions by companies under 
its jurisdiction.  
 With regard to the above MSME notification, MCA has stated that there is no 
provision under the Companies Act, 2013 under which a RoC can be mandated to 
monitor the compliances under MSME Act. The RoCs have no locus to act against the 
companies not complying with the MSME notification dated 2.11.2018 with respect to 
registration and transacting on TReDS. However, notwithstanding the lack of jurisdiction 
in this regard, RoCs are still constantly persuading companies to comply with the 
notification.” 
13. The Committee noted that it was mandatory for all CPSEs and companies 
with turnover of more than Rs. 500 crores to join TReDS platform. Yet, many such 
companies seemed to be defying Government’s order by not onboarding the 
TReDS. The Committee had recommended the Government to penalize such errant 
companies. Further, the Committee were of the opinion that the Central 
Government and State Government entities should be given instructions about 
penal consequences so that they make prompt payment of MSME receivables, 
which should remain short term and can be funded by banks under their working 
capital arrangement. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) has submitted that 
M/o MSME in exercise of powers conferred by Section 9 of the MSME Development 
Act 2006 and vide notification no. S.O. 5621 (E) dated 2.11.2018 has mandated all 
companies registered under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2012) with a turnover 

11 
 
of more than ₹500 crore and all Central Public Sector Enterprises to get 
themselves onboarded on the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) 
platform set up as per the notification of Reserve Bank of India, and Registrar of 
Companies (RoCs) in each State shall be the competent authority to monitor the 
compliance of these instructions by companies under its jurisdiction. With regard 
to the above MSME notification, MCA has stated that there is no provision under 
the Companies Act, 2013 under which a RoC can be mandated to monitor the 
compliances under MSME Act. The RoCs have no locus to act against the 
companies not complying with the MSME notification dated 2.11.2018 with respect 
to registration and transacting on TReDS. The Committee would like to point out 
the lack of coordination and coherence between two ministries viz. MCA and M/o 
MSME and would now expect them to sort out this discrepancy without delay. 
Further, the Committee would like to reiterate their recommendation with regard to 
penal provisions for companies which are neglecting the mandate of onboarding 
TReDS and if required, the MSME Development Act 2006 may be amended to 
include penal provisions for errant companies. The Committee also take note of 
the work being done by Registrar of Companies (RoCs) in States whereby they are 
constantly persuading companies to comply with the notification and would further 
like RoCs to increase their awareness drive at district and block levels also. The 
Committee also take note of the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed by 
Ministry of MSME with the three TReDs platforms (M1xchange, Invoice Mart and 
RXIL) and its integration with the Udyam Portal for providing credit facilitation and 
the Committee firmly believe that it is an effective step in the right direction for 
ensuring timely payment to MSMEs. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
14. Currently on TReDS platform, the seller has to enter complete details of invoices 
manually and the Committee in their 24th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
examination of the Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020 sought to amend it by 
recommending that the TReDS platform be integrated with GSTN e-invoicing portal. The 
Committee believed that such an integration would lead to automatic uploading of all GST 
invoices onto the TReDS platform which will enable seamless financing to sellers through 
factoring of invoices and will also keep the financier with information about the seller. The 
Committee have been informed that this proposal is under consideration and has already 

12 
 
been agreed, in-principle, in the GST Law Committee consisting of officers from Central 
and State tax administration. The Committee has been further informed that the proposal 
to amend GST Laws shall be placed before the GST Council for its recommendation and 
will then be moved for approval of the Parliament and State Legislatures. The Committee 
while reiterating their previous recommendation expect the necessary amendments in the 
GST laws to be made soon so that it can be implemented at the earliest. 
15. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows:- 
“Department of Revenue has submitted that in respect of sharing of data to the Trade 
Receivables Discounting System (TReDS), it is mentioned that the process is underway 
to amend GST laws and place it before the GST Council for its recommendation. After 
GST council recommendation, the parliament and state legislatures will pass appropriate 
amendments.” 
16. The Committee would like to reiterate their recommendation of integrating 
TReDS platform with GSTN e-invoicing portal on a timely basis. The Committee 
had earlier made this recommendation in their 24th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on examination of the Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020, which 
was presented to the Parliament in February, 2021. Since then, more than two 
years have lapsed but it is still not implemented. The Ministry in their reply has 
stated that major steps of amending GST laws and placing it before the GST 
Council are yet to be undertaken. The Ministry further informed that if the GST 
Council recommends it, the Parliament and state legislatures will pass appropriate 
amendments. The Committee would like to urge the Ministry to take up this matter 
on a priority basis so that the integration is expedited and seamless financing 
through factoring of invoices is ensured. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
17. NABARD’s loan portfolio to support to the agricultural sector was Rs. 6.03 lakh 
crore in FY21 and it caters to about 18-20% of India’s GDP. SIDBI’s loan portfolio is about 
Rs. 1.56 lakh crore in FY21 and it supports about 30% of India’s GDP. It is clear that 
SIDBI needs to grow its balance sheet so that it can support the various financial 
institutions that work with India’s MSMEs. This can be accomplished gradually over the 
next 5-8 years. However, given RBI’s prudential norms, it is necessary that SIDBI’s equity 

13 
 
base be strengthened so that it can grow its balance sheet. The Committee recommend 
that the Government could start with an immediate Rs. 5,000 to 10,000 crore equity 
injection in SIDBI and continue to make contributions of Rs. 10,000 to 15,000 crores for 
the next few years. These capital contributions will massively increase SIDBI’s ability to 
provide wholesale financing to NBFCs that work with the MSME sector. NBFC are 
perennially starved of wholesale financing and find it difficult to raise money at competitive 
rates. Once SIDBI is able to start providing substantial wholesale financing to the NBFC 
sector, it should lower their borrowing rates and increase competition to lend to the 
NBFCs.  
18. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows:- 
“The proposal for equity infusion in SIDBI was examined and it has been observed that 
presently, SIDBI is well capitalised to achieve their projected business growth.” 
19. The Committee observed that the loan portfolio of SIDBI was only Rs. 1.56 
lakh crore in FY21 i.e. around one-fourth of NABARD’s loan portfolio of Rs. 6.03 
lakh crore in FY 21, which made it clear that SIDBI needed to grow its balance sheet 
so that it can support the various financial institutions that work with MSMEs. To 
accomplish this, the Committee in their report recommended that SIDBI’s equity 
base should be strengthened. The Committee were of the opinion that the 
enhanced capital base could massively increase SIDBI’s ability to provide 
wholesale financing to NBFCs that work with the MSME sector. The Ministry in their 
reply have submitted that presently SIDBI is well capitalized to achieve their 
projected business growth. The Committee would like to re-emphasize the point 
that since NBFCs do not have adequate access to wholesale financing and find it 
difficult to raise money at competitive rates, SIDBI’s role as the nodal financial 
institution for the MSME Sector needs to become larger and more pronounced. 
 
NEW DELHI                                          JAYANT SINHA, 
22 December, 2023                                                   Chairperson, 
01 Pausha, 1945 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Finance 

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 1) 
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector is the backbone of Indian 
economy. As per MSME Ministry data, this sector consists of a vast set of an estimated 
6.34 crore enterprises, contributing about 45 percent to manufacturing output, more  
than 40 percent of exports, about 30 percent of GDP while creating employment for about 
11.1 crore people, which stands next only to the agriculture sector.  
This sector is instrumental in growth of the nation, driving exports and creating huge 
employment opportunities in every nook and corner of India. In view of its significance, the 
Government seeks to provide adequate and timely financial support to ensure sustainable 
growth for MSMEs. 
The Committee appreciate the increase in budgetary allocation for MSMEs from last 
year’s (FY 2021-22) Rs 15,699.65 crore to Rs 21,422 crore now (FY 2022-23), which is 
an increase of 26.71%. However, there is still a significant credit gap for the MSME sector 
and unmet demand remains substantial. As per the UK Sinha Expert Committee on 
MSMEs Report, the overall credit gap in the MSME sector is estimated to be ₹20 – 25 
trillion (Rs. 20-25 lakh crore). The Committee therefore recommend a time-bound road 
map to accurately estimate and then bridge this credit gap with appropriate policy 
measures and focused interventions. Along with the credit gap, the MSME sector is often 
not able to borrow at globally competitive rates since there is not sufficient and affordable 
financing available to financial institutions that target the MSME sector. MSME enterprises 
also have to contend with delayed and erratic payments from their customers, which 
makes working capital management and financing very difficult. Since few MSMEs have 
sufficiently predictable cash flows or have substantial collaterisable assets, it becomes 
difficult for MSMEs to access affordable financing to operate and grow their businesses. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of MSME has submitted that to bridge the credit gap, focused interventions have 
been envisaged and outputs and outcomes for each scheme have been identified (as 
conveyed to NITI Aayog). As per the Budget 2022-23 announcement, Udyam Portal has 
been integrated with National Career Service, and e-Shram Portal for credit facilitation, 

15 
 
skilling, and recruitment. For bridging the credit gap; especially for nano enterprises 
(smallest of the micro enterprises), an Advisory Committee has been set up under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (MSME), with Members from SIDBI and other organisations. 
The first meeting of the Committee has been held and a Concept Note is being prepared 
before technical discussions commence. A working group to improve the credit flow to the 
targeted sectors including MSME sector is also constituted by the Department of Financial 
Services (DFS) under the chairmanship of Secretary (MSME) to look into the credit 
related issues of MSMEs. The vision of Ministry of MSME is to bring relatively smaller 
enterprises, not having PAN, within the formal ambit of MSMEs. For this purpose, the 
Ministry of MSME has launched Udyam Assist Portal (UAP) on 11.01.2023 for onboarding 
the Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs), for availing the benefit under Priority Sector 
Lending. As on 20.07.2023, more than 30 lakhs IMEs have been onboarded on UAP. 
2. Improving credit flow to MSME sector has been a policy priority for Government 
and Reserve Bank of India (RBI). RBI has undertaken various initiatives to enhance the 
credit flow to the MSME sector such as no collateral requirements for MSE units upto ₹10 
lakhs, simplified method for working capital computation, streamlining flow of credit to 
MSEs for facilitating timely and adequate credit flow during their ‘Life Cycle’, target for 
lending to Micro enterprises under New Priority Sector Guidelines, Priority Sector Lending 
status for Factoring transactions, introduction of Trade Receivables Discounting System 
(TReDS), increase in threshold of Regulatory Retail Portfolio, “Co-Lending Model” (CLM) 
under ‘Priority Sector Lending, Lending by Commercial Banks to NBFCs and Small 
Finance Banks (SFBs) to NBFC-MFIs, for the purpose of on-lending to priority sectors etc. 
3. To foster responsible innovation in MSME financing, it has been decided by RBI to 
have ‘MSME Lending’ as the theme for the third cohort under the Regulatory Sandbox set 
up by RBI. RBI has also issued guidelines for Peer to Peer (P2P) lending, Account 
Aggregator (AA) framework which are expected to facilitate increased flow of credit to the 
sector. Further, banks have been encouraged to adopt digital and other innovative means 
of lending to the sector in various fora viz., Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) for 
MSMEs, Empowered Committee meeting for MSMEs, etc. conducted by RBI.  
4. As regard to competitive rate of interest to MSMEs, RBI, has advised banks to link 
loans to Micro Small and Medium Enterprises to external benchmark so as to improve 
monetary policy transmissions to them. 

16 
 
5. Under the initiative of DFS where all credit related schemes are being brought 
together under one National Portal, the Ministry of MSME is in the process of linking the 
UDYAM Portal and Portals of major credit related schemes with the said National Portal.  
6. To address the issue of delayed payments to MSMEs, M/o MSME is in the process 
of amending the provisions related to delayed payments of MSMED Act. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 2) 
A major roadblock in the growth of MSME sector is the lack of reliable data about 
enterprises operating in this sector. The Committee note that the last MSME survey was 
conducted by National Sample Survey Office (NSSO), Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation in the year 2015-16 i.e., 6 years ago. In the meantime, the 
definition of MSME itself has undergone changes in 2020. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that survey/census of MSMEs in line with the changed definition, be 
conducted at the earliest so as to estimate the actual number of MSMEs in the country 
along with realistic assessments of their credit requirements. This survey should be 
conducted regularly and, in addition, SIDBI can develop a fact-based MSME Annual 
Financing Report to guide policies and investments. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of MSME vide D.O. 42(6)/2022-S and D – DCMSME dated 16.08.2022 has 
requested Survey coordination Division, M/o Statistics and Programme Implementation to 
include data collection on “Survey on MSME Sector” in various fields as per the New 
definition of MSMEs. In addition, SIDBI has stated that in order to partly address the 
information asymmetry in the MSME sector, it has spearheaded various knowledge 
products like MSME Pulse, the health tracker of MSME credit; and CriSidEx for gauging 
the MSE sentiments & aspirations; Fintech Pulse, on emerging technologies causing 
disruption in the financial sector; Industry Spotlight, focused on credit trends in key 
Industry sectors; and Microfinance Pulse, providing key insights on Microfinance Sector. 
These knowledge products are being brought out in collaboration with Credit Rating 
Agencies or Bureaus and are aimed to provide data support to policy makers. MSME 
Pulse, published in collaboration with CIBIL; provides the key trends in the MSME credit 
(classified based on credit exposure up to ₹50 crore). 

17 
 
2. Regarding publishing fact-based Annual Financing Report, it may be mentioned 
that SIDBI engaged the services of M/s Datawise Management Services India Pvt Ltd 
(which emerged as the L1 bidder) for preparing “Comprehensive report on MSMEs in 
India”. The report titled ‘Report on MSME Sector’ has been published in May, 2023, which 
will provide key insights of the financing trends in the MSME sector at granular level and 
data on various other parameters viz; number and distribution of MSMEs, formalization, 
export contribution by MSMEs, MSME beneficiaries under various Government Schemes 
etc.  
3. An outcome of the formalisation project for MSMEs (Udyam Assist Platform) 
undertaken by MoMSME and SIDBI (as given at Recommendation No. 23) shall also lay 
the formal building blocks for leveraging a digital framework to collate credible data in 
respect of MSMEs. Over 30 lakh Informal Micro Entities (IMEs) have been registered on 
the platform.  
4. In order to partly address the information asymmetry in the MSME sector, SIDBI 
has spearheaded various knowledge products like MSME Pulse, the health tracker of 
MSME credit; Fintech Pulse and Microfinance Pulse, providing key insights on Fintech 
and Microfinance Sector respectively. These knowledge products are being brought out in 
collaboration with Credit Bureaus and are aimed to provide data support to policy makers. 
MSME Pulse, published in collaboration with CIBIL, provides the key trends in the MSME 
credit (classified based on credit exposure up to Rs 50 crore). 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
The Committee note that, as per Government data, out of 6.34 crore MSMEs, less than 
40% borrow from the formal financial system. This means that a significantly large number 
of these enterprises remain outside the ambit of formal finance to meet their credit needs. 
MSMEs which are not borrowing from the formal financial system are borrowing from the 
unorganised finance/sector which is costly as well as unreliable. Therefore, the 
Committee are of the firm view that formalisation of the MSME sector needs to be 
accelerated to promote their growth.  
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of MSME has revised the definition of MSMEs. With effect from 1.7.2020, MSMEs 
are defined as per the composite criteria of turnover and investment in plant and 
machinery / equipment. Further, Government has made registration mandatory, through 
‘Udyam Registration Portal’, for classification of units as MSMEs which is an important 
step towards promoting formalization in the sector. Moreover, this will bring large number 
of entrepreneurs under the ambit of formal banking sector which will facilitate flow of credit 
to the sector.  
2. Ministry of MSME has submitted that one of the visions of the Ministry is to bring all 
relatively smaller enterprises in the formal ambit of MSMEs. For this purpose, the Ministry 
of MSME has been taking up special drives for facilitating registrations on UDYAM Portal. 
Within 36 months of the change in the definition of MSMEs, more than 2.10 crore MSMEs 
have registered on UDYAM Portal. In recent weeks, per day registration has been around 
30,000. The Ministry of MSME has been taking up special drives for facilitating 
registrations on UDYAM Portal. To bring relatively smaller enterprises, not having PAN, 
within the formal ambit of MSMEs, the Ministry of MSME has launched Udyam Assist 
Portal (UAP) on 11.01.2023 for onboarding the Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) for 
availing the benefit under Priority Sector Lending. As on 28.07.2023, 31 lakh IMEs have 
been onboarded on UAP.  
3. Banks and Industry associations have been encouraged to create awareness and 
facilitate registration of MSMEs on the Udyam Portal.  
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 4) 
As per the NSS 73rd Round Survey (2015-16) Report on Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises, micro sector with 630.52 lakh estimated enterprises accounts for more than 
99 percent of total estimated number of MSMEs. The Small sector with 3.31 lakh and the 
Medium sector with 0.05 lakh estimated MSMEs accounted for 0.52% and 0.01% of total 
estimated MSMEs, respectively. Further, out of the 633.88 lakh estimated number of 
MSMEs, 324.88 lakh MSMEs (51.25%) are in rural area and 309 lakh MSMEs (48.75%) 
are in the urban areas. The gap in information about MSMEs is greatest for micro 
enterprises and those that belong to rural areas. 

19 
 
The Committee note that effective July 2020, the Government of India revised the 
definition of MSMEs and to facilitate the process of MSME registration in accordance with 
the revised definition, Ministry of MSME launched a new portal – Udyam Registration 
Portal. In a written submission to the Committee, the MSME Ministry informed that Udyam 
Portal has already been linked with the Government e-Marketplace (GeM), Income Tax, 
GST and Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) portals. 
The Committee believe India’s public digital infrastructure projects have been an 
outstanding success over the last decade and can be a powerful enabler for expanding 
formal MSME lending. India has shown it has the capability to design and build world-
class public digital infrastructure over the last decade with projects like BHIM UPI 
(enabling 4+ billion instant digital payment transactions per month); Direct Benefit 
Transfers (Rs. 3.81 lakh crore sent directly to beneficiaries’ bank accounts in 2019-20); 
Aadhaar, eKYC, and Aadhar Enabled Payments System (Digital ID for over a billion 
adults, 44.7 million new bank accounts opened digitally, and biometric-based money 
withdrawal for 150 million people in small towns); FastTag (streamlined toll charges & 
parking collections), COWIN, etc. 
The Committee’s review into current lending processes brought out that existing MSME 
credit schemes would benefit from a robust, integrated digital ecosystem. This digital 
ecosystem would solve multiple challenges associated with MSME financing including 
physical collateral requirements, lengthy approval/verification processes from buyers or 
lenders, long bank branch queues despite a digital pre-approved loan, paper-based loan 
applications, web portals designed for desktop access, a limitation to existing bank 
customers, etc.  
However, the Committee still feel that whatever data is there with regard to MSME sector, 
they exist in a fragmented manner and there is no real integration across multiple 
datasets. Hence, the Committee are of the opinion that to bridge the information gap in 
MSME sector, the Udyam portal could be developed to act as the one-stop central data 
repository for the MSME sector. Such a database could then be accessed by lenders, 
after getting MSME borrower’s consent, to extend timely credit to them. The Committee 
are of the view that the Udyam portal should further be linked with other databases such 
as CIBIL data, Utility bills data etc. to bridge the information gap in the MSME sector. 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the Budget 2022-23 Announcement, one of the objectives of integration of Udyam 
Portal with National Career Service (NCS), Atmanirbhar Skilled Employee-Employer 
Mapping (ASEEM) and e-Shram Portal is credit facilitation. The integration of Udyam with 
NCS and e-Shram has been completed.  For bridging the credit gap, especially for nano 
enterprises (smallest of the micro enterprises), an Advisory Committee has been set up 
under the chairmanship of Secretary (MSME), with Members from SIDBI and other 
organisations. The first meeting of the Committee has been held and a Concept Note is 
being prepared before technical discussions can commence. The Ministry of MSME is 
making efforts to bring all relatively smaller enterprises, not having PAN, within the formal 
ambit of MSMEs. For this purpose, the Ministry of MSME has launched Udyam Assist 
Portal (UAP) on 11.01.2023 for onboarding the Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) for 
availing the benefit under Priority Sector Lending and as on 28.07.2023, 31 lakh IMEs 
have been onboarded on UAP.  
2. Since UDYAM is linked to ITR and GSTN, it constitutes e-KYC for registered 
MSMEs. Udyam has been linked to Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small 
Enterprises (CGTMSE) through API in June, 2023. On 3rd July, 2023, the API linkage of 
Udyam portal with National Single Window System has been completed.  
3. DPIIT is in the process of developing a single e-KYC for availing the benefits of   
Government schemes and credit facilities from Banks. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 5) 
The Committee note that SIDBI has proposed to develop an UDYAM Assist Platform 
(UAP) with innovative digital processes and linkages to other digital services. This UAP 
would help in accelerating widespread registration of MSMEs (including informal 
enterprises which constitute more than 95% of the MSMEs in the country) on Udyam 
portal.  The Committee further note that SIDBI is closely connected to a vast ecosystem of 
Microfinance Institutions (MFIs), Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs), Business 
Correspondents (BCs), Banks, Fintechs etc. and it also has access to deep data bases 
viz. Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), National 
Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd. (NCGTC), The SME Rating Agency (SMERA), 

21 
 
Prime Minister’s Street Vendor’s Admanirbhar Nidhi (PM SVANidhi) etc. Therefore, the 
Committee are of the opinion that keeping in mind SIDBI’s wide network and deep access 
to data bases, it could be made the nodal agency for Udyam value-added financial 
applications. 
Reply of the Government 
SIDBI is made the nodal agency for onboarding the Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) on 
Udyam Assist Portal (UAP) for availing benefits under Priority Sector Lending. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 6) 
The Committee note that the payments sector made the transition from first 
generation physical processes at bank branches, to second generation processes which 
combine ‘web’ and physical processes, to finally third generation mobile-first, simple, and 
inclusive UPI which has scaled up to 4.5 billion transactions per month as of December 
2021. The Committee envision that India needs a ‘UPI for MSME Lending’ to introduce a 
similar next generation experience that creates a fully mobile-based, easy, immediate, 
contact-less, paperless, and low-cost way for all formal MSMEs to access small-ticket 
working capital loans. A digital solution could reduce frictions enough to turn the tables, 
forcing financial institutions to compete for MSME loans. 
To enable this digital vision of MSME credit to come to life, the Committee believe 
that information needs to be used to replace physical collateral: this is ‘cash flow lending’ 
or ‘flow-based lending’. The Committee acknowledge the insight of the UK Sinha MSME 
Committee Report of 2016 that India does not lack liquidity for MSME financing; rather the 
processes and credit distribution methods need to change from asset-based lending that 
require physical collateral to CFL lending based on information, with low transaction costs. 
While most lenders may not be comfortable sanctioning large loans to a business over a 
5- or 10-year period without collateral, unsecured small ticket loans over a 60- or 90-day 
period can be profitable if the transaction cost for the lender can be brought down enough. 
MSMEs can then build the credit history for larger ticket sizes gradually over time. 
This digital ecosystem leads to several important benefits. First, it reduces 
transaction costs of the process to make small ticket loans viable. Second, it increases 

22 
 
trust in information and claims made virtually, via digital signatures, authentication, real 
time data sharing rather than delayed sharing, etc. Third, it creates a single, powerful 
ecosystem for digital lending with full interoperability across all actors involved in all 
phases of the lending process to remove entry barriers and proprietary walls. Fourth, it 
removes the need for multiple bilateral/exclusive partnerships to share data; allowing an 
individual MSME to use a single deposit account to access loans from multiple 
institutions, etc. Fifth, it increases competition, affordability, and choice by creating 
visibility of loan offers in a remote, real-time manner, lowering interest rates and placing 
power in the hands of MSMEs selecting an offer rather than financial institutions. 
And, finally, it leads to inclusiveness for all kinds of MSMEs. Digitally powered flow-
based lending would allow even small shops to access formal credit inclusively. Moreover, 
the burden of sophisticated technology updates should be on entities (financial 
institutions, for instance), while the individual or MSME-facing loan applications should be 
simple to use, and inclusive for individuals at all levels of digital literacy. Open standards 
ought to allow voice based, assisted, and multilingual experiences. 
Reply of the Government 
The benefits of cash flow-based lending are well appreciated. RBI has facilitated the 
Account Aggregator (AA) framework under which information related to financial assets of 
a customer is collected from the holders of such information (Financial Information 
Providers) and is presented to the customers or specified users (Financial Information 
Users). Further, it is stated that GSTN has been allowed to join the AA framework 
ecosystem as a Financial Information Provider (FIP) with Department of Revenue (DoR) 
as the regulator for GSTN for MSME lending. The approach is to make sharing and 
aggregation of financial data possible in a secure, transparent, and efficient manner by 
setting-up an intermediary which will also be responsible for the customers' consent 
management. Hence, RBI has facilitated the required ecosystem for enabling cash-flow 
based lending. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 7) 
The digital building blocks required to make each step of the process instant & 
paperless are now largely in place. The Committee welcome the progress over the last 5 

23 
 
years by various departments including the Ministry of Finance, the Reserve Bank of 
India, GSTN, NSDL, MSME Ministry, MeITY, and UIDAI in introducing key digital building 
blocks required to reduce the transaction costs of lending and improve access to new 
alternate data sources that can be the basis for cash flow-based lending for small 
businesses. 
There are various building blocks for the integrated digital ecosystem:  
 GSTN owned by the Department of Revenue in the Ministry of Finance is both a 
digital business identifier (GST certificate) and a trusted central registry of 
business invoices indicating future cash flows.  
 Account Aggregators were introduced by the Financial Stability and 
Development Council and are regulated in the Banking sector by the Reserve 
Bank of India. The AA framework creates a secure means to digitally share 
financial data (bank statements, invoices, etc.) between different institutions in a 
secure manner.  
 Account Aggregators required introduction of the MeiTY Consent Artefact which 
was a common digital standard of APIs to communicate consent of an individual 
to share a granular piece of data for a specific purpose. 
 Open Credit Enablement Network (OCEN): OCEN is a community-based digital 
standard that enables a person to share a single cash-flow based loan 
application to multiple lenders and get a personalised loan offer back in real 
time. 
 Aadhaar eSign: eSign built by UIDAI is a public digital service allowing an 
individual to provide a simple, easy to use digital signature for a loan agreement 
at a low cost using just their Aadhaar number and associated mobile.  
 Unified Payments Interface (UPI) and UPI AutoPay: UPI managed by NPCI can 
be used to disburse small ticket loan funds directly into an MSME’s bank 
account. Its scale up to 4.5 billion transactions per month has also resulted in 
informal cash transactions switching to formal ‘digital footprints’ in bank 
accounts, creating further proof of cash flows. UPI AutoPay is a service that 
allows set up of recurring payments (eg. loan repayments) using a mobile UPI 
PIN authentication.  

24 
 
 eNACH is another payments service managed by NPCI which can be used to 
set up and manage recurring mandates of larger transaction limits. 
 Udyam is operated by the MSME Ministry and provides a certificate of 
registration for all MSMEs including their name, sector, key partners/directors, 
and data corroborated by the IT department on turnover of the business.  
 PAN is a card-based taxpayer business ID given to individuals and entities 
registered as partnerships, LLPs, Private Limited Companies, HUFs, etc. As a 
common identifier collected both by financial institutions and GSTIN, it allows 
for corroboration that GST invoices and bank statements are referring to the 
same individual or entity.  
 
Reply of the Government 
It is an observation. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 8) 
The Committee believe the FSDC-led Account Aggregator framework for which RBI 
introduced Master Directions has a high potential to enable secure and instant sharing of 
banking data and GST data. The Committee note that the Account Aggregator framework 
has been growing very rapidly since its launch in September 2021. The Committee 
believe the Account Aggregator framework can improve many aspects of the MSME 
Lending system including inclusive access to credit, fraud prevention, and improved 
monitoring and NPA reduction.  
The Committee note that after the Budget announcement of 2020 stating that, ‘an 
invoice financing app will be launched’, the Department of Financial Services developed a 
flagship application to increase cash flow lending known as SAHAY GST. The Committee 
have learned that SAHAY GST combines the digital infrastructure building blocks 
referenced above to provide instant digital lending to MSMEs based on secure access to 
GST invoices and introduces a fully mobile based end-to-end 5–10-minute process with 
multiple lenders simultaneously. The Committee note that the SAHAY application using 
the OCEN infrastructure has been built, tested, and piloted with loans disbursed as small 

25 
 
as Rs. 160 and as large as Rs. 5.5 lakh, and that it may have a lending potential of 3 lakh 
crore in the next year alone, going up to 10-15 lakh crore by 2025. The Committee note 
that RBI and Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have had discussions in 2020 
to allow GST information to flow securely to lending institutions by bringing it into the 
Account Aggregator network. The Committee also note that if working capital lending 
were to take off based on GST invoices, it would not only allow MSMEs to grow quickly 
and generate jobs, but also encourage formalisation and GST registration of businesses.  
Reply of the Government 
The Account Aggregator framework was introduced in September 2016 with the issuance 
of guidelines for NBFC-Account Aggregator (NBFC-AA). As per the extant regulations, 
NBFC-AA, Financial Information Providers, Financial Information Users and customers 
form the part of AA ecosystem.  
2. In order to support flow-based lending to MSMEs, GSTN has been permitted to 
onboard the NBFC-Account Aggregator framework as a Financial Information Provider. 
Department of Revenue has agreed in-principal to be treated as the regulator of GSTN for 
this specific purpose. GSTN has coordinated with Reserve Bank Information Technology 
Pvt. Ltd. to synchronize the information format with the prescribed API specifications.  
3. Department of Revenue (DoR) has informed that GSTN has been allowed to join 
the AA framework as Financial Information Provider (FIP) with DoR as the regulator for 
GSTN. Further, invoice-based lending app is similar to integration of TReDS platform with 
GSTN e-invoicing portal which requires amendment in GST Act of Centre and States. For 
this purpose, proposal to amend GST laws to enable such systems is being brought 
before GST Council. GST SAHAY app which is based on GST invoices will be made 
operational after GSTN integration. 
4. DFS has also conducted various stakeholders meeting monthly to review 
the progress of app for invoice-based lending and onboarding of Public Sector Banks on 
Account Aggregator Ecosystem with all PSBs, NPCI, DoR, DEA, GSTN & Sahmati 
Foundation. As on 24.7.2023, 64 Financial Institutions (including 49 banks) and SIDBI 
have onboarded on AA framework. All PSBs are currently live on Account Aggregator 
Ecosystem both as Financial Information Provider and Financial Information User. In a 
recent review meeting held by DFS on 25.7.2023, the representative from GSTN apprised 
that GSTN as FIP will be live on AA framework shortly. 

26 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 9) 
The Committee note that now that most of the key digital building blocks required to 
scale up MSME lending are in place, four policy and technology updates can accelerate 
scale up flow-based lending via SAHAY GST.  
First, the Committee recommend the Ministry (Department of Revenue) and the 
Reserve Bank of India close out their 2020 discussions with the required technology and 
regulatory updates to bring GSTIN formally into the Account Aggregator framework to 
allow regulated entities to access GST data with individual consent. The Committee 
believe that regulated Entities in the financial sector (Banks, NBFCs, etc.) need to be able 
to access GST data securely via regulated Account Aggregators to sanction loans based 
on future revenue. This access would enable many apps such as SAHAY, TReDS, PSB 
59, or others to use GST data for lending with the consent of businesses. This may 
require RBI to update its definition of Financial Information Providers in the Master 
Directions on Account Aggregator to include GSTIN and affiliated entities. This may also 
need the Ministry (Department of Revenue) to authorise GSTIN to make necessary 
technology changes for GST data access, such as incorporating the Financial Information 
Provider technology module Version 1.1.2 as per ReBIT specifications. 
Secondly, the Committee recommend that the members of the Financial Stability and 
Development Council (RBI, SEBI, IRDAI, PFRDA, and the Ministry) encourage and 
accelerate adoption of Account Aggregator standards across all regulated entities, and 
indirectly monitor progress of adoption as part of financial inclusion efforts. 
Third, the Committee recommend that the Ministry (Department of Financial 
Services) focus on encouraging public sector banks, public sector insurers, public sector 
pension funds, and public sector depositories to adopt the Account Aggregator standards. 
The Committee strongly believe that scaling up to universal adoption of Account 
Aggregator beyond the small set of large financial institutions that have already adopted 
will create powerful network effects for financial inclusion, access to credit, and economic 
growth and ensure the benefits reach individuals not banking with the largest institutions. 
This will allow more individuals and MSMEs to share their financial information with 
lenders and improve their access to flow-based credit based on their data. Actions taken 

27 
 
by regulators could include setting a time-bound adoption phase for REs, and monitoring 
progress via industry associations.  
Fourth, the Committee believe that small changes to Udyam and GST certificates will 
allow them to be universally relied on by financial institutions as KYC documents and 
reduce the cost of MSME due diligence. Unfortunately, businesses do not have access to 
a fully digital KYC process today; many of their identification documents (e.g., Company 
articles of incorporation, partnership deeds, etc.) are still physically provided and verified. 
The Committee believe that updating and digitising KYC processes is key to increasing 
volumes of safe, small ticket lending at low unit costs for lenders. As per the RBI Master 
KYC Guidelines (Paras 27, 28 and 29 set forth in Part 2 of the RBI KYC Master Directions 
2016) requires in addition to Customer Due Diligence source 2 digitally signed 
documents, even for sole proprietorships. The documents specified are not available 
digitally. The Committee recommend that: (1) The Udyam certificate managed by MSME 
Ministry may be issued in digitally signed form that allows lenders to access it with high 
trust and may add API-based machine-readable access; (2) in the case of the GST 
Certificate managed by the GSTIN, the Committee acknowledge that it is already issued 
in digitally signed form. The Committee recommend adding API-based machine-readable 
access and including the PAN Numbers of partners and directors in addition to their 
names so as to enable them to authenticate on behalf of the MSME entity they are 
affiliated with to enable smoother entity KYC.  
Finally, the Committee recommend the introduction of enabling business KYC 
reforms and utilities to create inclusive, frictionless, and safe access to financial services 
for all at low cost of customer due diligence. The cost of repeating an entity KYC is high, 
redundant, and precludes small ticket loans from being offered. Enabling KYC reforms by 
the Ministry could frameworks such as Derived or Foundational KYC (which could be 
enabled by a PML Rules Update) allow a lender to rely on the KYC done by an existing 
bank account holder based on KYC parameters shared in digitally signed form. The 
Committee note that it is important to shift away from per transaction KYC towards 
system-wide KYC in a way that secures both data and money flow. Alternative 
frameworks which meet the criteria of solving for real-time, secure, low-cost, and AML risk 
reducing once-only KYC may also be considered. 
The Committee believe that these technology and policy updates will allow the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) to accelerate the launch of the 

28 
 
flagship cash flow lending application known as SAHAY GST in the immediate term to 
make low-cost small ticket loans based on GST invoices a reality for 5-8 lakh crore of new 
formal flow-based lending.  
In a future phase, additional actions can allow further scale up of MSME Lending to 
15-18 lakh crore including: (1) enabling KYC reforms could also include adjustments by 
the RBI such as increased transaction limits for eKYC; (2) introducing Buyer Ratings for 
buyers on GSTN will introduce more information on the buyer’s payment timelines and 
history, improving credit decisioning for lenders; (3) enabling entities to sign digital 
agreements because even if the KYC problem is solved, the issue of authority to sign on 
behalf of a non-sole proprietor and the limits of that authority still remain unsolved. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to support flow-based lending to MSMEs, GSTN has been permitted by RBI to 
onboard the NBFC-Account Aggregator framework as a Financial Information Provider. 
Department of Revenue (DoR) has informed that GSTN has been allowed to join the AA 
framework as Financial Information Provider (FIP) with DoR as the regulator for GSTN. 
On confirmation from DoR on the Financial Information (FI) types for inclusion in the 
Master Direction for NBFC-AA, RBI on 20.6.2023 had published GSTN FI Type Schema 
on the ReBIT API website. GSTN has coordinated with Reserve Bank Information 
Technology Pvt. Ltd. (ReBIT) to synchronize the information format with the prescribed 
API specifications.  
2. The discussion with relevant stakeholders is in progress to build necessary 
integration for consent-based sharing of data with AA by GSTN. Further, invoice-based 
lending app is similar to integration of TReDS platform with GSTN e-invoicing portal which 
requires amendment in GST Act of Centre and States. For this purpose, proposal to 
amend GST laws to enable such systems is being brought before GST Council. 
3. All the regulators and DFS are closely monitoring the boarding status of their 
regulated entities (REs) on the AA platform. In this regard, the following information has 
been furnished by different regulators: 
3.1 SEBI: 
I. SEBI in August 2022 had issued a circular (copy enclosed) titled ‘Participation as 
Financial Information Providers in Account Aggregator framework’ enabling 

29 
 
participation of Depositories and Asset Management Companies (AMCs) through 
their Registrar and Transfer Agents (RTAs) as Financial Information Providers 
(FIPs) in AA ecosystem. Consequently, both the depositories have onboarded the 
AA ecosystem. 
II. Further, with respect to the go-live status of AMCs through RTAs, it is informed that 
one of the RTAs has gone live with 12 AMCs while the other RTA is in the process 
of going live on the AA ecosystem. 
3.2  PFRDA: 
It can be noted that currently, Account Aggregator standards are yet to be adopted by the 
PFRDA regulated entities. However, PFRDA has facilitated discussion of Central Record 
Keeping Agencies (CRAs) in NPS Architecture (CRAs - Protean, KFintech and CAMS) 
with Sahamati - Industry alliance for promotion of Account Aggregator ecosystem 
on 13.5.2022. Based on the insights received in the discussion, Sahamati shared a 
proposed concept note with CRAs as potential Financial Information Providers (FIPs) and 
content artefact customised for NPS architecture. The documents are currently under 
perusal of PFRDA and the regulated entities (CRA's) for further engagement towards 
early adoption of Account Aggregator. 
3.3 IRDAI: 
3.3.1 KYC information: Once a customer has completed KYC with a financial participant 
in the Account Aggregator (AA) ecosystem, insurance companies should be able to get 
this information from other FIPs. This will be useful while insuring MSMEs.  
3.3.2 Sharing of Policy and Claims information: Currently insurers require past insurance 
and claims information from customers for various scenarios such as No Claim Bonus 
(NCB) in Motor insurance, portability credit in health insurance and general claims 
experience. The AA ecosystem can facilitate this.  
3.3.3 Sharing of fraud information amongst insurers on real time basis: AA ecosystem 
can be used to transfer details about fraudulent customers across insurers on a real time 
basis.  
3.3.4 IRDAI has advised General Insurance & Life Insurance Councils to encourage and 
accelerate adoption of Account Aggregator standards across all insurers. 

30 
 
3.4 DFS: 
3.4.1 DFS has conducted various meetings with concerned stakeholders to review the 
progress of app for invoice-based lending and onboarding of Public Sector Banks on 
Account Aggregator Ecosystem with all PSBs, NPCI, DoR, DEA, GSTN & Sahmati 
Foundation. On account of these meetings, all PSBs are today live on Account 
Aggregator Ecosystem both as Financial Information Provider and Financial Information 
User. It may be mentioned that Union Bank of India became the first PSB to go live on AA 
in April 2022. SIDBI became first FI to go live as FIU on AA in May 2022. 
3.4.2 The details of the entities onboarded on the AA ecosystem as on 30.6.2023 are as 
under: 
 58 Financial Institutions have gone live both as FIP and FIU, including  
 all 12 PSBs, 11 Private Sector Banks, 2 Small Finance Bank, 8 Insurance 
Companies, 23 Regional Rural Bank, 1 NBFC-D and 1 Registrar and 
Transfer Agent (RTA). 
 17 Financial Institutions have gone live as FIP, including 
 9 Asset Management Company, 1 RTA, 2 Depository, 3 Central 
Recordkeeping Agency, 1 Life Insurance Company and 1 Insurance 
Company 
 173 Financial Institutions have gone live as FIU, including  
 130 RBI Regulated, 32 SEBI Regulated, 9 IRDAI regulated entities, 2 
PFRDA regulated entities 
3.5 RBI: 
3.5.1 In order to support flow-based lending to MSMEs, GSTN has been permitted to 
onboard the NBFC-Account Aggregator framework as a Financial Information Provider. 
GSTN has coordinated with Reserve Bank Information Technology Pvt. Ltd. to 
synchronize the information format with the prescribed API specifications. RBI on 
20.6.2023 had published GSTN FI Type Schema on the ReBIT API website.  
3.5.2 With regard to encouraging regulated entities to adopt AA standards, Indian Banks 
Association was advised to sensitize banks to onboard the AA ecosystem as Financial 

31 
 
Information Providers so that, they along with other Financial Information Users can 
benefit from the ecosystem. 
3.5.3 RBI has submitted that recommendations pertain to customer due diligence (CDD) 
of sole proprietorships. It states that apart from CDD of the proprietor, two documents 
(physical form / equivalent e-documents) of the proof of the business/activity of the 
proprietorship shall be obtained by the regulated entities (REs).  
3.5.4 It is provided in the Master Directions (MD) on Know Your Customer (KYC) that if 
two such documents are not available, then the RE can accept one document and 
undertake contact point verification and collect such other information and clarification as 
would be required to establish the existence of such firm. 
3.5.5 The definition of equivalent e-document is as per that provided in the PML Rules, 
2005 – Equivalent e-document” means an electronic equivalent of a document, issued by 
the issuing authority of such document with its valid digital signature including documents 
issued to the digital locker account of the customer as per rule 9 of the Information 
Technology (Preservation and Retention of Information by Intermediaries Providing Digital 
Locker Facilities) Rules, 2016. 
3.5.6 RBI has also stated that while Udyam certificate is currently not one of the activity 
proof documents that are prescribed in the MD on KYC, the same is already under 
consideration for incorporation as an activity proof for proprietorship firms. Ministry of 
MSME may examine the possibility of introducing equivalent e-documents of the Udyam 
certificate. Such equivalent e-documents should be as per the definition provided in the 
PML Rules, 2005. This will enable furnishing of the Udyam certificate digitally by the 
customer. However, MoMSME has stated that the Udyam Certificate has the QR code 
which can be scanned and as a part of the implementation of Budget 2022-23 
announcement regarding integration of UDYAM Portal with other Portals, a Committee 
has been formed where with GSTN is one of the members.  
3.5.7 With regard to API-based machine-readable access, RBI stated that the 
mechanism should be such as to allow the REs to access and store the documents as per 
requirements of PML Rules and MD on KYC. Only information flow without flow of KYC 
documents will not adhere to requirements of PML Rules. 
3.5.8 With regard to GST Certificate, it is submitted that while the Reserve Bank has 
allowed GST Certificate as one of the activity proofs for proprietorship firms, the same is 

32 
 
not prescribed as a KYC document for other type of Legal Entities (LEs) such as 
companies, etc., in the PML Rules. Necessary amendments in this regard will have to be 
carried out in the PML Rules by the Government. Regarding API based machine readable 
access, the comments made above may be referred to. 
3.5.9 PML Rules, 2005 and MD on KYC permit REs to rely on KYC carried out by third 
parties, including relying on the CKYCR database. However, the ultimate responsibility for 
customer due diligence (CDD) and undertaking enhanced due diligence measures, as 
applicable, will be with the RE. This is important as the risk categorisation of the customer 
may change based on various factors, and any change in customer KYC information 
needs to be updated by the RE. Further, in terms of international standards such as 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations, the KYC document is to be 
maintained by the RE which is onboarding the customer. 
3.5.10 Further, regarding SAHAY GST, representatives from Department of Revenue had 
reiterated that CDD is the primary responsibility of the entity with which the relationship of 
the customer is intended. It was also stated that while PML Rules and FATF Standards 
CDD based on data from third party is permitted, the ultimate responsibility is that of the 
financial institution concerned and such reliance on third party data includes flow of 
documents and not just of information. 
3.5.11 Restrictions are placed with respect to Accounts opened using OTP based e-KYC, 
in non-face-to-face mode as part of risk-mitigation measures as non-face to face 
onboarding is a high-risk scenario.  
3.5.12 It is submitted that the Bank has introduced Video based Customer Identification 
Process (V-CIP) for remote onboarding. Accounts opened using V-CIP do not entail any 
transaction limits. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 10) 
The Committee note that the Government has been very successful in implementing 
many schemes to provide collateral-free loans to the MSME sector, like the Prime 
Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP), Credit Guarantee Fund Trust 
for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 

33 
 
(ECLGS), Sahay GST, GeMSahay, PSBloansin59 minutes portal etc. Yet the Committee 
found in its scrutiny that only a few MSME enterprises are managing to get collateral-free 
loans under the Government schemes, with majority being compelled to furnish adequate 
collateral even after being eligible for collateral-free loans. As more than 99 percent of the 
MSMEs belong to the micro sector they typically have no collateral to offer to banks. 
The UK Sinha Expert Committee on MSMEs in its report suggested replacing 
physical collateral or guarantee requirements (asset-based lending) with high trust 
information on an MSMEs future cash flows called cash flow-based lending (CFL). The 
Committee are also of the view that credit flow to the MSME sector can be strengthened 
with the adoption of CFL with digitization of products and processes and an integrated 
digital ecosystem described above. This is expected to speed up the process of credit 
underwriting and faster disposal of credit proposal. The Committee would further like to 
add that since this form of lending is dependent upon cash flow information of the MSME 
entity, the role of adequate data acquires critical role. Here again, the Committee would 
like to reiterate that a portal like Udyam should be comprehensively developed in a user-
friendly manner to function as a one stop central data repository for MSMEs. 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to collateral free lending, it may be mentioned that two of the Government’s 
flagship schemes viz. Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) and Credit 
Guarantee Trust Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) have benefitted the 
MSME sector to a great extent in the light of headwinds caused by Covid pandemic. 
ECLGS was introduced by the Government, as a targeted policy response, to support the 
most vulnerable category of borrowers i.e. individual borrowers, small businesses and 
MSMEs and provided them liquidity support required in the wake of disruptions caused 
due to Covid-19 pandemic. As on 28.7.2023, loans amounting to ₹3.68 lakh crore have 
been guaranteed benefitting 1.19 crore borrowers under the scheme. Out of the total 
guaranteed amount, nearly 66% has gone towards benefit of MSMEs. In terms of 
guarantee numbers, nearly 95% has benefitted MSMEs. There has been a 52 % growth in 
guarantees approved under Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro & Small Enterprises 
(CGTMSE) in 2021-22 over 2020-21 figures. The amount of guarantee in CGTMSE in 
2021-22 crossed   Rs. 50,000 crore for the first time and reached Rs. 56,172 crore. The 
amount of guarantee in CGTMSE in 2022-23 crossed Rs. 1.00 Lakh crore for the first time 
and achieved Rs. 1,04,781 crore. 

34 
 
2. DFS is also taking regular reviews for early launch of GST SAHAY app, which is 
cash flow-based lending model and uses GST invoices for providing credit. This app will 
be made operational after GSTN integration. Department of Revenue (DoR) has informed 
that GSTN has been allowed to join the AA framework as Financial Information Provider 
(FIP) with DoR as the regulator for GSTN. In a recent review meeting held by DFS on 
25.7.2023, the representative from GSTN apprised that GSTN as FIP will be live on AA 
framework shortly. Further, invoice-based lending app is similar to integration of TReDS 
platform with GSTN e-invoicing portal which requires amendment in GST Act of Centre 
and States. For this purpose, proposal to amend GST laws to enable such systems is 
being brought before GST Council.  
3. The Ministry of MSME is working towards developing UDYAM Portal into a one 
stop central data repository for MSMEs through its integration with other portals, through 
SIDBI’s proposal for developing an UDYAM Assist Platform, and storage on Digilocker 
platform. The Ministry of MSME has launched Udyam Assist Portal (UAP) on 11.01.2023 
for onboarding Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) for availing the benefit under Priority 
Sector Lending. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 11) 
The Committee believe that like the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) scheme of National 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), a MSME “Vyapar” Credit Card 
scheme for the MSME sector should be launched nationwide, under the implementing 
authority of SIDBI. Only MSMEs that are registered on the Udyam portal would have 
access to this Vyapar credit card. This would create a substantial incentive for even nano 
MSMEs (such as roadside vendors, kirana shops, and village salons) to sign up on the 
Udyam portal. There are crores of MSMEs that have not yet entered the formal financial 
system, the Vyapar credit card would be an excellent mechanism to bring them into the 
system. Once they are in the Udyam portal, then other targeted programs can also be 
created by industry, geography, and size. The MSME database can also be used by 
states and other stakeholders to support the MSME sector. 

35 
 
The Ministry of Finance in a written submission informed the Committee that several 
banks are already providing their own MSME Credit cards / LaghuUdyami Credit Cards to 
eligible MSME borrowers, including Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana (PMMY) borrowers. 
However, the Committee feel that bank-specific cards are limited in their reach and 
benefits, as services offered to the card holder vary from one bank to another. The 
Committee are of the view that such a scheme could be launched by the Government of 
India, in consultation with leading banks, so that there is uniformity in the card benefits for 
each group of MSMEs. This would provide them an easy and convenient access to formal 
credit. Further, the Committee would like to recommend that as KCC scheme provides 
short-term credit limits to farmers for crops and term loans, Vyapar Credit Card can also 
provide its holders short term loans at low interest rates for meeting the working capital 
requirements of MSME sector. It can be further extended to provide collateral-free, small 
loans to MSMEs, like the Rs. 1 lakh collateral-free facility available to KCC holders. 
Today, the MSME sector is much larger than the agricultural sector; however, it is not 
getting the benefit of easy, concessional finance that is available to the agricultural sector 
through KCCs. The Ministry of Finance working with stakeholders can develop 
appropriate terms and conditions for different types of MSME segments. It may even be 
necessary to run multiple trials and experiments to understand which type of credit card 
would be most effective. 
Reply of the Government 
On 25.2.2022, Ministry of MSME, along with NPCI and Union Bank of India launched, on 
a pilot basis, MSME RuPay Credit Card for MSMEs. On 10.5.2022, the second phase of 
the pilot project of MSME RuPay Credit Card was launched with 4 more banks namely; 
Bank of Baroda, Kotak Mahindra Bank, SBM Bank India and HDFC Bank. Till May 2023, 
total 76,987 credit cards have been issued by above Banks.  
2. DFS also held a series of meetings with various stake holders including banks and 
RBI to launch a Merchant Credit Card (MCC) to traders on the line of Kisan Credit Card 
(KCC). Based on the deliberation made in these meetings to finalise the basic features of 
MCC, IBA formulated the guidelines in consultation with RBI and the same has been 
issued vide their letter dated 27.02.2023, advising all member banks for implementing the 
said guidelines and start issuing MCC to all eligible borrowers. 
19,856 MCCs were so far issued by some PSBs i.e. Union Bank of India (UBI), Canara 
Bank and State Bank of India (SBI) as on 03.07.2023 while other have completed 

36 
 
technical integration and pilot testing and are in process of issuing cards to the eligible 
customers.  
3. In addition, RBI has submitted that to enhance the coverage of General Credit 
Card (GCC) Scheme, to ensure greater credit linkage for all productive activities within the 
overall Priority Sector guidelines and to capture all credit extended by banks to individuals 
for non-farm entrepreneurial activity, the GCC guidelines were formulated. The objective 
is to increase flow of credit to individuals for entrepreneurial activity in the non-farm sector 
provided through the General Credit Card. Any credit facility extended under the Scheme 
would include both working capital and term loan requirements of entrepreneurs. Detailed 
guidelines were issued in terms of circular RPCD.MSME & NFS.BC.No.61/06.02.31/2013-
14 dated 2.12.2013 on ‘Revised General Credit Card (GCC) Scheme’. Further, in terms of 
para 7 of circular DoR.AUT.REC. No.27/24.01.041/2022-23 dated 21.4.2022 on ‘Master 
Direction – Credit Card and Debit Card – Issuance and Conduct Directions, 2022’, card-
issuers may issue business credit cards to business entities/individuals for business 
expenses. The business credit cards may also be issued as charge cards, corporate 
credit cards or by linking a credit facility such as overdraft/cash credit provided for 
business purpose as per the terms and conditions stipulated for the facility concerned. 
Corporate credit cards can be issued together with add-on cards wherever required. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 12) 
The Committee feel that CIBIL rating for MSMEs can be improved because their 
credit rating mechanism is similar to the rating system of corporate entities. As a result, 
MSMEs in many cases, are assigned low scores. This makes it difficult for them to access 
formal credit. The Committee believe that lack of updated data about the MSME sector 
plays a big role in their poor credit ratings. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
timely data should be made available to the rating agencies so that ratings can be 
appropriately updated, as and when necessary. As suggested earlier, the Committee 
would like to reiterate the role that Udyam Portal can play in providing reliable data about 
MSMEs to the rating agencies, so that data silos in this sector is bridged. Further, MSME 
associations appearing before the Committee have pointed out that the basis of data 
collection and process of rating is not completely transparent. As a result, there are a 
number of wrong entries in CIBIL which change the company’s overall ratings and 

37 
 
consequently their loan applications are held up indefinitely. It was further mentioned that 
MSMEs are forced to spend enormous time, energy and money in correcting the wrong 
entries. Therefore, the Committee recommend that a physical and virtual contact 
mechanism be established with CIBIL for verification and clarification. This should be 
accompanied with an online ticketing system so that the anomalies can be corrected in a 
time bound manner.  
Reply of the Government 
With regard to the improvement in the CIBIL rating for MSMEs, the issue was taken up 
with TransUnion Cibil (TU Cibil), which has submitted as under: 
1.1 CIBIL MSME Rank (CMR) is a credit default-predictor model for Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSME). CMR provides insights into the credit behaviour of the 
borrowing entity (MSMEs) and predicts the probability of default in the next one year 
horizon. CMR is a robust model which risk differentiates borrowers in the smallest Micro 
segment having aggregate commercial credit exposure lesser than ₹10 Lakhs to the 
Medium segment having aggregate commercial credit exposure of ₹50 Crores. CMR is 
different from corporate ratings in many ways including its objective and coverage. The 
Company ratings are derived using parameters in the areas of Industry risk, financial risk, 
business risk and management risk. CMR on the other hand is a completely objective 
assessment of an MSME. CMR is completely based on the borrowers past credit 
performance and the rank is derived purely based on company’s performance on the 
loans taken. Company Ratings also considers broader industry factors whereas CMR is 
built purely on credit parameters enabling discrimination on assessment of probability of 
default. 
1.2 It is further stated by TU Cibil that CMR has enabled Credit Institutions and 
Consumers take faster and better-informed decisions. CMR is the industry norm for 
MSME lending risk assessment. More than 1000 credit institutions use CMR in their 
decision-making process including all public sector banks and leading private sector 
banks, NBFCs and other financial institutions. CMR currently is available for more than 1 
crore MSMEs in India and has been well recognized by both lending Industry as well as 
the regulator. Credit flow to MSME entities can be further expanded by widening the risk 
underwriting parameters of MSMEs based on multiple data sources available in the 
marketplace. Continuing with the mission of supporting banks and financial institutions to 

38 
 
sustainably grow MSME credit portfolios while driving access to finance for underserved 
and unserved MSMEs, TU Cibil is working in partnership with a large fintech, on 
developing a Financial, Income and Trade data based Rank (FIT Rank) which leverages 
the power of Goods and Services Tax (GST), bank statements and Income Tax returns 
(ITR) information to provide a ranking model for MSME lending. FIT Rank shall benefit 
MSMEs with a strong track record of healthy GST payments, banking behavior and 
income tax returns to be able to become more credit eligible. FIT Rank shall be able to 
help India’s credit industry in significantly scaling portfolio growth while also supporting 
the government’s Atmanirbhar Bharat initiative by increasing access to finance for 
MSMEs. 
2. Even RBI vide circular DBOD.No. CID.BC.127/20.16.056 /2013-14 dated 
27.6.2014 on ‘Data Format for Furnishing of Credit Information to Credit Information 
Companies and other Regulatory Measures’ has advised banks/FIs that the CIBIL 
method of calibrating credit score from 300 to 900 be adopted by the other Credit 
Information Companies (CICs) also, so that they have a common classification of credit 
scores. 
3. With regard to the lack of updated data about the MSME sector, RBI has stated 
that Rule 22 of the Credit Information Companies Rules, 2006 - ‘Updating of the credit 
information by credit institution’ already provides the provisions for updation of credit 
information by Credit Institutions, the same is as under:  
“Without prejudice to the provisions of rule 21, if there is any change in the data, 
information or credit information, already furnished to a credit information company due to 
change in the liability of the borrower or his guarantor, on account of write off in full or in 
part of the amount of outstanding dues of the credit institution or the repayment thereof by 
the borrower or his guarantor, or release of the guarantor, or any scheme of arrangement 
entered into between the credit institution and the borrower, or the final settlement of the 
amount payable by the borrower pursuant to any scheme of arrangement with the credit 
institution, as the case may be, or on account of any such other reason, the credit 
institution shall,- 
c. continue to update such data, information or credit information promptly or in any 
event, by the end of each reporting period not exceeding thirty days until the 
termination of the respective account relating to such credit information; and 

39 
 
d. furnish an updated credit information to the credit information company at the 
earliest in this behalf.” 
4. Further, RBI vide circular DBOD.No.CID.BC.127/20.16. 056/2013-14 dated 
27.6.2014 on “Data Format for Furnishing of Credit Information to Credit Information 
Companies and other Regulatory Measures” has detailed certain best practices to be 
followed by banks/ financial institutions (FIs)/ CICs, wherein it has been suggested that 
updation of credit information should take place on a monthly basis or at such shorter 
intervals as may be mutually agreed upon between the bank/FI and the CIC. 
5. TransUnion Cibil has submitted that it has dedicated teams managing data 
governance and provide necessary support to lenders for improving their data 
completeness, accuracy, quality and freshness. Working closely with lenders in last 
couple of years, they have been able to make significant improvement in data reporting 
process for most lenders. All of the commercial bureau data is updated at a monthly 
frequency, out of which over 50% of the data is reported on a weekly frequency. On an 
average it takes 13 days for lenders to submit commercial data to TransUnion CIBIL. In 
cases of delays in data submission by lenders, TU Cibil follows the process for 
regularizing data from inconsistent data contributing lenders. If a lender fails to report 
data to TU Cibil within defined timelines, then, escalation procedure is followed by them. 
6. With regard to the role that Udyam Portal can play in providing reliable data about 
MSMEs to the rating agencies, RBI has submitted that CICs operate under the framework 
of the Credit Information Companies Regulation Act, 2005 (CICRA), CIC Rules and 
Regulations, 2006 and instructions issued by RBI from time to time. It is pertinent to note 
the following provisions of CICRA, 2005, viz; 
iv. Section 2(d) which defines credit information and generally includes information 
pertaining to loans and advances/any credit facility availed by a borrower or any 
information that determines the credit worthiness of the borrower 
v. Section 14 which specifies the forms of business that a CIC can engage in. CICs 
can collect, process and collate information trade, credit and financial standing of 
the borrower of the credit institution which is a member of the CIC. 
vi. Section 17(1) which mandates that CIC can collect credit information from its 
member credit institution only. 

40 
 
7. RBI has stated that on combined reading of aforementioned provisions, it can be 
inferred that the information in Udyam Portal is not Credit Information. Further, at present, 
Udyam Portal does not fall under the category of a ‘Credit Institution’ as defined under 
Section 2(f) of CICRA, 2005. Therefore, as per extant guidelines it may not be possible 
for CICs to collect data from Udyam Portal. 
8. As regards the correction in Credit Information Report (CIR), RBI has stated that 
Section 21(3) of CICRA, 2005 already provides for updation of credit information within 
thirty days, subject to conditions stipulated therein. Further, necessary provisions with 
regard to grievance redressal has already been provided by RBI, wherein the complainant 
may lodge a complaint with the CIC, either through physical or online mode, for any 
correction in CIR. Complainant may also approach the concerned Credit Institution (CI) for 
correction. If the concerned bank /CI do not make the correction, he/she can approach the 
grievance redressal authority of the respective CIs and further if the complainant is not 
satisfied with the action taken by Grievance Redressal authority, then he/she can 
approach Centralised Receipt and Processing Centre, RBI for redressal of the complaint. 
9. TransUnion Cibil stated that it does direct interaction with commercial entities to 
help them resolve their credit report concerns through three modes viz. online, email and 
walk in. It has an established & well-functioning Consumer Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism which is both physical & online. Consumers can log their grievances on the 
TU Cibil website or in person. If they find any information reflecting in their report to be 
inaccurate, they can raise dispute with TU Cibil. The dispute resolution process TAT is 30 
days’ time from the date the request was received as defined under the Credit Information 
Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 13) 
The Committee note that in case of MSME loans, banks generally keep 25% to 40% 
margin money on working capital limits which leave reduced funds with the MSMEs for 
their needs. The Committee desire that the Government should give directions to banks to 
reduce this margin money, so that more funds are available with MSMEs. This would 
result in enhanced credit flow to the economy in general and MSME sector, in particular.  

41 
 
Reply of the Government 
RBI has submitted that credit related matters have been largely deregulated and banks 
are expected to put in place Board-approved lending policy within the overarching 
regulatory guidelines. The extant regulations provide adequate flexibility to fix margins for 
working capital limits in consultation with the borrowers; however, banks have to ensure 
that double financing is avoided. Banks are expected to take credit decisions including 
stipulating margins based on their commercial judgement on the viability of the loan. Any 
intervention in this regard may not be prudent as it may impact the loss given default of 
banks which may have unintended consequences such as increased pricing, outright 
denial of loans to borrowers perceived as high risk, etc. However, to protect the interest of 
MSEs, as per RBI’s instructions, banks are required to provide minimum 20% of the 
turnover to the business enterprises as bank finance and 5% is to be obtained as margin 
in terms of the Nayak Committee norms. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 14) 
MSMEs usually borrow loans at higher rates as compared to their corporate counterparts, 
as banks consider them high risk entities. In the case of borrowing from NBFCs, this rate 
increases manifold with some NBFCs lending at rates as high as 20 to 25 percent. The 
Government of India had announced Interest Subvention Scheme for MSMEs, for the 
period 01.04.2019 to 31.03.2021. However, all MSMEs have not been given the benefit of 
this scheme. In such circumstances, the Committee would suggest that at least MSMEs 
which are paying their loans and interest on time should be allowed interest rate 
subvention of 2 to 3 percent like in the agriculture sector.   
Reply of the Government 
With regard to lowering the interest rates for MSMEs, it is stated that for better 
transmission of monetary policy, banks have been advised by RBI to link all new floating 
rate loans to external benchmark, for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) from 1.10.2019 
and for Medium Enterprises from 1.4.2020. The RBI’s data on Lending and Deposits rates 
of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) shows that the weighted average lending rate 
(WALR) on outstanding rupee loans, has come down from 10.24% in Sept 2019 to 9.76% 
in April 2023 in line with the reduction in Repo rate. In addition, with a view to increase 

42 
 
flow of funds to MSE sector at reasonable cost, RBI’s extant regulatory framework 
prescribes a lower standard asset provisioning requirement of 0.25% on outstanding bank 
loans to these sectors, as against 1% for commercial real estate and 0.4% for most of the 
other sectors. 
2. With a view to reduce interest for the exporters including MSME exporters, an 
Interest Equalization Scheme on Pre and Post Shipment Rupee Export Credit has been 
extended by the Government till 31.3.2024. The revised interest equalisation rates under 
the Scheme will now be 3 per cent for MSME manufacturer exporters exporting under any 
HS lines, and 2 per cent for manufacturer exporters and merchant exporters exporting 
under 410 HS lines (after excluding 6 HS lines pertaining to Telecom Sector) 
3. The Ministry of MSME has also prepared a Concept Note for facilitating access of 
MSMEs to credit at low costs, wherein subvention of guarantee fees is envisaged. Along 
with this subvention in guarantee fee, various other steps viz; making collateral free loan 
available at lower rates, Budget 2023-24 announced the infusion of Rs. 9,000 crore in the 
corpus of CGTMSE to enable additional collateral free guaranteed credit of Rs. 2.00 lakh 
crore with a reduced cost of credit.   
4. The following modifications in Credit Guarantee Scheme effective from 1st April 
2023 have been introduced:  
(i) Increase in ceiling of guarantee from Rs. 2.00 crore to Rs.5.00 crore. 
(ii) In order to reduce the cost of credit, new guarantee fee structure has been 
introduced, annual guarantee fee have been reduced by 50% across segments. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 15) 
The Committee note that TReDS is an effective step for ensuring timely payment to 
MSMEs on reasonable terms. However, the Committee observe that many buyers are still 
reluctant to adopt this technology. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Government should increase TReDS usage by rolling out awareness campaigns to 
address stakeholders’ grievances so that companies are encouraged to join the platform. 
Further, the Committee note that it is mandatory for all CPSEs and companies with 
turnover of more than Rs. 500 crores to join TReDS. Yet, many such companies seem to 

43 
 
be defying Government’s order by refusing to onboard TReDS. The Committee 
recommend the Government to penalize such errant companies. Further, the Committee 
are of the opinion that the Central Government and State Government entities should be 
given strict instructions with penal consequences to make prompt payments of MSME 
receivables so that the receivables remain short term and can be funded by banks under 
their working capital arrangement.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of MSME has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the three 
TReDS Platforms (M1xchange, Invoice Mart and RXIL) and been integrated with Udyam 
Portal for providing credit facilititation. Further, M/o MSME is in the process of amending 
the provisions related to delayed payments of MSMED Act. 
2. With regard to penalising the companies which are still not boarded on TReDS 
platform, Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) has submitted that M/o MSME in exercise of 
powers conferred by Section 9 of the MSME Development Act 2006 and vide notification 
no. S.O. 5621 (E) dated 2.11.2018 had mandated all companies registered under the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2012) with a turnover of more than ₹500 crore and all 
Central Public Sector Enterprises to get themselves onboarded on the Trade Receivables 
Discounting System (TReDS) platform set up as per the notification of Reserve Bank of 
India, and Registrar of Companies (RoCs) in each State shall be the competent authority 
to monitor the compliance of these instructions by companies under its jurisdiction.  
3. With regard to the above MSME notification, MCA has stated that there is no 
provision under the Companies Act, 2013 under which a RoC can be mandated to monitor 
the compliances under MSME Act. The RoCs have no locus to act against the companies 
not complying with the MSME notification dated 2.11.2018 with respect to registration and 
transacting on TReDS. However, notwithstanding the lack of jurisdiction in this regard, 
RoCs are still constantly persuading companies to comply with the notification. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 16) 
Currently on TReDS platform, the seller has to enter complete details of invoices manually 
and the Committee in their 24th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on examination of the 

44 
 
Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020 sought to amend it by recommending that 
the TReDS platform be integrated with GSTN e-invoicing portal. The Committee believed 
that such an integration would lead to automatic uploading of all GST invoices onto the 
TReDS platform which will enable seamless financing to sellers through factoring of 
invoices and will also keep the financier with information about the seller. The Committee 
have been informed that this proposal is under consideration and has already been 
agreed, in-principle, in the GST Law Committee consisting of officers from Central and 
State tax administration. The Committee has been further informed that the proposal to 
amend GST Laws shall be placed before the GST Council for its recommendation and will 
then be moved for approval of the Parliament and State Legislatures. The Committee 
while reiterating their previous recommendation expect the necessary amendments in the 
GST laws to be made soon so that it can be implemented at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
Department of Revenue has submitted that in respect of sharing of data to the Trade 
Receivables Discounting System (TReDS), it is mentioned that the process is underway 
to amend GST laws and place it before the GST Council for its recommendation. After 
GST council recommendation, the parliament and state legislatures will pass appropriate 
amendments. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 17) 
The Committee note that loans to MSME involve stringent laws, complex documentation 
procedures, the necessity of collateral, strict repayment tenures and a high rate of 
interest. Even though MSMEs account for a large share of economic activity, 
banks/financial institutions (FIs) usually show a lukewarm attitude towards lending capital 
to this sector. Instead of looking at the viability and merits of the project and the loan 
proposal, the Bankers’ main focus remains on collateral security of immovable property 
which deprives a large number of MSMEs from access to Bank credit. The Committee are 
of the opinion that such an attitude by banks/FIs warrants a “naming and shaming” 
mechanism of those bankers/sanctioning authority who delay the processing of loan 
applications unnecessarily. Further, applicants should be provided the reasons of 
rejection or reduction of their requested loan amount. This online platform should also be 

45 
 
used to show movement of loan applications through the hierarchy in banking channels 
and to highlight names of officials with whom loan applications are pending beyond the 
designated timeline. This will help put pressure on officials and speed up the processes 
for timely action on MSME’s loan applications. 
Reply of the Government 
Government and RBI is constantly working towards increasing credit flow to the MSME 
sector. The Government has launched various credit guarantee schemes and RBI has 
provided various regulatory dispensations and issued the following guidelines/instructions 
in this regard: 
i. Banks have been encouraged to simplify the processes and adopt technological 
interventions in lending to Micro enterprises in the Standing Advisory Committee 
for MSMEs conducted by RBI. 
ii. In terms of circular RPCD.SME & NFS. BC.No. 79 /06.02.31/2009-10 
dated 6.5.2010, on ‘Working Group to Review the Credit Guarantee Scheme for 
Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) – Collateral free loans to MSEs’, banks are 
mandated not to accept collateral security in the case of loans up to ₹10 lakh 
extended to units in the MSE sector. 
iii. In terms of circular  FIDD.MSME & NFS.BC.No.60/06.02.31/2015-16 
dated 27.8.2015 on ‘Streamlining flow of credit to Micro and Small Enterprises 
(MSEs) for facilitating timely and adequate credit flow during their ‘Life Cycle’, 
banks have been advised to tune their policies for lending to MSME sector by 
incorporating therein the provisions for sanctioning of, inter alia, Additional Working 
Capital Limits, Mid Term Review of Regular Working Capital Limits, Timelines for 
Credit Decisions, so as to facilitate timely and adequate availability of credit to 
viable MSE borrowers especially during the need of funds in unforeseen 
circumstances. 
iv. Further, with a view to improve monetary policy transmission, banks have been 
advised to link loans to MSMEs to external benchmark. 
v. The Regulatory Retail Portfolio threshold to a single counterparty was increased 
from ₹5 crore to ₹7.5 crore in respect of all fresh as well as incremental qualifying 
exposures vide circular DOR.No.BP.BC.23/21.06.201/2020-21 dated 12.10.2020. 
Accordingly, banks may assign a lower risk weight of 75% to exposure to MSME 
entities with counterparty exposure upto ₹7.50 crore as against ₹5 crore earlier. 

46 
 
2. Because of various steps taken by the Government and RBI including credit 
guarantee schemes and above-mentioned regulatory steps, credit flow to MSME sector 
by Scheduled Commercial Banks has increased from ₹16.14 lakh cr as on 31.3.2020 to 
₹23.99 lakh cr as on 31.3.2023 despite the Covid pandemic (Source: RBI). With regard to 
collateral free lending, it may be mentioned that two of the Government’s flagship 
schemes viz. Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) and Credit Guarantee 
Trust Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) have benefitted the sector to a 
great extent in the light of headwinds caused by Covid pandemic. ECLGS was introduced 
by the Government, as a targeted policy response, to support the most vulnerable 
category of borrowers i.e. individual borrowers, small businesses and MSMEs and 
provided them liquidity support required in the wake of disruptions caused due to Covid-
19 pandemic. As on 28.7.2023, loans amounting to ₹3.68 lakh crore have been 
guaranteed benefitting 1.19 crore borrowers under the scheme. Out of the total 
guaranteed amount, nearly 66% has gone towards benefit of MSMEs. In terms of 
guarantee numbers, nearly 95% has benefitted MSMEs. 
3. In a move to boost entrepreneurial sensitivity among banks’ field-level 
functionaries, the Reserve Bank in collaboration with the College of Agricultural Banking 
(CAB), Pune, launched the National Mission for Capacity Building of Bankers 
(NAMCABS) for financing the MSME sector. Under the NAMCABS, awareness about the 
different schemes viz. CGTMSE, latest guidelines for lending to MSE sector, etc. are 
provided to the banks’ personnel attending the programme. 
4. Further, to reduce the turnaround time for sanctioning small ticket loans, IBA, vide 
letters dated 6.11.2019 and 8.1.2020 had released the Simplified Common Appraisal 
Memorandum and matrix for loans up to ₹25 crore for MSMEs amongst all the member 
banks for adoption and implementation. 
5. With regard to the online loan applications of MSMEs, RBI stated as under: 
i. In terms of circular DBOD.No.Leg.BC.65 /09.07.005/2006-07 dated 6.3.2007 on 
‘Guidelines on Fair Practices Code for Lenders’, banks have been advised that in 
case of all categories of loans irrespective of any threshold limits, including credit 
card applications, banks / AIFIs should convey in writing the main reason / reasons 
which, in the opinion of the bank / AIFI have led to rejection of the loan 
applications. It has been decided that the loan application forms should be 

47 
 
comprehensive and should include information about the fees/charges, if any, 
payable for processing, the amount of such fees refundable in the case of non-
acceptance of application, pre-payment options and any other matter which affects 
the interest of the borrower, so that a meaningful comparison with that of other 
banks can be made and informed decision can be taken by the borrower. 
ii. In terms of our circular RPCD. MSME&NFS.BC.No.74/06.02.31/2012-13 dated 
9.5.2013 on ‘Structured Mechanism for monitoring the credit growth to the MSE 
sector’, banks have been advised  
 To strengthen their existing systems of monitoring credit growth to the sector and 
put in place a system-driven comprehensive performance management information 
system (MIS) at every supervisory level (branch, region, zone, head office) which 
should be critically evaluated on a regular basis. 
 Put in place a system of e-tracking of MSE loan applications and monitor the loan 
application disposal process in banks, giving branch-wise, region-wise, zone-wise 
and State-wise positions. The position in this regard is to be displayed by banks on 
their websites. 
iii. Further, the issue pertaining to disposal of MSME loan applications on time and 
importance of effective grievance redressal is also discussed in various forums such as 
Standing Advisory Committee for MSMEs, Empowered Committee meetings on MSMEs 
etc. conducted by RBI. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 18) 
The Committee note that under the MSME Development Act of 2006, every buyer is 
under compulsion to release the payment to its MSME vendors within 45 days. Yet, the 
Committee observe that in many cases, this timeline is not adhered to and hence, the 
payments get considerably delayed to much beyond 45 days. As per the Act, when a 
buyer does not make payment to the supplier for his supplies within 45 days of the 
acceptance of goods/services rendered, the buyer is liable to pay a compound interest 
with monthly rests to the suppliers which are Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) on the 
amount at three times of the bank rate notified by RBI. However, the Committee observe 
that MSMEs are not usually reimbursed with interest cost incurred by them for credit 

48 
 
period beyond 45 days. As per MSME SAMADHAAN portal, out of the 40,541 cases 
involving an amount of Rs. 13,816.14 crore filed in Micro and Small Enterprises 
Facilitation Council (MSEFC) of different States and Union Territories (UTs) after 
30.10.2017 (i.e., after launch of MSME-Samadhaan), only 12,737 cases worth Rs. 
2358.63 crore has been disposed off till now (as on 15.02.2022). Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that Government needs to put in place strict and punitive control 
mechanisms to ensure that these payments are remitted well in time without any delays 
and if delayed, with appropriate interest, to the MSME sellers. The Committee further 
desire that close monitoring of payments to MSMEs through TReDS needs to be done at 
central level and in a well-coordinated fashion to ensure its smooth and efficient 
functioning. 
Once TReDS and GSTN invoicing are integrated, it will become clear which 
customers are not paying MSMEs on time. This data can be used by credit rating 
agencies to develop ‘payment scores’ for each company. Just like there are credit scores 
for companies which provide information on their loan payment performance, there can be 
payment scores which provide information on their invoice payment performance. Thus, if 
there is a company that is habitually late in making payments to its vendors, this will get 
flagged and reported. This ‘naming and shaming’ will impact that company’s business 
operations because most other companies will not want to work with a company that does 
not pay its invoices on time. Again, an integrated digital ecosystem which enables full 
digitisation of invoices and actual payments will highlight and then discourage such 
behaviour.  
Reply of the Government 
M/o MSME is in the process of amending the provisions related to delayed payments of 
MSMED Act. However, delay in getting payments from buyers is one of the perennial 
problems faced by MSMEs. To address this issue, the Reserve Bank had introduced the 
Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) in 2014.  Presently, three entities [viz., 
Receivables Exchange of India Ltd. (RXIL), A. TReDS, and Mynd Solutions] authorized by 
RBI are operating the TReDS platforms for more than three years. Further, RBI has 
allowed ‘on tap’ authorization to entities desirous of setting up of a platform under TReDS, 
which will lead to further competition and help sellers to get the best price. 
2. M/o MSME vide Gazette Notification S.O. 5621(E) dated 2.11.2018 has mandated 
that that all companies registered with the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) with a 

49 
 
turnover of more than ₹500 crore and all Central Public Sector Enterprises shall be 
required to get themselves onboarded on the Trade Receivables Discounting System 
platform. 
3. Once the integration of GSTN and TReDS is completed, the suggestion related to 
rating agencies may be looked into. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 19) 
The UK Sinha Expert Committee on MSMEs has made wide ranging 
recommendations for expanding the role of Small Industries Development Bank of India 
(SIDBI). The Expert Committee recommend that the Government should deploy the 
Priority Sector Lending (PSL) shortfall to SIDBI on the lines of rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund (RIDF) fund of NABARD, for lending to State Governments as soft 
loans for infrastructural and cluster development. Further the UK Sinha Committee 
recommend that SIDBI should deepen credit markets for MSMEs in underserved districts 
and regions by handholding private lenders such as Non-Banking Finance Companies 
(NBFCs) and Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs). Echoing the Expert Committee’s view, this 
Committee also feel that the role played by SIDBI in financing MSME sector needs to be 
further revamped, strengthened and expanded.  
SIDBI should be made the nodal agency for MSME financing akin to NABARD for 
agriculture financing, which would then require a much larger capital base. The 
Institutional Finance book of SIDBI accounts for approx. 10% of the total MSME 
outstanding credit in country as it extends assistance to MSMEs through 30 Banks, 9 
Small Finance Banks (SFBs), 86 NBFCs and 28 MFIs. However, the Committee feel that 
there is a large scope and huge untapped potential for SIDBI to have a much more scaled 
engagement with lending institutions, in particular the NBFC sector. The Committee are of 
the opinion that SIDBI should extend finance to a more diversified category of NBFCs and 
also work towards capacity building of smaller NBFC players to transform them into 
stronger entities for expanding the MSME financing ecosystem. 
Reply of the Government 
On the recommendations of UK Sinha Expert Committee on MSMEs, RBI has established 
Cluster Development Fund with SIDBI and has allocated ₹6,990 crore approx. (₹1,990 

50 
 
crore in FY 2021 & ₹5,000 crore in FY 2022) for lending to State Governments as soft 
loans for MSME infrastructure and cluster development. “SIDBI Cluster Development 
Fund (SCDF)” scheme guidelines developed on lines of NABARD’s RIDF have been 
shared with the State Governments and necessary handholding to states is being 
provided by SIDBI. SIDBI has identified cluster and green enterprise promotion as thrust 
areas. On cluster development theme, a holistic approach is being followed wherein hard 
infrastructure is being supplemented by soft infrastructure promotion. SIDBI is the nodal 
agency for onboarding the Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) for availing the benefit under 
Priority Sector Lending.  
SIDBI Cluster Development Fund (SCDF) 
(i) UK Sinha Committee recommended formation of Cluster Development Fund with SIDBI 
in line with NABARD’s RIDF. 
(ii) RBI allocated Rs 7,000 crore approx. (Rs 2000 crore in FY2021 & Rs 5,000 crore in 
FY2022) for lending to State /UT Governments to develop/create/upgrade infrastructure in 
& around MSME clusters.  
(iii) SCDF scheme covers nearly all segments falling under three broad categories viz (1) 
Industrial and Agri-allied sectors in the MSME eco-space, (2) Social Sector projects in and 
around MSME clusters and (3) Connectivity to MSME Clusters to provide competitive 
advantage to MSME Clusters. 
(iv) Sanctions amounting to Rs 5546.58 crore have been accorded to 92 projects in 11 
States/UTs. Out of which Rs 1588.57 crore have been disbursed to 7 states for 71 
projects as on June 30, 2023. 
(v) Further, 10 projects from 3 states are under appraisal for financial assistance of Rs 
518.51 crore. 
(vi) Suitable handholding support is also being extended to State/UT governments. Bank 
has placed Project Management Units (PMU) via appointed agency in 20 States and also 
providing need-based Project Management Consultant (PMC) services through another 
agency. 
Institutional Finance  
(i) Through Institutional Finance, the Bank facilitates flow of funds to MSEs by suitably 
augmenting resources of Primary Lending Institutions. To enhance reach, the Bank has 
included Scheduled Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) and Regional Rural banks (RRBs) 

51 
 
as eligible Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs) and is expected to further support economic 
growth and bring in more MSMEs in the fold of formal banking. 
(ii) SIDBI also augments resources of NBFCs and MFIs to facilitate flow of funds to MSEs.  
(iii) During COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank assisted lower rated NBFCs/ MFIs for their 
liquidity support. Under these three liquidity schemes, SIDBI’s assistance supported 
nearly 27 lakh MSE/ MFI beneficiaries through 46 NBFCs. 
(iv) SIDBI also launched various innovative schemes such as Double Intermediation 
route, Pooled Loan Issuance scheme and investments in AIF for debt investments in 
lower rated NBFCs, under Special Liquidity Fund support (SLS III), received from RBI, 
with the objective of reaching out to low rated and unrated rated NBFCs/ MFIs. The 
objective of channelizing assistance through AIF route was to develop bond markets for 
well performing lower rated entities for which ‘SIDBI MSE Covid Response Fund’ 
(SMCRF) under SLF-3,  with target corpus of Rs 1400 crore and a SIDBI’s contribution 
upto 75 % of the corpus i.e. upto Rs 1000 cr. Out of the said corpus, SIDBI has 
subscribed to 2 debt funds viz. Promising lenders fund -1 ( Total Corpus – Rs 300 Cr, 
SIDBI’s subscription – Rs 225 Cr ) and Promising Lenders Fund-2 ( Total Corpus Rs. 400 
crore, SIDBI contribution of Rs 300 crore). 
(v) The Bank in FY 2023 has launched a regular mainline scheme of assistance for 
supporting smaller/ lower rated emerging NBFCs upto BBB- rating. Under this scheme, 22 
NBFCs have since been supported. Besides, under the Scheme of Double Intermediation 
and 2 AIFs (launched with corpus of Rs 1000 crore), assistance to 36 lower rated/ unrated 
NBFCs was extended. 
(vi) In order to further deepen the reach to lower rated/ unrated universe of NBFCs in 
the current FY, the Bank has launched, Scheme of Developmental Assistance to cater to 
below investment grade/ unrated NBFCs. 
(vii) These efforts have led to portfolio growth of nearly 55% under assistance to 
NBFCs/ MFIs from Rs 21,053 crore (as on March 2022) to Rs 38,555 crore as on March 
31, 2023.  During the year ended March 31, 2023, the Bank has disbursed ~ Rs 26000 
crore to NBFCs and MFIs. 
(viii) SIDBI has commenced co-lending operations (as per RBI scheme) and has 
partnered with 3 NBFCs. More partners shall be added in due course. 

52 
 
(ix) SIDBI has also constituted an Advisory Committee on NBFCs comprising industry 
practitioners, representative from FIDC, domain experts, etc. with the objective of 
providing guidance for strengthening the Indian NBFC ecosystem especially towards the 
growth and development of lower spectrum of the NBFC sector thereby accelerating the 
access of such smaller/ lower rated NBFCs to institutional credit. 
(x) Guarantee cover (on the lines of CGTMSE/ NCGTC) to support unrated/ lower 
rated NBFCs act as catalyst in channelising institutional funding to such entities.  Further, 
SIDBI has achieved balance sheet size of Rs 4.02 lakh crore which is about 15% of 
MSME credit outstanding in the country. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 20) 
During the Covid pandemic, the Government’s various credit guarantee schemes worked 
well in making credit available to borrowers in good standing. Unfortunately, during 
emergency situations, it is weaker borrowers and those that are facing uncertain 
prospects that are most in need of support. Once MSMEs are registered and have 
established their payments and credit history through a digital ecosystem, it will be 
possible to provide credit guarantees in a much more focused way. By targeting specific 
industries (e.g., high-touch industries during the pandemic such as salons and tour 
agencies) and geographic areas, government guarantee programs can be provided to 
those that are most in need. Programs can also be rolled out quickly and flexibly ramped 
up and down depending on circumstances. Thus, an integrated digital ecosystem is vital 
to efficient and effective credit guarantee programs. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of MSME has submitted that applications for Credit Guarantee Scheme for 
Subordinate Debt (CGSSD), a scheme which targeted weak MSMEs i.e. SMA-2 and NPA 
MSME borrowers, was launched amidst the first wave of COVID pandemic is completely 
online. Applications for other schemes like Credit Guarantee Scheme are also completely 
online. The Government has also made specific schemes/provisions in the existing 
scheme for the most adversely affected contact intensive sectors. It may be recalled that 
ECLGS 3.0/3.0 Extension specifically targets hospitality and related sectors and provides 
much higher credit to these sectors as compared to other sectors. In addition, Ministry of 

53 
 
Tourism had also launched a Loan Guarantee Scheme for the Covid affected Tourism 
Service Sector (LGSCATSS) specially for registered Tourist Guides and Travel & Tourism 
Stakeholders. 
2. DFS has taken an initiative where all credit related schemes are being brought 
together under one National Portal. Under the initiative of DFS, the Ministry of MSME is in 
the process of linking the UDYAM Portal and Portals of major credit related schemes with 
the said National Portal. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 22) 
Along with expanding financing to NBFCs, SIDBI also needs to build up its organizational 
capabilities. SIDBI should have adequate, competent staff in every district in the country. 
SIDBI staff can help guide, train, and mobile the MSME financing ecosystem in each 
district. Major industry clusters, such as in Morbi or Moradabad, could have even larger 
SIDBI offices so that adequate financing support is available to the various financial 
institutions operating there. These field offices will also provide on-the-ground feedback to 
SIDBI on how various MSME financing programs are actually working. SIDBI staff should 
participate in district-level meetings on credit delivery and industry promotion along with 
other financial institutions and NABARD. 
SIDBI should also work closely with the MSME departments of various State 
Governments. Joint implementation plans for strengthening MSME financing at the district 
level should be developed between SIDBI, MSME Ministry, and States. These plans must 
duly consider available State capacities and also focus on capacity development as 
concrete interventions that will lead to the success of overarching policies. This synergy is 
currently missing. 
Reply of the Government 
SIDBI actively participates in many programs / seminars organized by DICs, Industry 
Associations and RBI for MSMEs to make them aware of various financing schemes, 
availability of subsidies, etc., apart from arranging various skill development programmes 
for the overall development of MSMEs at State level as part of its Credit Plus function. 
The Ministry of MSME and field offices of DC(MSME), KVIC, etc. work closely with SIDBI 

54 
 
and its offices in various States for implementation of various credit related schemes like 
Credit Guarantee Scheme for Micro & Small Enterprises, etc. Udyam Portal has been 
integrated with CGTMSE portal to extend the benefit of guarantee coverage to Micro and 
Small Enterprises. 
2. SIDBI has geographically positioned its branch network to cater to major industrial 
clusters across the country including presence of branches at Morbi, Noida, Rudrapur and 
Ghaziabad, which cater to Morbi and Moradabad clusters.  To strengthen the branch 
network, SIDBI has opened 11 new BOs and 2 Extension of Branch Offices (XBOs) in FY 
2024. In order to further extend outreach to MSMEs through direct credit, the Bank is 
exploring opening of new Branch Offices/ Extension of Branch Offices at potential centres, 
designing of new schemes for direct credit, simplification of operational processes etc. 
3. SIDBI has been actively participating in many programs / seminars organized by 
District Industries Centres (DICs), Industry Associations and RBI for MSMEs to make 
them aware of the various financing schemes, availability of subsidies, etc., apart from 
arranging various skill development programmes for the overall development of MSMEs 
at State level as part of its Credit Plus function. 
4. SIDBI has entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with various State 
Governments for accelerating the development of MSMEs in the States, in an organized 
and structured manner. MSME Outreach Programmes were undertaken in various states 
followed by setting-up of Project Management Units (PMUs). SIDBI has set up PMUs in 
23 states with the objective of strengthening local MSME ecosystem and transferring 
good practices through learning sessions and closer engagement with states which 
includes, inter alia, helping State Governments / UT in studying the existing framework 
available for MSMEs in the respective State and address the gaps and suggest 
modifications for enhancing efficacy and removal of bottlenecks, design/ develop need-
based schemes/ products/ interventions for MSMEs, provide technical/ consultative 
support to the State Govt. for initiatives planned/to be planned for MSMEs, assist 
SIDBI/State Govt in conducting training sessions/ workshops for strengthening the MSME 
ecosystem, maintain regular interface with relevant stakeholders in the State, responsible 
for collecting data, reporting and analytics and creating and maintaining a knowledge 
repository for the work done under the project.  
5. SIDBI, under the Mission Swavalamban is implementing Swavalamban Connect 
Kendras [SCKs] in districts, pan India, for promoting Enterprise Creation. Aimed at 

55 
 
supporting potential entrepreneurs, SCKs guide aspiring entrepreneurs to become job 
creators through awareness, mapping gaps, skill connect, pre-handholding support, 
create localized project profiles, credit connect, post-handholding support like market 
connect. SCKs are also helping in strengthening their business plans, accessing skill 
trainings as well as credit requirements. In FY 2023, total 3879 enterprises were set-
up/scaled-up under this intervention. Cumulatively, 50301 profiles were created, 6200 
enterprises set-up / scaled-up and 5066 beneficiaries were credit-linked with total loan 
amount of Rs 53 crore. Going forward, in FY 2023, the phase II of the intervention (SCK 
2.0) has since been rolled out for 10,000 new enterprises creation through setting-up of 
100 SCKs in 5 States viz., Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and 
West Bengal. These SCKs will adopt an End-to-End digital approach for enterprise 
creation.  
6. SIDBI has launched a special scheme viz., SIDBI Cluster Development Fund 
(SCDF) Scheme for the purpose of facilitating interventions at cluster levels (Details given 
at Recommendation No. 19).  
7. Besides the above, SIDBI is developing smart clusters through EE Intervention. 
Presently, initiative is ongoing in 4 clusters including Moradabad. The initiative, called 
GRiT (Green Inclusivity), works through ESCO route where ESCOs are deployed to 
conduct workshop on energy efficiency and also detailed energy audits in MSMEs. This 
leads the MSMEs to fine tune their operations and invest in energy efficient technology, 
which are supported by Bank finance. Under GRiT program, clusters in Bihar, Kota, 
Jalandhar and Moradabad are covered. Work shall start in Belgaum, Rajkot, Tirupur and 
Kolhapur clusters. It is targeted to scale up the initiative to 100 MSME clusters for 
adopting green and clean initiatives (within 5 years). 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
  

56 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 23) 
In conclusion, the Committee find that MSME financing could be vastly expanded and 
better targeted through an integrated digital ecosystem as shown below: 
 
The integrated digital ecosystem proposed in this report should hopefully bring 
crores of MSMEs in the formal sector. It will then be possible to provide them an 
affordable line of credit (particularly with the MSME Vyapar credit card) for working 
capital, ensure trade financing for their revenues, provide capital loans at affordable rates, 
and necessary credit guarantees. Once the digital ecosystem is in place, these 
concessional financing and credit guarantee can also be targeted well to those sectors 
that are experiencing difficult economic conditions due to external factors beyond their 
control. 
NBFC lending rates and therefore financing rates for their MSME customers will also 
decrease once the integrated digital ecosystem proposed in this report, much faster 
invoice payments are possible, and various types of credit guarantees are made 
available. Finally, the Committee believe that it is necessary that the Government of India 
and the States adopt a comprehensive and holistic whole-of-India approach to strengthen 
and keep improving the MSME financing ecosystem. This can be achieved by developing 
a nation-wide plan that is shared with the States and other stakeholders through an 

57 
 
annual report and an in-person conference. This will bring together all the key ecosystem 
participants and build a common understanding of regulations and policies. 
Reply of the Government 
SIDBI initiated an MSME Formalisation project to formalise MSMEs and prepare them for 
engaging with fast emerging digital ecosystem in the country to gain access to 
governance, market and financial services. This project will be implemented with Udyam 
Registration as the fulcrum. Udyam registration is a self-registration process and portal is 
connected to GST and CBDT portals to check the investment and revenue of the MSMEs 
for their MSME eligibility. As a large number of smaller MSMEs do not have the capability 
to register directly on the Udyam portal nor many of them have PAN/GST, an Assist 
methodology is proposed to register them with the help of designated agencies (DAs) 
which will be regulated entities like Banks, MFIs, NBFCs, etc. 
2. Udyam Assist Platform (UAP): 
(i) Out of the estimated 6.3 crore MSMEs in India, around 1.30 crore are registered with 
Udyam portal of MoMSME. About 5 crore unregistered entities are Informal Micro 
Enterprises (IMEs) and are outside Governance and Statutory framework. The reason for 
non-registration of IMEs include lack of awareness, incentives, absence of documents, 
inability to self-register etc. 
(ii) Hence, SIDBI has developed an UDYAM Assist Platform (UAP), with support of 
MoMSME, to provide the UDYAM registration of IMEs on Assist mode. The bulk 
registration is proposed to be done through Designated Agencies (DAs) i.e., Banks, 
NBFCs, MFIs, etc.  
(iii) IMEs with Udyam Registration Number (URN) qualify as MSMEs and become eligible 
under Priority Sector Lending (PSL) coverage. Thus, Formalisation project can 
significantly improve accessibility to formal finance by MSEs. IBA, Commercial Banks, 
SROs (MFI) are onboard for implementation of project. 
(iv) UAP shall use dedupe processes and validate unique IMEs before registration and 
issue of Udyam Registration Number and Udyam Assist Certificate. 
(v) The project has been launched on January 11, 2023. Over 30 lakh IMEs are registered 
on UAP.  
(vi) In the next 12 months, it is expected to register 2 crore IMEs and in the next phase, 
interventions for access to government schemes, new credit initiatives such as working 

58 
 
capital/revolving credit through UPI (under development), onboarding on ONDC, etc. can 
be introduced for registered IMEs. 
 
GST Sahay: 
SIDBI in association with Online PSB Loans Ltd. (OPL) and Indian Software Products 
Industry Round Table (iSPIRT), has developed GST Sahay App, an Invoice based 
Financing application, for providing a completely paperless, presence less, collateral free, 
cashflow based and straight through small loans to MSMEs. The proposed solution based 
on OCEN, e-sign, e -NACH, Account Aggregator (AA) framework, De dupe registry, etc. 
which will reduce the turnaround time and reduce the cost of lending.  
2. SIDBI tested the app in RBI Regulatory Sandbox under 3rd Cohort of the 
Regulatory Sandbox on ‘MSME Lending’. SIDBI has tested the app with its customers and 
is proposing to launch the app shortly. 
3. Once the above formalization project and GST Sahay are completed, facilitating 
lending through digital cash-flow based lending and invoice financing, access to formal 
financing by MSMEs shall increase considerably.  
4. On 25th Feb., 2022, the Ministry of MSME, along with NPCI and Union Bank of 
India launched on a pilot basis MSME RuPay Credit Card for MSMEs. On 10th May, 
2022, the second phase of the pilot project of MSME RuPay Credit Card was launched 
with 4 more banks namely; Bank of Baroda, Kotak Mahindra Bank, SBM Bank India and 
HDFC Bank.  Till May 2023, total 76,987 credit cards have been issued by the above 
Banks. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 24) 
The Government’s various credit guarantee programs have worked well during the Covid 
pandemic. Unfortunately, it was not possible to extend this support to those MSMEs that 
were either not lendable due to business conditions triggered by the pandemic and those 
MSMEs that have not been able to borrow from the formal financial sector. 
 
 

59 
 
Reply of the Government 
The scheme of Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) was launched on 
23.5.2020, i.e. within 60 days of the Covid 19 pandemic creating havoc in India and 
borrowers with days past due upto 60 days were considered eligible. Hence, businesses 
which were running normal prior to the pandemic were eligible for support under ECLGS. 
Subsequent reference date of 31.3.2021 (for all businesses) and 31.1.2022 (for hospitality 
and related sector businesses) were also fixed keeping in view the period when the 2nd 
and 3rd wave of Covid 19 impacted India. One of the visions of Ministry of MSME is to 
bring all relatively smaller enterprises in the formal ambit of MSMEs. For this purpose, the 
Ministry of MSME has been taking up special drives for facilitating registrations on 
UDYAM Portal. To formalize, Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs), the Ministry of MSME, 
along with SIDBI launched Udyam Assist Portal (UAP) on 11.01.2023 for availing the 
benefit under Priority Sector Lending. 
Within 36 months of the change in the definition of MSMEs, more than 2.10 crore MSMEs 
have registered on UDYAM Portal. In recent weeks, per day registration has been around 
30,000.   
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 25) 
Around 17% of the registered MSMEs in India are women-led. In the past decade, their 
share in the MSME sector has grown by over 7%, from 13.72% in 2011 to 20.37% in 
2020. However, for women entrepreneurs, many challenges including the lack of access 
to finance, business networks and safe public spaces still persist. Around 90% of women 
entrepreneurs lack access to formal lending institutions. To increase financial inclusion, all 
women SHGs and Joint Liability Groups could be registered as MSMEs in a campaign 
mode. Best practices from microfinance can be used to target women led MSMEs for 
affordable credit. Additional interest subvention could be extended to women led SHG 
type MSMEs.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of MSME has submitted that the extent of guarantee coverage is higher for 
women led MSEs and the annual guarantee fee is for women led MSEs is lower. Further, 
to facilitate financial inclusion of women led MSMEs a special campaign of UDYAM 

60 
 
Registration was launched in March, 2022 (around the time of International Women’s 
Day). Within the first three weeks of March, as many as 80,000 women entrepreneurs 
registered on UDYAM. As on date, 1,28,189 SHGs are already registering on Udyam as 
MSMEs.   
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
 
 
  

61 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Sl No. 21) 
NABARD’s loan portfolio to support to the agricultural sector was ₹6.03 lakh crore in 
FY21 and it caters to about 18-20% of India’s GDP. SIDBI’s loan portfolio is about ₹1.56 
lakh crore in FY21 and it supports about 30% of India’s GDP. It is clear that SIDBI needs 
to grow its balance sheet so that it can support the various financial institutions that work 
with India’s MSMEs. This can be accomplished gradually over the next 5-8 years. 
However, given RBI’s prudential norms, it is necessary that SIDBI’s equity base be 
strengthened so that it can grow its balance sheet. The Committee recommend that the 
Government could start with an immediate ₹5,000 to 10,000 crore equity injection in 
SIDBI and continue to make contributions of ₹10,000 to 15,000 crores for the next few 
years. These capital contributions will massively increase SIDBI’s ability to provide 
wholesale financing to NBFCs that work with the MSME sector. 
NBFC are perennially starved of wholesale financing and find it difficult to raise money at 
competitive rates. Once SIDBI is able to start providing substantial wholesale financing to 
the NBFC sector, it should lower their borrowing rates and increase competition to lend 
to the NBFCs. 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal for equity infusion in SIDBI was examined and it has been observed that 
presently, SIDBI is well capitalised to achieve their projected business growth. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. F.No. 7/26/2022-Parl., Dated 3rd August, 2023] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

63 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                          JAYANT SINHA, 
22 December, 2023                                                   Chairperson, 
01 Pausha, 1945 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Finance 
  

64 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2023-24) The 
Committee sat on Friday, the 22nd December, 2023 from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘2’, Parliament House Annexe Extension Block A, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
MEMBERS 
  
Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri S.S Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
7. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
8. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
9. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
11. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
12. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
13. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
14. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Puneet Bhatia    - Deputy Secretary  
 
  

65 
 
PART I 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
PART II 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for consideration and 
adoption: 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Performance Review and Regulation of 
Insurance Sector’ pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services). 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the observations/recommendations contained 
in their Thirty-Second Report on the subject 'Implementation of Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code - Pitfalls and Solutions' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs.  
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the observations/recommendations contained 
in their Forty-Sixth Report on ‘Strengthening Credit Flows to the MSME 
Sector' pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) and Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
After deliberation, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports without any 
change and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present to the Hon’ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

66 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-SIXTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
THE SUBJECT ‘STRENGTHENING CREDIT FLOWS TO THE MSME SECTOR' 
OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
AND MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 25  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
24, 25) 
24 96%  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies  
01 4% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  
Nil 0.00 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
  
 
 