 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE, 
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND INVESTMENT & PUBLIC ASSET 
MANAGEMENT) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management)’] 
 
  
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 19 

ii 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE, PUBLIC 
ENTERPRISES AND INVESTMENT & PUBLIC ASSET MANAGEMENT) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management)’] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


iii 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report     1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
12 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
27 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
28 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
32 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025  33 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the     
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry 
of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset 
Management)’ 
 36 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Yugma Malik Under Secretary 

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized by 
the Committee, present this Nineteenth Report on action taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public 
Asset Management). 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
19 March, 2025.  The Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were 
received from Department of Economic Affairs on behalf of Departments of Economic 
Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management on 27 
May, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July, 
2025.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 8th Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and Investment & 
Public Asset Management) which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya Sabha on 
19th March, 2025. 
 
1.2  The Action Taken Notes on behalf of Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Expenditure, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management were 
received from Department of Economic Affairs on 27th May, 2025.  The Action Taken 
Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 12 
recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been analyzed and also 
clarifications were sought on few recommendations. The replies have been categorized 
as follows: 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12   
               (Total - 10) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
                        (Total - NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2 and 4 
                    (Total - 02) 
 (Chapter- IV) 

2 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
                    (Total - NIL) 
(Chapter- V) 
 
1.3  The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
OUTPUT OUTCOME MONITORING FRAMEWORK (OOMF) 
1.4 The Committee note that the guidelines for preparing Output Outcome Monitoring 
Framework (OOMF) are published in the Budget Circular of every financial year. As per 
the Budget Circular of 2025-26, the OOMF is to be prepared as per the Ministry of 
Finance’s D.O. letter No. 2(33)-B(P&A)/2018 dated 13th May, 2019. The Committee 
recommend that the format of OOMF be modified suitably to enhance its 
comprehensiveness and utility. The Committee suggest that the modified format should 
incorporate progress against the targets (both physical and financial targets) for atleast 
two preceding financial years, along with the outputs and outcomes of the current 
financial year. The Committee opine that this consolidated and comprehensive 
approach will facilitate a more in-depth and hands-on analysis, thereby improving the 
overall effectiveness of the document in assessing the progress against the targets. 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
“The primary purpose of the Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework 
(OOMF) is to facilitate real-time monitoring and assessment of the current year 
scheme’s performance. The OOMF format is designed to monitor the current 
financial year's anticipated outputs and outcomes against allocated financial 
resources. This forward-looking monitoring approach allows for a clear 
articulation of objectives and a targeted assessment of ongoing scheme 
performance. Adding extensive historical data for multiple years may significantly 
expand the size and complexity of the OOMF document. It might shift the focus 
from the core objective and potentially overburden the reporting and analysis 

3 
 
processes. To improve the overall effectiveness of the OOMF, the scheme's 
progress against the targets of previous financial years is discussed annually 
during the OOMF Review meetings under the Chairpersonship of Hon’ble 
VC/Members, NITI Aayog.” 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)  
O.M. No. F. No. 65(2)/PFC-I/2025 dated 22nd April, 2025] 
 
1.6 The present OOMF originates from performance budgeting discussions in 1950s, 
notably from the Lok Sabha Estimate Committee’s 1958 and 1960’s recommendations 
for a ‘performance-cum-programme system of budgeting’, which led to the first output-
focused performance budget in 1968. This was further refined with the introduction of 
‘Outcome Budget’ in 2005-06 and its merger with the Performance Budget in 2007-08.  
Despite subsequent efforts like the Results Framework Documents (RFDs) from 2009-
10, robust mechanism for tracking outcomes remained elusive until the OOMF’s 
implementation in 2019-20, which now tracks the developmental expenditure outcomes. 
However, the OOMF’s advent also brought changes to the outcome budget format 
(given below) discontinuing the provision of past performance related information. 
Nonetheless, the Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office, NITI Aayog, in their 
December 2023 Report titled “Best Practices Compendium on Outcome Budgeting” 
suggested, inter-alia, that long-term objectives in inter-governmental reports could 
provide an overview of past and anticipated expenditure and programme impact, 
indicating the Government’s shift towards a sustainable budgeting approach.  
 
(i) Prescribed Format for Outcome Budget 2006-07 
(Rs. in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Scheme / 
Programme 
Objective 
Outcome 
Outlay 2006-07 Quantifiable 
Deliverables/ 
Physical 
Outputs 
Projected 
Outcomes 
Processes/ 
Timelines 
Remarks/ 
Risk 
Factors 
1 2 3  4  5 6 7 8 
   Non-Plan 
Budget 
Plan 
Budget 
Compleme
ntary Extra-
Budgetary 
Resources 
    
          
 
 

4 
 
(ii)   Prescribed Format for Outcome Budget 2017-18 
(₹ in crores) 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Scheme / 
Sub-Scheme 
Projected Financial Outlay Output/Deliverables against the Outlay Projected 
Medium Term 
Outcomes 
Remarks/ 
Risk Factors 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
  2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2017-18 to 
2019-20 
 
          
 
(iii) Prescribed Format for Outcome Budget 2024-25 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs. In Cr.) 
OUTPUTS 2024-25 OUTPUTS 2024-25 
2024-25 Output Indicators Target  
2024-25 
Outcome Indicators Target 
2024-25 
       
 
1.7 The Committee underscore the pivotal significance of the Output-Outcome 
Monitoring Framework (OOMF) enhancing transparency and accountability by 
presenting measurable outlays, outputs and outcomes to the Parliament. This 
framework, designed to furnish quantifiable indicators for achieving scheme 
objectives, represents the culmination of India’s multi-decade pursuit of 
performance based budgeting. Its origin can be traced back to the years 1958-
1960’s when the Lok Sabha Estimates Committee first gave their recommendation 
for a ‘performance-cum-programme system of budgeting’ which was later refined 
and the ‘Outcome Budget’ introduced in 2005-06 followed by the Results 
Framework Documents (RFDs) from 2009-10 onwards and thereafter, the OOMF 
from the year 2019-20, thereon. 
 Throughout this evolutionary journey, the format of the outcome budget 
has undergone numerous alterations, notably leading to unfortunate omission of 
critically vital information such as a review of the past performance, multi-year 
projections, risks factors. The Committee assert that the inclusion of past 
expenditure is a vital stride towards a sustainable approach to budgeting, as 

5 
 
advocated by the Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DEMO), an 
attached office of NITI Aayog. Despite this recognized imperative, the Committee 
observe with concern the Ministry’s discernible reluctance to publicly depict this 
quintessential historical information within the OOMF document. 
 The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to suitably integrate and 
incorporate both physical and financial achievement for the two preceding 
financial years within the OOMF document. This critical imperative, by intending 
beyond mere internal departmental utilization, will enable consistent monitoring 
of spending and efficacy for all stakeholders. Essentially, this will empower 
common citizens to track trends, assess outcomes, and foster transparency for 
wider public discussion and informed scrutiny.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
GIFT-IFSC (GUJARAT INTERNATIONAL FINANCE TEC-CITY- INTERNATIONAL 
FINANCE SERVICES CENTRE) 
 
1.8 The Committee note that GIFT-IFSC has improved its ranking by five places in 
the Global Financial Centres Index 36 (GFCI 36), securing the 52nd position and has 
also advanced four places in the FinTech rankings, now ranking 45th. While 
acknowledging these achievements, the Committee believe that there is significant 
scope for further improvement to bring GIFT-IFSC on par with leading global financial 
centres. The Committee feel that measures such as further streamlining of policies, 
improving transparency, fostering financial education, enhancing digital infrastructure, 
enhancing regulatory sandboxes, simplifying taxation regimes, reducing compliance 
burden, etc can help GIFT-IFSC position itself as a premier global financial hub, in the 
years to come. The Committee recommend the Government to develop similar GIFT 
City models in other major metro cities. 

6 
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
“The Government of India undertook a significant financial sector reform 
by establishing the country’s first International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) 
within the Gujarat International Financial Tec City (GIFT City).  
Envisioned as a globally competitive financial hub, GIFT IFSC offers a 
trusted regulatory environment, a favourable tax structure, and ease of doing 
business. Designated as a non-resident zone under the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, the IFSC facilitates transactions in notified freely convertible 
foreign currencies without capital control restrictions.  
Over the past five years, GIFT IFSC has experienced significant 
expansion across diverse sectors such as banking, capital markets, insurance, 
fintech, aircraft and ship leasing, bullion, and fund management. Positioned with 
international regulatory standards, cost efficiencies, and tax incentives, GIFT 
IFSC is rapidly emerging as a new-age global financial centre aimed at onshoring 
India-centric international financial services and attracting global capital flows. 
This has resulted in the improvement in the rankings of GIFT IFSC in GFCI 36th 
report. 
On the suggestion of development of similar GIFT City models in other major 
cities the following may be noted – 
 Section 18 of the Special Economic Zones (SEZ) Act, 2005 provides that 
the Central Government may approve the setting up of an IFSC in a SEZ 
and prescribe the requirements for setting up and operation of such 
Centre. 
 GIFT SEZ Ltd was the first entity to apply and receive a license for setting 
up of an IFSC under the SEZ Act and it received the license in 2011. It 
could, however, start operations only in 2015 when the concerned 
Ministries and Regulators issued guidelines for banking, capital markets 
and insurance businesses in the IFSC. 

7 
 
 Globally, one can find only one international financial centre in a country. 
This is done to maximize the efficiency gains and for optimum utilization of 
resources. The reason for this strategy is that the mainland activities are 
not affected by the offshore activities. This provides an easy mechanism 
for the regulator to monitor one location and keep upgrading regulatory 
infrastructure at the said location. 
 As stated by former Finance Minister, late Shri Arun Jaitley on the floor of 
the Lok Sabha on 22nd December 2017, there is a limit to how many 
IFSCs can be set up and since GIFT City is already under development in 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat there is a need to first optimally utilise GIFT City 
before considering other requests. This was reiterated during the debate 
on the IFSC Authority Bill in the Lok Sabha on 11th December 2019. 
 The International Financial Services Centres Authority (IFSCA) was 
established on April 27, 2020 under the IFSCA Act, 2019 as a unified 
regulator with a holistic vision to promote ease of doing business in IFSC 
and provide world class regulatory environment. As the dynamic nature of 
business in the IFSCs requires a high degree of inter-regulatory 
coordination within the financial sector, the IFSCA has been 
headquartered in Gandhinagar, Gujarat where the only IFSC in India 
currently is located. This enables a smooth engagement between the 
Authority and IFSC units for a coherent and integrated regulatory 
framework.” 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M. No. 3/5/2023-IFSCA dated 25th March, 2025] 
 
1.10 The Committee further enquired about the number of International Finance 
Centres in BRICS and ASEAN nations and their respective ratings, to which the Ministry 
furnished the following reply:- 
 
 

8 
 
“International Financial Centres in BRICS and ASEAN 
Sr. 
No. 
Group Name of the Financial 
Centre 
Name of the 
Country 
Rank as per 
GFCI 37 
A. ASEAN a. Singapore Singapore 04 
b. Kuala Lumpur Malaysia 51 
c. Bangkok Thailand 96 
d. Jakarta Indonesia 97 
e. Ho Chi Minh City Vietnam 98 
B. BRICS 1. Sao Paulo Brazil 78 
2. Rio de Janeiro Brazil 94 
3. Moscow Russia 115 
4. St. Petersburg Russia 117 
5. GIFT City-Gujarat India 46 
6. Mumbai India 52 
7. Delhi India 60 
8. Hong Kong China 03 
9. Shanghai China 08 
10. Shenzhen China 09 
11. Guangzhou China 34 
12. Chengdu China 39 
13. Beijing China 20 
14. Qingdao China 35 
15. Hangzhou China 63 
16. Dalian China 74 
17. Tianjin China 82 
18. Cape Town South Africa 84 
19. Johannesburg South Africa 88 
20. Tehran Iran 104 
21. Riyadh Saudi Arabia 71 
22. Dubai UAE 12 
23. Abu Dhabi UAE 38 
 
Source- The Global Financial Centres Index 37, March 2025 
https://www.longfinance.net/media/documents/GFCI_37_Report_2025.03.20_v1.
2.pdf ” 
1.11 The Committee note GIFT IFSC’s current ranking of 46th out of 119 financial 
centres evaluated, a notable improvement from its previous rank of 52nd in the 
Global Financial Centres Index [GFCI 37]. However, the Committee believe further 
measures are essential to elevate GIFT-IFSC to a premier global financial hub, 

9 
 
aligning with the vision of Viksit Bharat. The Committee while acknowledging 
India’s vast economic geography and the growing demand for specialised 
financial services, reiterate the need to explore region-specific models for new 
IFSCs, drawing inspiration from GIFT City’s success, to further integrate India 
into the global financial services landscape and bolster the nation’s journey 
towards Viksit Bharat. The Committee note that GIFT-IFSC is the country’s sole 
IFSC however other major economies, including some BRICS nations like China 
with 10 Centres, possess multiple financial hubs. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that while maintaining focus on GIFT City as the core hub, the 
Government may consider establishing satellite financial innovation zones or fin-
tech clusters in other major cities to foster inclusive growth, create talent pools 
and attract diverse investors all contributing to the goals of Viksit Bharat.  
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
ASSET MONETIZATION TARGET 
1.12 The Committee are informed that although disinvestment target has been 
discontinued, the Government continues to pursue an asset monetization target, which 
includes the monetization of assets under the National Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI), Indian Railways etc. The Committee opine that it is essential to stay on course 
to achieve the vision of asset monetization as it will contribute to funding new capital 
investments, improving operational efficiencies and reducing fiscal burdens. The 
Committee thus urge for regular reviews and monitoring to ensure that the monetization 
targets are met, contributing to the long-term economic growth and infrastructure 
development of the country. 
 

10 
 
1.13 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
“Disinvestment is an ongoing process, and execution/completion of 
specific transactions hinges upon market conditions, domestic and global 
economic outlook, geopolitical factors, investor interest and administrative 
feasibility. The Department has experienced that high disinvestment targets in 
successive years lead to price overhang resulting in value erosion of PSU stocks. 
Accordingly, Government has moved away from target-oriented approach for 
disinvestment since RE 2023-24. “Miscellaneous Capital Receipts (MCR)- 
Receipts” in Budget documents accounts for the receipts under erstwhile 
categories of disinvestment and capital receipts such as asset monetization etc.  
The actual MCR in FY 2024-25 was Rs. 16,731 crore (Rs. 6,600 crore received 
as proceeds from Asset Monetization and Rs. 10,131 as disinvestment 
proceeds). The BE for MCR in FY 2025-26 has been kept at Rs.47,000 crore. All 
efforts will be made to achieve the target this year.”  
[Ministry of Finance Department of Investment and Public Asset Management  
O.M No 3/1/2008.DD.II(Vol. IV)-Part (1) dated 21st May, 2025.] 
 
1.14 The Committee observe that while the Government has transitioned from 
specific disinvestment targets, asset monetization continues to be a pivotal 
strategy for national development. Despite its integration into the Miscellaneous 
Capital Receipts (MCR) framework and the acknowledged challenges in achieving 
the past targets, this initiative is crucial for generating substantial resources for 
new investments, enhancing asset productivity and alleviating fiscal pressure. 
Therefore, the Committee while reiterating their recommendation, underscores 
the paramount importance of rigorously and transparently tracking asset 
monetization performance. This dedicated monitoring, irrespective of being an 
integral departmental function, is essential to uphold its strategic focus and 

11 
 
ensure its significant contribution to funding capital investments, improving 
operational efficiencies and delivering sustained fiscal relief. 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
   
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
DEMAND NO. 30 -  DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS (DEA) 
The Committee observe that Demand No. 30 pertaining to the Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA) shows significant variations between the Budget Estimates 
(BE) and Revised Estimates (RE). Additionally, it is noted that the Quarterly Expenditure 
Plan for the Financial Year (FY) 2024-25 reflects considerable deviations in each 
quarter between the allocated funds and the actual expenditure. The Committee further 
note that the reduction in RE 2024-25 is primarily attributable to the substantial 
decrease in the allocation for the 'New Scheme', which was initially earmarked at Rs. 
62,592.88 crore in BE 2024-25 but was subsequently reduced to Rs. 9,068.29 crore at 
the RE 2024-25 stage. Furthermore, it has been informed by the Ministry that the 
significant variation between the earmarked funds and actual expenditure in the 
Quarterly Expenditure Plan is due to this drastic reduction. The Committee are made 
aware that out of the surrendered amount of Rs. 53,524.29 crore, a sum of Rs. 20,000 
crore has been reappropriated to the Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme under the Gold 
Monetization Scheme, 2015 and Rs. 10,000 crore has been reappropriated to the 
Guarantee Redemption Fund through second supplementary, with the remaining 
balance being surrendered at the RE stage of 2024-25. The Committee urge the 
Department to revisit the extant practice of allocating funds that are not directly related 
to the Department—such as allocations for New Schemes which are not finalized. The 
Committee would like to further emphasise that enhanced forecasting techniques and 
strategic foresight are essential for improving budgetary projections and minimising 
fiscal uncertainties. The Committee feel that this may facilitate the preparation of 
realistic estimates and ensure optimal utilisation of sanctioned funds of the Department. 
Given that the DEA serves as the nodal Department for budget formulation, the 
Committee believe that it is imperative that it upholds financial discipline and fiscal 
prudence while making budgetary allocations. The Committee, therefore, urge the DEA 

13 
 
to set a benchmark of excellence in budgetary planning and execution, serving as a 
model for other Ministries and Departments. 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard, it is stated Department would endeavour to revisit the extant 
practice of allocating funds that are not directly related to Department- such as 
allocations for New Schemes which are not finalized.  
DEA is continuously trying to enhance its forecasting techniques to create more 
realistic budget estimates. DEA endeavours to ensure that Budget allocations are based 
on Realistic and detailed planning, considering past expenditure trends latest economic 
developments and emerging trends and DEA also endeavours to ensure the optimal 
utilisation of sanctioned funds. 
Further, Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), as the nodal department in the 
formulation of the Budget, is committed to adhering to requisite financial discipline and 
maintaining fiscal prudence while making budgetary allocations and endeavours to be a 
role model for other Ministries and Departments in preparing realistic estimates and 
optimally utilising sanctioned funds. 
The DEA acknowledges the Committee's observations and is dedicated to 
maintaining the highest standards of fiscal prudence and responsibility. DEA will try its 
best to enhance the forecasting techniques and strategic foresight for improving 
budgetary projections and minimising fiscal uncertainties and set a benchmark for other 
Ministries and Departments. However, Committee’s Recommendation has been noted 
for future compliance. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M. No. 5/3/2025-IF.I dated 22nd April, 2025] 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
CLIMATE TAXONOMY 
The Committee are made aware that with respect to progress of climate 
taxonomy, sector-specific Committees have been constituted and a consultation paper 
for public and stakeholder feedback is scheduled to be brought out within March of  
2025. The Committee would like to be apprised of further developments post 
consultation with the stakeholders. The Committee urge the Government to expedite 
work on an India-specific climate taxonomy as the same will aid in providing structure, 
clarity and accountability for addressing the complex challenges posed by climate 
change. 
Reply of the Government 
A Draft Framework of the Climate Finance Taxonomy has been developed to 
guide the classification of activities, projects, and measures that support India's climate 
commitments while also taking into account goals associated with achieving Viksit 
Bharat by 2047. This framework will serve as the basis for developing sectoral annexes 
that identify climate-supportive initiatives. 
The draft framework is placed on the Department of Economic Affairs website for 
45 days to enable public consultations, following which the Department of Economic 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance, will finalise and release the Framework of India’s Climate 
Finance Taxonomy.  
The draft framework can be accessed at https://dea.gov.in/ under the Recent 
Initiatives and Updates tab and at 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2127562  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
OM No.25(4)/Ec.Dn./2025 dated 9th May 2025] 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES FOR CAPITAL 
INVESTMENT/EXPENDITURE (SASCI) 
The Committee note that out of the allocation of Rs. 1,50,000 crore, the release 
under the Scheme for Special Assistance to the States for Capital 
Investment/Expenditure (SASCI) scheme during the current financial year up to 
14.02.2025 is Rs. 1,13,856 crore. The Committee understand that since 2020-21, 
Government of India is providing financial assistance to the State Governments in the 
form of 50-year interest free loan through the Scheme and promotion of a higher rate of 
growth of economy. The SASCI (2024-25) has 13 parts out of which six parts i.e. Part – 
IV (Incentives for scrapping of old vehicles), Part-V (Stimulating Industrial Growth), Part-
VII (Incentives for rural land reforms and farmers’ registry), Part-VIII (Incentives for land 
related reforms in urban areas), Part-XI (Incentives for on-boarding of CSS on the SNA 
Sparsh Model) and Part-XIII (Urban Planning Reforms) are aimed at incentivizing States 
to carry out certain reforms. Some parts of the Scheme available to States are on ‘First-
Come-First-Served’ basis. The Committee, further, note that the total allocation for 
these reform-linked components amounts to Rs. 42,000 Crore. Additionally, an 
allocation of Rs. 25,000 crore has been set aside to incentivise States for achieving the 
prescribed capital expenditure targets, particularly ensuring a year-on-year growth of 
over 10% in capital expenditure from their own resources. Thus, a total amount of Rs. 
67,000 crore out of the amount of Rs. 1,50,000 crore is contingent upon achievement of 
stipulated reforms and targets fixed for capital expenditure by the States. The 
Committee observe that only Rs. 31,103 crore have been released to the States under 
these parts till 14.02.2025. This slow pace of expenditure has resulted into downward 
revision of allocation to Rs. 1,25,000 cr. at RE 2024-25 from BE (24-25) of Rs. 1,50,000 
cr. In light of this, the Committee urge that regular reviews with all stakeholders be held 
at the highest level to expedite uptake of the Scheme and steps be undertaken to 
identify and address any bottlenecks or challenges faced by State Governments in 
accessing and utilising the allocated funds to reap the benefit of the Scheme. The 
Committee also recommend to consider allocation of funds to States under some parts 

16 
 
of the Scheme on certain other criteria rather than ‘First-Come-First-Served Basis’ so as 
to full-fill the demand of all States. 
Reply of the Government 
 As observed by the Standing Committee, the regular reviews with all 
stakeholders were held periodically at the highest level. Also, necessary steps to 
identify and address all the issues and challenges faced by the State 
Governments in accessing and utilising the funds under SASCI 2024-25 were 
taken. This has resulted in incurring an expenditure of Rs. 1,49,483.73 crore out 
of the BE value for 2024-25 amounting to Rs. 1.50 lakh crore. 
 
 Further, in view of the observation/recommendation of the Committee to consider 
allocation of funds to States under some parts of the Scheme on certain other 
criteria rather than ‘First-Come-First-Served Basis’ so as to fulfill the demands of 
all States, it is submitted that a substantial part of the funds allocated to the 
States under SASCI are not reform based and are allocated to the States as per 
inter-se share of States in Central Taxes & Duties. Accordingly, Rs. 1,04,085.46 
crore under Part-I (including additional allocation), Part-II, Part-III, Part-IX and 
Part-X of SASCI 2024-25 has been provided to the States without linking them to 
any reforms.  
 
 Furthermore, the reform-based parts are necessary to create a healthy 
competition amongst the States and also to ensure swift implementation of 
governance related and citizen-centric reforms.  
 
 Details of reform-based parts i.e. Part-IV (Scrapping of Old Vehicles), Part-V 
(Stimulating Industrial Growth), Part-VII (Modernization & Digitization of Rural 
Land Records & Farmers Registry), Part-VIII (Incentives for Land-related 
Reforms by State Governments  in  Urban  Areas),  Part-IX  (State's  share of 
Centrally  Sponsored  Scheme), Part-XII (Incentives for Achieving Capital 
Expenditure Target) and Part-XIII (Urban Planning Reforms) of SASCI 2024-25 
are as below: 
   (Rs. in crore) 
Part of SASCI 2024-25 Approved Released 
Part-IV 840.68 840.68 
Part-V 9400.00 9400.00 
Part-VII 4457.68  4457.68 
Part-VIII 0.00 0.00 
Part-IX 14693.75 14046.96 
Part-XII 20258.45 20261.45 
Part-XIII 1972.49 1936.74 

17 
 
   
All Parts of SASCI 2024-25 
(including additional allocations) 156965.88 149483.73 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) 
O.M. No. No. 44(1)/PF-S/2025-26 (CAPEX) dated 29th April, 2025] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, CONSULTANCY & REORIENTATION SCHEME 
(RDCR) 
The Committee note that both training-oriented schemes of Department of Public 
Enterprises i.e. Counselling, Retraining & Redeployment (CRR)  for separated 
employees and Research, Development & Consultancies (RDC) for current employees 
have been merged with effect from 01st October, 2024 to enhance implementation and 
reduce overhead costs and rechristened the Scheme as ‘Research, Development, 
Consultancy & Reorientation’ (RDCR). The Committee observe that the actual utilization 
of funds for the CRR scheme has been significantly lower than the Budget Estimates 
(BEs) over the past three financial years. Specifically, the fund utilisation stood at Rs. 
1.75 crore for FY 2022-23, Rs. 0.04 crore for FY 2023-24 and zero utilisation as on  
07.02.2025 in the current financial year, compared to the allocated BEs of Rs. 3.4 crore, 
Rs. 3.4 crore and Rs. 2 crore respectively. Similarly, for the RDC scheme, while the 
allocation for FY 2024-25 was Rs. 6.38 crore, only Rs. 1.67 crore has been utilised as 
on 07.02.2025. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to make all efforts for 
efficient and optimal utilisation of allocated funds under the consolidated RDCR Scheme 
so that it delivers maximum impact in supporting Public Sector Enterprises and their 
workforce. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Concurrence of IF Wing for conducting of 3 training programs under RDC 
Scheme have been received on 3rd March, 2025. Accordingly, DPE has organized 
three training programmes in March, 2025 at an estimated cost of Rs. 67.00 Lakh for 
executives of CPSEs/SLPEs. All efforts would be made for efficient and optimal 
utilization of allocated funds under RDCR Scheme during FY 2025-26. 

18 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Public Enterprises) 
O.M. No. 1(1)/2025-Coord. dated 29th April, 2025.] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
UTILISATION OF FUNDS FOR THE SCHEMES IN NORTH-EAST REGION 
The Committee observe with concern that the utilisation vis-à-vis the allocation of 
the schemes in the North East region has been dismal with only Rs. 0.44 crore out of 
the BE (2023-24) of Rs. 0.99 crore i.e. 44.45% being utilised in the last financial year 
and Rs. 0.31 crore out of BE (2024-25) of Rs. 0.84 crore i.e. 36.90% being utilised in 
the current financial year as on 07.02.2025. The Committee strongly recommend that 
efficient and timely utilisation of funds be ensured along with addressing bottlenecks 
and stregthening monitoring mechanisms to maximise the impact of these Schemes in 
the region. 
Reply of the Government 
DPE has conducted three training programmes during H1&H2 of FY 2024-25 in 
NER. Further, one training program at Guwahati with estimate cost of Rs.18.00 Lakh 
itself in March, 2025. All efforts would be made for timely   and maximum utilization of 
allocated funds for NER under RDCR Scheme during FY 2025-26 to maximize the 
impact of scheme in the north east region. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. 1(1)/2025-Coord. dated 29th April, 2025.] 
 
  
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
TRAINING EXPENSES 
The Committee observe that the actual training expenses of Department of 
Economic Affairs, DIPAM and Department of Public Enterprises have been quite low 
compared to the budget allocations for them in FY 2023-24 with only 53.40%, 54.54% 
and 39.80% respectively being utilised by the three Departments. It is further observed 
that actual utilization in FY 2024-2025 (upto 31.01.2025) stands at 25.87%, 13.04% and 
15% respectively. The Committee would like to highlight that adequate and effective 

19 
 
training is imperative for Government personnel to adapt to evolving economic, financial 
and administrative landscapes. This will enable them to stay updated with the latest 
advancements in financial management and technological integration thereby 
enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of these key Departments. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly urge the Departments concerned to prioritise training initiatives and 
ensure optimal utilisation of allocated funds to provide comprehensive and high-quality 
training for their workforce. 
Reply of the Government 
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA)  
The Budget for training expenses in DEA are being utilized by Divisions for 
various workforce, as under: 
1(a)     The diminishing expenditure under "Training Expenses" Budget Head of this 
Department is on account of the fact that there exists now a Capacity Building 
Commission under DoPT and trainings are offered in ONLINE mode and all employees 
have to mandatorily undergo these training to hone their skill and increase efficiency 
and output in their domain areas, monitored at highest level. 
(b) Further, 400 employees of the Department undertook various courses on iGoT 
platform under 'Mission Karmayogi' in ONLINE mode under National Programme for 
Civil Services Capacity Building (NPCSCB) of DoPT. 
(c) It is added that after India assumed the 620 Presidency in the Financial Year 
2022-23, majority of the officers got involved into it thus leaving very little scope to 
make officers available for the trainings. During the year 2024, 107 employees of DEA 
underwent training in offline mode through other various agencies viz. ISTM, NIFM, 
LBSNAA, ISHA Foundation etc. This number was 110 during the preceding calendar 
year. 
(d) This department is also proposing to initiate a tie up with different institute.s, 
relevant to the work-functioning of this Department, to impart training to the employees 
to make them more proficient and result oriented as a way forward to improve efficiency 
and better utilization of the Budget. Further avenues for training of employees will also 
be explored in consultations with sister departments of Ministry of Finance. In the 

20 
 
meanwhile, to stimulate the process, 13 No. officers are sponsored to 11M 
Vishakhapatnam for undergoing ensuing training on "public procurement" Also, couples 
of officers are also sponsored for various training programmes organized by NeGD, 
pending approval from Competent Authority. 
 
2(a) The Capacity Building Unit (CBU), IPP Division under the Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA) conducts sector-specific training programs for officials involved 
in the conceptualization, structuring, planning, implementation, monitoring of 
Infrastructure Projects. Since January, 2022, DEA has conducted a total of 73 offline 
training programmes in association with top Institutions viz. Arun Jaitley National 
Institute of Financial Management (AJNIFM), Indian Institute of Management (IIMs) etc. 
in the areas like Infrastructure Development, Public Private Partnerships (PPP), Project 
Finance, etc. benefitting 2261 officers (i.e. 765 from Central Ministries/Departments, 
637 from CPSEs, and 859 from State Governments/Union Territories) across the 
country. Since January 2022, a total of Rs. 18,27,78,368/- have been spent on 
aforesaid training programs.  
 
(b) Further, for broader outreach and greater effectiveness of its capacity building 
initiatives, CBU, DEA has collaborated with the Capacity Building Commission (CBC) 
and developed three e-courses, viz. “Project Finance”, “Financial and Debt Markets in 
India” and “Municipal Bonds”, which are available on i-Got Karmayogi Platform. An e-
course on “Public Private Partnership (PPP) – Beginner” developed by DEA is also 
available on the i-GOT Karmayogi platform. Till dated, a total of 12198 Govt. officials 
across the country have enrolled for the said four e-courses on i-Got Karmayogi 
platform. 
3(a) Funds were assigned for the probationary training of 15 IES officers for a period 
of 12 months. However, India assumed the presidency of the G20 in the year 2023, the 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, attached all 15 IES (P) of Batch 
2022 for work in the G20 presidency. Therefore, the probationary training programme of 
this batch was truncated. Consequently, budget in training head was not fully utilized. 
(b) Training Institutes that conducted training in FY 2023-24 & 2024-25 did not 
submit the bill within the FY, despite several reminders from the Division. As a result, 

21 
 
payment to these institutes could not be made, and the budget was not fully utilized. 
Hence, the payment may be made in the next Financial Year.  
(c) The IES cadre has initiated an Online Training Programme for IES Officers on 
Research Writing, Research Methodology, and Artificial Intelligence in Research in FY 
2024-25. This training programme aims to enable self-paced learning without disrupting 
work schedules and provide tools to enhance writing, analytical, and research 
capabilities. This initiative is also helpful in minimizing the training cost as compared to 
Offline Training. 
(d) IES Cadre is continuously conducting the Probationary, Induction, and In-service 
training programme to IES Officers. In the last two financial years, the training 
programmes were conducted at different institutions such as LBSNAA, AJNIFM, IIMs, 
ISTM, NIPFP, SARTTAC, PRIDE, IIFT, RBSC, etc. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) O.M. No. A-20011/01/2020 dated 
23.04.2025, 1/5/2024-CBU dated 09.05.2025 and 14013/02/2024-IES dated 05.05.2025] 
Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) 
DPE has organized 42 training/orientation programmes/workshops during 2022-
23, 25 training/orientation programmes/workshops during 2023-24 and 12 
training/orientation programmes/workshops during 2024-25. DPE’s employees have 
successfully completed 2592 training modules on iGot portal. DPE will make all efforts 
for efficient and optimal utilization of allocated funds to provide comprehensive and 
high-quality training for their workforce during FY 2025-26. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. 1(1)/2025-Coord. dated 29th April, 2025.]  
Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) 
The Standing Committee on Finance observed that actual utilization of training 
expenses of DIPAM in FY 2024-25 (upto 31.01.2025) was quite low as it was 13.04% of 
Budget Estimate (BE). In this regard, it may be stated that separate budget head for the 
training expenses has been operationalized only since FY 2023-24. The Department 
strives to utilize all the training opportunities that are being conducted by training 
organizations. However, the observation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted and 

22 
 
the Department will try to increase these trainings by coordinating with Training 
Institutes. Besides in house programmes of the Department, training of employees of 
DIPAM are also being controlled/managed through their respective Cadre Controlling 
Authorities and employees of DIPAM are relieved timely to undergo their service-related 
training programmes on receiving communication from their respective Cadre 
Controlling Authorities. Moreover, like in other Ministries/Departments, employees of 
DIPAM are attending various online training through iGOT Karamyogi portal which is 
being managed by Capacity Building Commission. 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Investment and Public Asset Management  
O.M No 3/1/2008.DD.II(Vol. IV)-Part (1) dated 21st May, 2025.]   
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
GENERAL GOVERNMENT DEBT 
The Committee understand the significance of maintaining a healthy debt-to-
GDP ratio as a crucial component of fiscal stability. However, the Committee also 
emphasise that ensuring effective management of General Government Debt which 
includes the cumulative debt of both the Central and State Governments is equally vital 
for sustainable economic growth. The Committee are informed that the current General 
Government Debt is of the order of about 82-83 per cent with 56-57 percent being the 
Government of India debt and rest being debt of States. The Committee feel that it is 
pertinent to mention that high levels of debt, if not prudently managed, can crowd out 
private investment, increase borrowing costs and limit fiscal space for developmental 
and welfare expenditures. Thus, the Committee would like to highlight that a well-
managed General Government Debt framework is essential to have healthy fiscal 
balances, ensure adequate resource allocation; pruning wasteful expenditure and 
support long-term economic resilience. The Committee desire that a comprehensive 
and coordinated approach be adopted to monitor and manage General Government 
Debt, ensuring that both the Central and State Governments adhere to prudent fiscal 
policies. The Committee further urge the Government to enhance transparency, 
strengthen debt management frameworks and explore innovative financing mechanisms 
to sustain economic growth while maintaining fiscal discipline. 

23 
 
Reply of the Government 
Central Government debt has come down to 57.1 per cent of GDP in RE 2024-25 
from the peak of 61.4 percent in the COVID pandemic year. It is estimated at 56.1 per 
cent of GDP in BE 2025-26. 
This path is also expected to reduce the General Government Debt provided the 
Consolidated State Government Debt to GDP ratio remains at current level or below 
current level. 
As regards the Committee’s concern about a well-managed General Government 
Debt framework, it is submitted that Central Government’s debt sustainability stands on 
three pillars - reduction in borrowing costs, risk mitigation and market development. 
Further, the Central Government in Budget 2025-26, presented a debt path in FRBM 
documents to attain a more sustainable level of debt. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M. No.  9(1)-B(W&M)/2024 dated 07.04.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
ASSET MONETIZATION TARGET 
The Committee are informed that although disinvestment target has been 
discontinued, the Government continues to pursue an asset monetization target, which 
includes the monetization of assets under the National Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI), Indian Railways etc. The Committee opine that it is essential to stay on course 
to achieve the vision of asset monetization as it will contribute to funding new capital 
investments, improving operational efficiencies and reducing fiscal burdens. The 
Committee thus urge for regular reviews and monitoring to ensure that the monetization 
targets are met, contributing to the long-term economic growth and infrastructure 
development of the country. 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
Disinvestment is an ongoing process, and execution/completion of specific 
transactions hinges upon market conditions, domestic and global economic outlook, 
geopolitical factors, investor interest and administrative feasibility. The Department has 
experienced that high disinvestment targets in successive years lead to price overhang 
resulting in value erosion of PSU stocks. Accordingly, Government has moved away 
from target-oriented approach for disinvestment since RE 2023-24. “Miscellaneous 
Capital Receipts (MCR)- Receipts” in Budget documents accounts for the receipts 
under erstwhile categories of disinvestment and capital receipts such as asset 
monetization etc.  The actual MCR in FY 2024-25 was Rs. 16,731 crore (Rs. 6,600 
crore received as proceeds from Asset Monetization and Rs. 10,131 as disinvestment 
proceeds). The BE for MCR in FY 2025-26 has been kept at Rs.47,000 crore. All efforts 
will be made to achieve the target this year.  
[Ministry of Finance Department of Investment and Public Asset Management  
O.M No 3/1/2008.DD.II(Vol. IV)-Part (1) dated 21st May, 2025.] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.14 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
SUBSIDIES 
The Committee observe that huge amounts of sum are allocated and utilised for 
subsidies. The budget estimates for the same have been Rs. 4,03,083.64 crore and Rs. 
4,28,422.67 crore for FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25 respectively. The BE for 2025-26 has 
been set at Rs. 4,26,216.21 crore. While acknowledging the importance of subsidies in 
supporting vulnerable sections of society and key economic sectors, the opportunity 
cost associated with high subsidy expenditures, as excessive spending on subsidies 
may divert resources from areas which are essential for long-term economic growth. 
The Committee would like to emphasise the need for prudence and efficiency in subsidy 
allocation. The Committee feel that it is essential that subsidies are targeted towards the 
most deserving beneficiaries and essential sectors to ensure maximum socio-economic 

25 
 
impact. The Committee desire that subsidies contribute to inclusive growth without 
compromising the broader economic priorities of the nation. 
Reply of the Government 
The expenditure on subsidies is incurred to protect the weaker sections of the 
society and therefore, every effort is made by the Government to ensure that the 
requirements on this account are completely provided for. Further, the expenditure on 
major items of subsidy is like Fertilizer, Food and Petroleum, is impacted by the prices 
prevalent in the global markets. As a result, there are chances that the amount 
budgeted for Subsidies in the BE of a particular year may have to be revised upwards in 
RE. The expenditure incurred on Major Subsidies till 31st, January of the current 
financial year stood at ₹3.38 lakh crore. 
While the concerns of the committee regarding diversion of resources from areas 
which are essential for long-term growth to subsidies is noted. However, it is 
emphasised that providing support to the weaker sections helps in avoiding financial 
distress as well as ensures better human development indicators. With regard to the 
recommendations of the Committee to ensure that subsidies are targeted towards the 
most deserving beneficiaries it is submitted that most of the schemes have introduced 
inclusion criteria’s as well as Aadhaar based Authentication. This ensures that only the 
weak and the vulnerable receive the benefits of these subsidies. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M. No.  9(1)-B(W&M)/2024 dated 07.04.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES SURVEY 
The Committee note that the Public Enterprises (PE) Survey, conducted annually 
by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), serves as a comprehensive repository 
of information on Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) providing detailed 
information on the financial and operational aspects of CPSEs. The Committee feel that 
the Public Enterprises (PE) Survey can be enhanced into a more insightful and user-

26 
 
centric document, thereby strengthening its role in the strategic oversight and 
development of CPSEs. The Committee feel that the accessibility of the PE Survey 
could be greatly improved by developing an interactive online platform where users can 
customise data to generate reports and download specific datasets. This would 
enhance usability of the Survey for policymakers, researchers and the public, thus, 
making the survey a more valuable tool for informed decision-making. Furthermore, 
given the increasing global emphasis on sustainability and responsible business 
practices, it is recommended that Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) 
metrics be incorporated in the Survey for all CPSEs. By implementing these 
enhancements, the PE Survey can evolve into a more insightful resource, ultimately 
contributing to more effective policy formulation and improved CPSE performance. 
Reply of the Government 
The Public Enterprises Survey (PE Survey) presents a summary of the financial 
performance of Central Public Sector Enterprises. DPE has disseminated the PE 
Survey reports along-with tables in excel format on its website for wider use by all stake 
holders. 
DPE shall make the suitable changes like bar chart/ pie chart in dashboard with 
enhanced facility of filters and selection parameters.  
DPE, in the survey collection format for 2024-25, will add the column “whether 
CPSE is publishing/ disclosing Business Responsibility and Sustainability Report”. 
Concerned CPSE will be asked to submit the data on selected parameters to 
incorporate summary in the Public Enterprises Survey Report of FY 2024-25. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. 1(1)/2025-Coord. dated 29th April, 2025.]  
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
OUTPUT OUTCOME MONITORING FRAMEWORK (OOMF) 
The Committee note that the guidelines for preparing Output Outcome Monitoring 
Framework (OOMF) are published in the Budget Circular of every financial year. As per 
the Budget Circular of 2025-26, the OOMF is to be prepared as per the Ministry of 
Finance’s D.O. letter No. 2(33)-B(P&A)/2018 dated 13th May, 2019. The Committee 
recommend that the format of OOMF be modified suitably to enhance its 
comprehensiveness and utility. The Committee suggest that the modified format should 
incorporate progress against the targets (both physical and financial targets) for atleast 
two preceding financial years, along with the outputs and outcomes of the current 
financial year. The Committee opine that this consolidated and comprehensive 
approach will facilitate a more in-depth and hands-on analysis, thereby improving the 
overall effectiveness of the document in assessing the progress against the targets. 
Reply of the Government 
The primary purpose of the Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) is to 
facilitate real-time monitoring and assessment of the current year scheme’s 
performance. The OOMF format is designed to monitor the current financial year's 
anticipated outputs and outcomes against allocated financial resources. This forward-
looking monitoring approach allows for a clear articulation of objectives and a targeted 
assessment of ongoing scheme performance. Adding extensive historical data for 
multiple years may significantly expand the size and complexity of the OOMF 
document. It might shift the focus from the core objective and potentially overburden the 
reporting and analysis processes. To improve the overall effectiveness of the OOMF, 
the scheme's progress against the targets of previous financial years is discussed 

29 
 
annually during the OOMF Review meetings under the Chairpersonship of Hon’ble 
VC/Members, NITI Aayog. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)  
O.M. No. F. No. 65(2)/PFC-I/2025 dated 22nd April, 2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
GIFT-IFSC (GUJARAT INTERNATIONAL FINANCE TEC-CITY- INTERNATIONAL 
FINANCE SERVICES CENTRE) 
The Committee note that GIFT-IFSC has improved its ranking by five places in 
the Global Financial Centres Index 36 (GFCI 36), securing the 52nd position and has 
also advanced four places in the FinTech rankings, now ranking 45th. While 
acknowledging these achievements, the Committee believe that there is significant 
scope for further improvement to bring GIFT-IFSC on par with leading global financial 
centres. The Committee feel that measures such as further streamlining of  policies, 
improving transparency, fostering financial education, enhancing digital infrastructure, 
enhancing regulatory sandboxes, simplifying taxation regimes, reducing compliance 
burden, etc can help GIFT-IFSC position itself as a premier global financial hub, in the 
years to come. The Committee recommend the Government to develop similar GIFT 
City models in other major metro cities. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India undertook a significant financial sector reform by 
establishing the country’s first International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) within the 
Gujarat International Financial Tec City (GIFT City).  
Envisioned as a globally competitive financial hub, GIFT IFSC offers a trusted 
regulatory environment, a favourable tax structure, and ease of doing business. 
Designated as a non-resident zone under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, the 
IFSC facilitates transactions in notified freely convertible foreign currencies without 
capital control restrictions.  

30 
 
Over the past five years, GIFT IFSC has experienced significant expansion 
across diverse sectors such as banking, capital markets, insurance, fintech, aircraft and 
ship leasing, bullion, and fund management. Positioned with international regulatory 
standards, cost efficiencies, and tax incentives, GIFT IFSC is rapidly emerging as a 
new-age global financial centre aimed at onshoring India-centric international financial 
services and attracting global capital flows. This has resulted in the improvement in the 
rankings of GIFT IFSC in GFCI 36th report. 
On the suggestion of development of similar GIFT City models in other major 
cities the following may be noted – 
 Section 18 of the Special Economic Zones (SEZ) Act, 2005 provides that the 
Central Government may approve the setting up of an IFSC in a SEZ and 
prescribe the requirements for setting up and operation of such Centre. 
 GIFT SEZ Ltd was the first entity to apply and receive a license for setting up 
of an IFSC under the SEZ Act and it received the license in 2011. It could, 
however, start operations only in 2015 when the concerned Ministries and 
Regulators issued guidelines for banking, capital markets and insurance 
businesses in the IFSC. 
 Globally, one can find only one international financial centre in a country. 
This is done to maximize the efficiency gains and for optimum utilization of 
resources. The reason for this strategy is that the mainland activities are not 
affected by the offshore activities. This provides an easy mechanism for the 
regulator to monitor one location and keep upgrading regulatory 
infrastructure at the said location. 
 As stated by former Finance Minister, late Shri Arun Jaitley on the floor of the 
Lok Sabha on 22nd December 2017, there is a limit to how many IFSCs can 
be set up and since GIFT City is already under development in Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat there is a need to first optimally utilise GIFT City before considering 
other requests. This was reiterated during the debate on the IFSC Authority 
Bill in the Lok Sabha on 11th December 2019. 
 The International Financial Services Centres Authority (IFSCA) was 
established on April 27, 2020 under the IFSCA Act, 2019 as a unified 
regulator with a holistic vision to promote ease of doing business in IFSC and 

31 
 
provide world class regulatory environment. As the dynamic nature of 
business in the IFSCs requires a high degree of inter-regulatory coordination 
within the financial sector, the IFSCA has been headquartered in 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat where the only IFSC in India currently is located. This 
enables a smooth engagement between the Authority and IFSC units for a 
coherent and integrated regulatory framework. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M. No. 3/5/2023-IFSCA dated 25th March, 2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER - V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES BY THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                              
 
  

33 
 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). The 
Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 hrs in Committee 
Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 

34 
 
PART I 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services, Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and 
Investment and Public Asset Management). 

35 
 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken Reports 
and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * 
  

36 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC 
AFFAIRS,  EXPENDITURE , PUBLIC ENTERPRISES & INVESTMENT AND PUBLIC 
ASSET MANAGEMENT). 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
12  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 
12) 
10 83.33% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies  
 
 
NIL -- 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee                                   
(vide Recommendation Nos. 2 and 4) 
 
02 16.67% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
 
* * * 