 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE, 
FINANCIAL SERVICES, PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND 
INVESTMENT & PUBLIC ASSET MANAGEMENT) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Financial Services, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management)’] 
 
  
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 14 

ii 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL 
SERVICES, PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND INVESTMENT & PUBLIC ASSET 
MANAGEMENT) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Financial Services, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management)’] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 July, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31 July, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 


iii 
 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
16 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
40 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
41 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
42 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025   43 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the     
Recommendations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset 
Management)’ 
 
 46 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Yugma Malik Under Secretary 

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized by 
the Committee, present this Fourteenth Report on action taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, Public Enterprises and Investment & 
Public Asset Management). 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
06 December, 2024.  The Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were 
received from Department of Economic Affairs on behalf of Departments of Economic 
Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset 
Management on 28 February, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July, 
2025.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 1st Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, Public Enterprises 
and Investment & Public Asset Management) which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 06th December, 2024. 
 
1.2  The Action Taken Notes on behalf of Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Expenditure, Financial Services, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset 
Management were received from Department of Economic Affairs on 28th February, 2025.  
The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
12 recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12   
               (Total - 12) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
                        (Total - NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
                    (Total - NIL) 
 (Chapter- IV) 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
                    (Total - NIL) 
(Chapter- V) 

2 
 
1.3  The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
NATIONAL INVESTMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE FUND (NIIF) 
1.4 The Committee are informed that the National Investment Infrastructure Fund 
(NIIF) has become a well established fund management organisation and has developed 
a credible track record with operational funds in infrastructure, private markets, climate 
and growth equity. The Committee take note of NIIF’s first bilateral fund in the form of 
India Japan Fund (IJF) with Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) setup in 
2023. Also, the launch of a green credit fund - the US India Green Transition Fund 
(USIGF) setup with the objective to help lower the cost of capital and attract international 
private finance at scale to accelerate the deployment of green field renewable energy, 
battery storage, and emerging green technology projects in India is noteworthy. The 
Committee suggest that NIIF should explore leveraging innovative financing mechanisms 
such as blended finance to actively attract international private capital; deploy more 
innovative and ingenious means to accelerate India’s infrastructure development in a 
sustainable and financially sound manner; and further boost investor confidence. 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
“NIIF is in the process of setting up a green transition credit fund with a 
corpus of USD 2 billion with anchor investment from the government and the US 
International Development Finance Corporation. The US India Green Transition 
Fund (USIGF) is a blended finance product that envisages raising global 
commercial capital alongside anchor commitments from USDFC and the 
Government of India. NIIFL shall explore opportunities in blended finance for new 
and emerging sectors of the Indian economy. 
Innovative financing mechanisms and innovative and ingenious means to 
accelerate India’s infrastructure development in a sustainable and financially 
sound manner: 

3 
 
i. NIIF’s Ports and Logistics platform has deployed innovative strategies to 
create an integrated logistics ecosystem uniquely positioned to reduce supply 
chain management costs.  
ii. The Smart meter platform has been at the forefront of introducing this 
transformative technology across multiple states. 
iii. NIIF’s investments in Greenfield airports are designed with instruments to 
manage and mitigate investment risks effectively, ensuring long-term viability.  
iv. NIIF also pioneered the commitment to India’s largest single-location 
hyperscale data centre in partnership with Digital Edge, reflecting our forward-
looking approach to infrastructure development in the digital age. 
v. The India-Japan Fund (IJF) is envisaged to play an important role in the 
Resilient and Inclusive Supply Chain Enhancement (RISE) initiative by 
leveraging its local expertise to strengthen clean energy and mineral supply 
chains in India by facilitating collaboration between Japanese and Indian 
companies and co-investing with Japanese companies in India.” 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
Ο.Μ./File No 18/5/2024-DI dated 20.12.2024] 
 
1.6 The Committee applaud National Investment Infrastructure Fund’s (NIIF’s) 
shift towards sustainable and future-ready infrastructure development, particularly 
its adept use of blended finance models such as the US India Green Transition 
Fund (USIGF) and targeted investments in critical areas like logistics and digital 
utilities. To further strengthen its role in mobilizing capital into infrastructure and 
other key sectors of the Indian economy, the Committee would like NIIF to 
formulate a robust blended finance framework across emerging sectors, 
proactively invest in transformative cutting-edge technologies, and diversify its 
capital base beyond bilateral government funds by attracting broader global 
institutional investment. This may be underpinned by enhanced public disclosure 
of fund performance, project pipeline, job creation and projects in aspirational 
regions/districts. The Committee believe that through these actions and proactive 
investor engagement, NIIF will become a key partner in India’s green transition and 
overall development.  

4 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
INFLATION 
1.7 The Committee note that the Government has been taking various measures to 
control inflation, maintain consumer confidence and ensure economic stability. However, 
the Committee observe that inflation varies considerably across States, with some states 
like Odisha (6.3%) and Bihar (6.2%) experiencing higher rates than the national average 
of 4.6%. It has been submitted to the Committee that factors such as regional crop 
production; transportation, storage and handling costs; local consumption patterns; 
variations in fuel prices including taxes and subsidies and local factors such as 
differences in geographical terrains, supply chain disruptions, natural calamities, and 
regional policies contribute to these disparities. To address these issues, the Committee 
urge the Government to study and explore all possible ways and means in collaboration 
with State Governments to achieve more consistent inflation control across the country. 
 
1.8 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
 “ 
1. The Union Budget 2025-26 proposed measures to be implemented in 
collaboration with the State Governments, which could help to achieve more 
consistent inflation control across the country. These include: 
 
 
a. Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana in partnership with states for 
Developing Agri Districts Programme: This is proposed to be done through 
the convergence of existing schemes and specialized measures. The 
programme will cover 100 districts with low productivity, moderate crop 
intensity and below-average credit parameters. It aims to (i) enhance 
agricultural productivity, (ii) adopt crop diversification and sustainable 
agriculture practices, (iii) augment post-harvest storage at the panchayat 
and block level, (iv) improve irrigation facilities, and (v) facilitate availability 
of long-term and short-term credit.  
  
b. A comprehensive programme for vegetables and fruits: A comprehensive 
programme to promote production, efficient supplies, processing, and 

5 
 
remunerative prices for farmers is proposed in the Budget 2025-26 to be 
launched in partnership with States. Appropriate institutional mechanisms 
for implementation and participation of farmer producer organizations and 
cooperatives will be set up under the programme.   
 
2. Department of Consumer Aﬀairs monitors the daily retail and wholesale prices 
of selected essential food commodities, submitted by the 555 price monitoring 
centres that have been set up with Central assistance by the State 
Governments and UT Administrations across the country. The daily price 
trends are analysed for taking appropriate decisions such as release of stocks 
from the buﬀer, stock disclosure by stockholding entities, imposition of stock 
limits, changes in trade policy instruments like rationalisation of import duties, 
changes in import quota, restrictions on exports of the commodities, etc. 
3. In order to tackle the volatility in prices, government maintains buﬀer stock of 
pulses and onion for market interventions through calibrated release to 
moderate market prices. Part of the buffer stock of pulses is converted into 
dals for retail sale to the consumers at aﬀordable prices under the Bharat Dal 
brand. Similarly, atta and rice are distributed to retail consumers under Bharat 
brand at subsidized prices. Onion from the buﬀer was also released during 
September to December, 2024 in a targeted manner to moderate prices in high 
price consuming centres at wholesale markets and through retail outlets. This 
was targeted in States and cities where prevailing prices were higher than the 
all-India average and were rising in order to moderate the inter-State variations 
in prices and inflation.” 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M No. 5(3)/Ec.Dn./2025 dated 14.02.2025] 
 
  

6 
 
1.9 The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation has  stated               
inter-alia the following in their Press Release dated 12.06.2025:- 
 
“CONSUMER PRICE INDEX NUMBERS ON BASE 2012=100 FOR RURAL, 
URBAN AND COMBINED FOR THE MONTH OF MAY, 2025 
 
Key highlights: 
 
1. Headline Inflation: Year-on-year inflation rate based on All India 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the month of May, 2025 over May, 2024 is 
2.82% (Provisional). There is decline of 34 basis points in headline 
inflation of May, 2025 in comparison to April, 2025. It is the lowest year-
on-year inflation after February,2019.  
 
2. Food Inflation: Year-on-year inflation rate based on All India Consumer 
Food Price Index (CFPI) for the month of May, 2025 over May, 2024 is 
0.99% (Provisional). Corresponding inflation rate for rural and urban are 
0.95% and 0.96%, respectively. All India inflation rates for CPI(General) 
and CFPI over the last 13 months are shown below. A sharp decline of 79 
basis point is observed in food inflation in May, 2025 in comparison to 
April, 2025. The food inflation in May, 2025 is the lowest after October, 
2021. 


7 
 
 
3. The significant decline in headline inflation and food inflation during the 
month of May, 2025 is mainly attributed to decline in inflation of Pulses 
& products, Vegetables, Fruits, Cereals & products, Households goods 
& services, Sugar & confectionary and Egg and the favourable base 
effect. 
  
4. Rural Inflation: Significant decline in headline and food inflation in rural 
sector observed in May, 2025. The headline inflation is 2.59% 
(Provisional) in May, 2025 while the same was 2.92% in April, 2025. The 
CFPI based food inflation in rural sector is observed as 0.95% 
(Provisional) in May, 2025 in comparison to 1.85% in April, 2025.  
 
5. Urban Inflation: Significant decline from 3.36% in April, 2025 to 3.07% 
(Provisional) in May, 2025 is observed in headline inflation of urban 
sector. Sharp decline is also observed in food inflation from 1.64% in 
April, 2025 to 0.96% (Provisional) in May, 2025.  
 
6. Housing Inflation: Year-on-year Housing inflation rate for the month of 
May, 2025 is 3.16% (Provisional). Corresponding inflation rate for the 
month of April, 2025 was 3.06%. The housing index is compiled for urban 
sector only.  
 
7. Education Inflation: Year-on-year Education inflation rate for the month 
of May, 2025 is 4.12% (Provisional). Corresponding inflation rate for the 


8 
 
month of April, 2025 was 4.13%. It is combined education inflation for 
both rural and urban sector.  
 
8. Health Inflation: Year-on-year Health inflation rate for the month of May, 
2025 is 4.34% (Provisional). Corresponding inflation rate for the month 
of April, 2025 was 4.25%. It is combined health inflation for both rural and 
urban sector.  
 
9. Transport & Communication: Year-on-year Transport & communication 
inflation rate for the month of May, 2025 is 3.85%(Provisional). 
Corresponding inflation rate for the month of April, 2025 was 3.67%. It is 
combined inflation rate for both rural and urban sector.  
 
10. Fuel & light: Year-on-year Fuel & light inflation rate for the month of May, 
2025 is 2.78%(Provisional). Corresponding inflation rate for the month of 
April, 2025 was 2.92%. It is combined inflation rate for both rural and 
urban sector.  
 
11. Top five major states with high Year on Year inflation for the month of 
May, 2025 are shown in the graph below.  
 
 
 


9 
 
 
                                                                                                      ” 
 
1.10 The Committee acknowledge the encouraging moderation in overall CPI 
inflation to 2.82% in May, 2025, largely due to easing food prices, a trend also noted 
by the RBI in its recent Monetary Policy update of June, 2025.  The RBI projects CPI 
inflation for FY 2025-26 at 3.7% and has signalled confidence in the inflation 
trajectory by reducing the repo rate and adopting a neutral stance to support 
growth.  
However, the Committee are concerned to note that certain specific sectors, 
such as housing (3.16%), health (4.34%) and transport & communications (3.85%) 
are still facing persistent inflationary pressures. Furthermore, significant 


10 
 
disparities across regions remain a concern, with urban areas (3.07%) recording 
higher headline inflation than rural areas (2.59%), and certain States like Kerala 
(6.46%), Punjab (5.21%), Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh (erstwhile State of J&K) 
recording notably higher overall inflation rates compared to others like Telengana 
(0.55%). The Committee feel that interventions should be precisely tailored to the 
unique economic supply-side dynamics of these affected sectors and varied rural-
urban price trends. The Committee, therefore, stress the need for a granular 
approach, combined with broader structural reforms in coordination with State 
Governments, to align the budgetary and subsequent policy measures to achieve 
more equitable and stable price conditions across the country.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
ACCOUNT AGGREGATOR (AA) 
1.11 The Committee note that the Account Aggregator (AA) framework, developed by 
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is designed to facilitate the seamless transmission of 
financial information with explicit customer consent and allows Non-Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) acting as AAs to collect and share financial data from various 
Financial Information Providers (FIPs) such as banks, insurance companies, asset 
management firms etc. to Financial Information Users (FIUs). The Committee are of the 
opinion that the AA framework can help improve access to financial services and foster 
innovation in the financial sector. Hence, the Committee feel that AA framework should 
be scaled up and made more widespread along with enhanced security measures to 
prevent lapses of data breach. The process of data reconciliation of Small Savings 
Schemes should be expedited and after due assessment, the same may also be included 
as financial information under the AA framework. The Committee further recommend that 
efforts should be undertaken for integrating more FIPs and developing efficient means for 
monitoring and compliance of AA framework. 
1.12 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
“The Reserve Bank has issued the Account Aggregator Framework vide 
Master Direction - Non-Banking Financial Company - Account Aggregator 

11 
 
(Reserve Bank) Directions dated September 02, 2016. The Account Aggregator 
(AA) undertakes the business of retrieving or collecting information related to 
financial assets of a customer from the specified financial information providers 
(regulated entities under financial sector regulators, viz., RBI, SEBI, IRDA, 
PFRDA & GSTN) and aggregating/ consolidating the same and presenting it to 
the customers or specified financial information users. AA undertake this process 
based on an explicit consent of the customer.  
Presently, AA framework covers 19 items identified as ‘Financial 
Information’ which are available with Financial Information Providers (FIPs). 
The AA ecosystem has shown significant traction as at end November 
2024. The AA Framework had 571 Financial Information Users (FI-Us) and 147 
Financial Information Providers (FIPs) spread across different financial sector 
regulators resulting in approximately 238 crore successful consent based data 
transferred to FIUs, since launch. 
Further, to increase the coverage and scope of AA ecosystem, Reserve 
Bank has taken a number of measures like advising all Regulated Entities (REs) 
in October 2023 that REs joining the AA ecosystem as Financial Information User 
shall necessarily join as Financial Information Provider as well if they hold 
specified ‘Financial Information’ and fall under the definition of FIP. Further, with 
a view to facilitate cash flow-based lending to MSMEs, Goods and Services Tax 
Network (GSTN) has been included as a Financial Information Provider under 
Account Aggregator Framework. 
Further to increase the coverage and scope of AA ecosystem, Reserve 
Bank has taken a number of measures as under: 
1. Reserve Bank had launched Public Awareness Campaign under ‘RBI 
Kehta Hai’ initiative for the year 2023-24 which will be continued for the 
year 2024-25 also.   
2. AAs have been suggested to develop their web/ mobile applications in 
bilingual/ multilingual for ease of use. 

12 
 
3. With a view to further enhance the usage and coverage of AA system, 
RBI is engaged in enhancing the list of purposes/use cases for which 
data can be shared.  
The regulatory prescriptions on data blindness, explicit consent of the data 
owners, periodic IS Audit, cyber security, IT security, outsourcing, etc. are 
stipulated to prevent data breaches and they are dynamically aligned or new 
measures added to address any evolving concerns. 
The Reserve Bank is actively working towards putting in place a framework 
for recognising Self-Regulatory Organisation (SRO) for Account Aggregator 
Ecosystem (SRO-AA). The SRO-AA is expected to play a role in framing a code 
of conduct for member participants, promote fair competition in the ecosystem, 
develop standards in collaboration with participants and regulators to ensure fair 
usage of financial information, and establish clear standards of conduct for 
member participants etc. The formation of SRO-AA would aid in improving 
compliance culture among the participants of the AA ecosystem. Further, as part 
of supervisory process, the compliance standards of AA are monitored by RBI. 
Reserve Bank has apprised the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) 
vide  letter dated January 25, 2024, that the Bank is following principle-based 
approach under which a financial information may be considered for inclusion 
under the AA Framework provided: 
 such information represents the asset position of a customer and is 
available in electronic/digital format; technological and legal provisions/ 
enablement to share such information with the customer’s consent is 
available; and 
 concerned Department/Ministry of Government of India agrees to be the 
deemed regulator for this limited purpose of the AA Framework. The 
authority holding the data may be designated as Financial Information 
Provider under the AA Framework. 
Accordingly, DEA’s consent was requested for treating information in 
respect of small saving schemes as financial information under the AA 

13 
 
ecosystem. It was also requested to confirm whether various schemes under 
small savings comply with the criteria of said principle-based approach. 
In this regard, DEA vide letter dated June 14, 2024 has informed that the 
data reconciliation process of small savings schemes is being undertaken in 
Department of Posts and hence the matter related to inclusion of Small Savings 
Schemes as Financial Information in the AA Ecosystem may be considered after 
the completion of the data reconciliation.” 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  
O.M. No. 07/44/2024-Parl. dated 10.02.2025] 
 
1.13 The Committee recognize RBI’s measures to expand the Account 
Aggregator (AA) eco-system, including its ongoing efforts regarding data 
management, periodic audits, and the establishment of a Self-Regulatory 
Organization (SRO). To significantly enhance the AA framework’s utility and reach, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to make all out efforts for accelerated 
integration of more Financial Information Providers (FIPs) and time-bound 
inclusion of Small Savings Schemes (under data reconciliation for over a year) into 
the AA framwork. While urging RBI to expedite SRO’s establishment to foster self-
governance and ensure orderly growth, the Committee advise exploring a 
comprehensive AA ranking system, based on performance, compliance, data 
security etc. to enable continuous monitoring, evaluation and incentivize 
adherence to the highest operational and data security standards.  
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
CHANGES IN PROVISIONS FOR LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES 
1.14 The Committee note that the changes introduced by Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India’s (IRDAI’s) Master Circular on Life Insurance Products, 
2024, makes it possible to provide wider choices and flexibility to the customers to choose 
products/riders as per their needs and minimises policyholder grievances, enhances 
customer satisfaction and confidence. The Committee feel that the adjustments to the 
methodology for determining Special Surrender Value (SSV) and the shift in the policy 
acquisition and persistency model may affect agents’ commissions, especially if insurers 
adjust their distribution strategies or revise commission structures to reflect new policy 
designs which may reduce their commissions and affect their morale. Thus, the 
Committee are of the opinion that IRDAI should revisit the directions after consultation 
with the various affected stakeholders. 
1.15 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
 
“It is envisaged by IRDAI that due to the recent changes in regulatory 
framework, the life insurance products can be made more attractive and 
competitive, it can lead to increase in their sales, augmenting a sustainable 
revenue to insurance agents and intermediaries. Further, IRDAI has expressed 
that the insurer can decide commission payable to their Agents as per their Board 
approved policy subject to the limits specified in the IRDAI (Expenses of 
Management, including Commission, of Insurers) Regulations, 2024. 
  
Considering the broad objective and interest of policyholders including their 
reasonable expectations and the likely overall positive impact of these changes, 
the timelines for compliance of the changes in surrender value was extended by 
IRDAI till 31.12.2024. Accordingly, this Department is of the view that the outcome 
of the revised framework may be reviewed after one year.” 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  
O.M. No. 07/44/2024-Parl. dated 10.02.2025] 

15 
 
 
1.16 The Committee note the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India’s (IRDAI) efforts to reform life insurance products through the 
2024 Master Circular. However, the Committee remains concerned about the 
impact on insurance agents, particularly due to revised acquisition cost 
structures and surrender value calculations, which may affect commissions and 
morale. Consistent with the Ministry’s view on a one-year framework review, the 
Committee recommend that IRDAI must undertake a holistic and comprehensive 
impact assessment of these regulatory changes on all stakeholders, following 
due structured consultations with all concerned at the earliest. In addition, the 
Committee suggest instituting a robust mechanism for continuous monitoring 
and periodic review of the implementation to ensure regulatory objectives are 
met without undermining the ecosystem that supports insurance outreach and 
penetration. 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
   
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
DEMAND NO. 30 - DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS (DEA) 
The Committee upon scrutiny of Demand No. 30 relating to Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA) find significant variations between the Budget Estimates (BE) 
and Revised Estimates (RE). The Committee note that RE 2023-24 stood at Rs.28,417.13 
crore, an increase of Rs. 13,280.59 crore from BE 2023-24 and the current BE 2024-25 
has seen a steep increase of Rs. 69,494.27 crore from BE 2023-24 and stands at Rs. 
84,630.81 crore. The main reasons cited by DEA which led to increase in RE 2023-24 
from BE 2023-24 are that Rs.5,000 crore was provisioned at RE stage under ‘Transfer to 
Senior Citizen Welfare Fund’;Rs.1,050 crore was increased at RE stage under Interest 
Equalization Support for Lines of Credit under Indian Development and Economic 
Assistance Scheme (IDEAS) due to higher claims received from Export-Import Bank of 
India (EXIM Bank) and Rs.5,922.15 crore was increased under International Monetary 
Fund [Maintenance of Value (MOV) obligation] at RE stage. Further, the Committee are 
informed that the reasons for increased fund requirement in the current fiscal are that a 
provision of Rs.62,592.88 crore has been made under the Head ‘New Schemes’, to cater 
need of funds for additional capital expenditure on infrastructure projects/programs of the 
various Departments during the year and a provision of Rs. 8,051crore under the Head 
‘Gold Reserve Fund’ for smooth redemption of Sovereign Gold Bonds (SGBs). The 
Committee would like to emphasise upon the need for realistic preparation of estimates 
and efficient utilisation of allocated funds. The Department of Economic Affairs, being the 
nodal Department in formulation of the Budget is expected to observe the requisite 
financial norms and maintain fiscal prudence, while making budgetary allocations and 
thus must endeavour to be a role model for other Ministries/Departments in preparation 
of realistic estimates and optimal utilisation of funds sanctioned. The Committee would 
also like to highlight that it is of utmost importance that improved forecasting techniques 

17 
 
and foresight is deployed to ensure more realistic budget projections and reduce 
budgetary unpredictability. 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard it is stated that the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), as the 
nodal department in the formulation of the Budget, is committed to adhering to requisite 
financial norms and maintaining fiscal prudence while making budgetary allocations and 
endeavours to be a role model for other Ministries and Departments in preparing realistic 
estimates and optimally utilising sanctioned funds. 
Ensuring Realistic Estimates: 
  DEA is continuously trying to enhance its forecasting techniques to create more 
realistic budget estimates. DEA endeavours to ensure that Budget allocations are based 
on Realistic and detailed planning, considering past expenditure trends, latest economic 
developments and emerging trends, thereby reducing budgetary unpredictability. 
Efficient Utilisation of Funds: 
We have strengthened our monitoring and evaluation processes to ensure that 
allocated funds are utilised efficiently. This includes regular monitoring of expenditure 
progress Major Head/Scheme wise through Monthly Expenditure Report. In FY 2023-24, 
expenditure under DEA’s grant was 97.01% of sanctioned Budget. Further, it is stated 
that we will endeavour to strengthen our monitoring and evaluation processes to ensure 
that allocated funds are optimally utilised. 
The DEA acknowledges the Committee's observations and is dedicated to 
maintaining the highest standards of fiscal prudence and responsibility. By employing 
improved forecasting techniques and foresight, we aim to reduce budgetary 
unpredictability and set a benchmark for other Ministries and Departments. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M No. 5/15/2024-IF-I dated 30.12.2024] 
 
 

18 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
NATIONAL INVESTMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE FUND (NIIF) 
The Committee are informed that the National Investment Infrastructure Fund 
(NIIF) has become a well established fund management organisation and has developed 
a credible track record with operational funds in infrastructure, private markets, climate 
and growth equity. The Committee take note of NIIF’s first bilateral fund in the form of 
India Japan Fund (IJF) with Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) setup in 
2023. Also, the launch of a green credit fund - the US India Green Transition Fund 
(USIGF) setup with the objective to help lower the cost of capital and attract international 
private finance at scale to accelerate the deployment of green field renewable energy, 
battery storage, and emerging green technology projects in India is noteworthy. The 
Committee suggest that NIIF should explore leveraging innovative financing mechanisms 
such as blended finance to actively attract international private capital; deploy more 
innovative and ingenious means to accelerate India’s infrastructure development in a 
sustainable and financially sound manner; and further boost investor confidence. 
Reply of the Government 
NIIF is in the process of setting up a green transition credit fund with a corpus of 
USD 2 billion with anchor investment from the government and the US International 
Development Finance Corporation. The US India Green Transition Fund (USIGF) is a 
blended finance product that envisages raising global commercial capital alongside 
anchor commitments from USDFC and the Government of India. NIIFL shall explore 
opportunities in blended finance for new and emerging sectors of the Indian economy. 
Innovative financing mechanisms and innovative and ingenious means to 
accelerate India’s infrastructure development in a sustainable and financially sound 
manner: 
i. NIIF’s Ports and Logistics platform has deployed innovative strategies to create an 
integrated logistics ecosystem uniquely positioned to reduce supply chain 
management costs.  

19 
 
ii. The Smart meter platform has been at the forefront of introducing this 
transformative technology across multiple states. 
iii. NIIF’s investments in Greenfield airports are designed with instruments to manage 
and mitigate investment risks effectively, ensuring long-term viability.  
iv. NIIF also pioneered the commitment to India’s largest single-location hyperscale 
data centre in partnership with Digital Edge, reflecting our forward-looking 
approach to infrastructure development in the digital age. 
v. The India-Japan Fund (IJF) is envisaged to play an important role in the Resilient 
and Inclusive Supply Chain Enhancement (RISE) initiative by leveraging its local 
expertise to strengthen clean energy and mineral supply chains in India by 
facilitating collaboration between Japanese and Indian companies and co-
investing with Japanese companies in India. 
[Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs)  
Ο.Μ./File No 18/5/2024-DI dated 20.12.2024] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.6 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
INTEREST PAYMENTS 
The Committee note that budget estimates for interest payments on both gross 
and net basis have shown an increase over the years and for the current fiscal the BEs 
stand at Rs. 12,08,841.36 crore and Rs. 11,62,940.29 crore on gross and net basis 
respectively. The Committee are informed that the reduction of Rs. 7,446.92 crore in the 
Revised Estimates (RE) for 2023-24 are primarily on account of softening of yields of 
dated securities and lower volume of issuances of T- Bills. It is further informed that higher 
provision in BE 2024-25 has been made owing to increase in fixed incidence due to full 
year interest payment on securities issued in FY 2023-24 coupled with interest payment 
provision on fresh borrowing in FY 2024-25.The Committee feel given that the interest 
payment estimates are closely linked to market conditions; building budget buffer would 
allow the Government to respond swiftly and flexibly during any adversities that may arise 

20 
 
due to global macroeconomic and geopolitical developments. The Committee, thus, 
would like to emphasise that the Government needs to focus on more sustainable debt 
management practices to avoid long-term fiscal strain and effectively manage the 
Government’s interest payments while maintaining fiscal stability. 
Reply of the Government 
Interest payment is closely linked to prevailing market condition and Fiscal Deficit 
of the Government. The Government is following a broad path of fiscal consolidation to 
attain a level of Fiscal Deficit lower than 4.5 per cent of GDP by FY 2025-26. This in turn 
helped in reduction of Central Government Debt from 61.4 % of GDP in FY 2020-21 to 
56.8 % of GDP in FY 2024-25 BE. This consolidation broadly align with the committee’s 
recommendation also.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
File/Ο.Μ. No 9(1)-B(W&M)/2024 dated 14.01.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
DISINVESTMENT 
The Committee note the Government's decision of discontinuing from a target 
oriented and revenue-centric approach for disinvestment. The Committee are informed 
that though the Budget Estimate for disinvestment proceeds for FY 2023-24 was kept at 
Rs. 51,000 crore, there was no specific estimate for disinvestment receipts at revised 
estimate stage for FY 2023-24 as well as in the Budget of 2024-25. The Committee 
understand that this move comes on account of disinvestment being an ongoing process 
with timing and completion of transactions being contingent upon economic outlook, 
sectoral trends, market conditions, investor interest and administrative feasibility. With the 
discontinuation of disinvestment targets, the Committee would like to press upon the 
importance that strategic disinvestment holds in the country particularly in reducing the 
fiscal burden of the Government and promoting efficiency. The Committee hence urge 
the Ministry to ensure that disinvestment should not become any less of a priority and be 
carried out in the right spirit with the aim of enhancing operational efficiency and 
maximising long-term value for Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and optimising 
returns for the Government. 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observation of the committee is agreed to by DIPAM.  As informed to the 
Committee, calibrated disinvestment strategy is an integral part of the value creation 
process keeping the interests of minority shareholders in mind. Disinvestment is an 
ongoing process, and   inter-alia includes listing of CPSEs through Initial Public offering 
(IPO), further stake sale through the SEBI approved methods and encouraging the 
CPSEs to do the same for their subsidiaries. In the current financial year (as of December 
2024), the Department has realized Rs 8625 crores through various Disinvestment 
methods. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Investment & Public Asset Management  
O.M No. 3/1/2008.DD.II (Vol.IV)- Part (1) dated 13.01.2025.] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
INFLATION 
The Committee note that the Government has been taking various measures to 
control inflation, maintain consumer confidence and ensure economic stability. However, 
the Committee observe that inflation varies considerably across States, with some states 
like Odisha (6.3%) and Bihar (6.2%) experiencing higher rates than the national average 
of 4.6%. It has been submitted to the Committee that factors such as regional crop 
production; transportation, storage and handling costs; local consumption patterns; 
variations in fuel prices including taxes and subsidies and local factors such as 
differences in geographical terrains, supply chain disruptions, natural calamities, and 
regional policies contribute to these disparities. To address these issues, the Committee 
urge the Government to study and explore all possible ways and means in collaboration 
with State Governments to achieve more consistent inflation control across the country. 
Reply of the Government 
1. The Union Budget 2025-26 proposed measures to be implemented in collaboration 
with the State Governments, which could help to achieve more consistent inflation 
control across the country. These include: 
 

22 
 
a. Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana in partnership with states for 
Developing Agri Districts Programme: This is proposed to be done through the 
convergence of existing schemes and specialized measures. The programme will 
cover 100 districts with low productivity, moderate crop intensity and below-
average credit parameters. It aims to (i) enhance agricultural productivity, (ii) adopt 
crop diversification and sustainable agriculture practices, (iii) augment post-
harvest storage at the panchayat and block level, (iv) improve irrigation facilities, 
and (v) facilitate availability of long-term and short-term credit.  
  
b. A comprehensive programme for vegetables and fruits: A comprehensive 
programme to promote production, efficient supplies, processing, and 
remunerative prices for farmers is proposed in the Budget 2025-26 to be launched 
in partnership with States. Appropriate institutional mechanisms for implementation 
and participation of farmer producer organizations and cooperatives will be set up 
under the programme.   
2. Department of Consumer Aﬀairs monitors the daily retail and wholesale prices of 
selected essential food commodities, submitted by the 555 price monitoring centres 
that have been set up with Central assistance by the State Governments and UT 
Administrations across the country. The daily price trends are analysed for taking 
appropriate decisions such as release of stocks from the buﬀer, stock disclosure by 
stockholding entities, imposition of stock limits, changes in trade policy instruments 
like rationalisation of import duties, changes in import quota, restrictions on exports of 
the commodities, etc. 
3. In order to tackle the volatility in prices, government maintains buﬀer stock of pulses 
and onion for market interventions through calibrated release to moderate market 
prices. Part of the buffer stock of pulses is converted into dals for retail sale to the 
consumers at aﬀordable prices under the Bharat Dal brand. Similarly, atta and rice 
are distributed to retail consumers under Bharat brand at subsidized prices. Onion 
from the buﬀer was also released during September to December, 2024 in a targeted 
manner to moderate prices in high price consuming centres at wholesale markets and 
through retail outlets. This was targeted in States and cities where prevailing prices 

23 
 
were higher than the all-India average and were rising in order to moderate the inter-
State variations in prices and inflation. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M No. 5(3)/Ec.Dn./2025 dated 14.02.2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para Nos. 1.9 & 1.10 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 
The continued increased provisioning towards capital expenditure in the Budget 
i.e. Rs. 11,11,111 crore in the financial year 2024-25 is a noteworthy step towards 
fostering economic growth, job creation, and long-term productivity enhancement. The 
Committee believe that the expected impact of this allocation is significant as the capital 
expenditure covers both physical and social infrastructure and by investing in both i.e. 
physical infrastructure, such as transport and logistics and social infrastructure like health 
and education facilities will aid in achieving holistic and inclusive growth. The Committee 
appreciate the commitment to maintain fiscal discipline and be on the fiscal consolidation 
path. The Committee understand that this not only minimises the risk of crowding out 
private sector borrowing but will further attract private investment, thereby driving 
economic growth further and ensuring effective utilization of increased capital 
expenditure. The Committee desire that the allocated funds are efficiently utilised across 
quarters of the financial year with effective monitoring and evaluation of the projects along 
with ironing out of any inter Ministry/ State-Centre disputes/disagreements i.e. efficient 
co-ordination between all stakeholders should be ensured to avoid cost and time overruns 
and improve performance. The Committee are confident that the increased allocation for 
capital expenditure will enhance India’s global competitiveness and fastrack sustainable 
economic development. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government appreciates the Committee's recognition of the capital 
expenditure's importance in fostering growth, creating jobs, and boosting productivity. 
Measures have been put in place to ensure the effective and timely use of the allocated 

24 
 
funds. The focus on both physical and social infrastructure aims to support balanced and 
inclusive growth, while maintaining fiscal discipline to encourage private investment. 
These efforts are expected to strengthen economic development and enhance long-term 
competitiveness. Further, as no specific recommendations have been provided, no further 
action is required at this stage. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  
O.M No. 8/1/2024-Infra-Fin dated 31.12.2024] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
ATAL PENSION YOJANA (APY) 
The Committee note that one of the reasons for shortfall in utilization of allotted 
funds by Department of Financial Services for financial year 2023-24was that the 
persistency of subscribers remained lower under Atal Pension Yojana (APY) which 
resulted in savings of Rs.40 crore. The Committee further note that a large majority of 
subscribers (5,98,09,342 of the total subscribers which stands at 6,99,94,568 as on 7th 
October’2024) i.e. 85.44% are enrolled in the lowest pension slab of Rs.1,000while the 
higher slabs have significantly fewer participants. The Committee are of the opinion that 
sincere efforts must be made to bring more subscribers into the higher pension brackets 
and outreach and promotional activities with respect to enrolment, persistency and efforts 
in reducing pre-mature exits should be intensified. The Committee take note of the various 
measures being undertaken to promote and expand the outreach of the scheme but 
would like to highlight on the importance of leveraging partnerships with Central and State 
Governments which can play a crucial role in ensuring workers in schemes like 
MGNREGA, Self Help Groups, Asha workers, Anganwadi workers etc. are adequately 
covered under APY. Additionally, the Committee feel that use of technology, such as the 
eAPY platform, Fin-tech partnerships and Banking Correspondents (BCs) should be 
expanded to reach a larger audience, especially in rural and underserved areas. The 
Committee further recommend that initiatives taken by Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority (PFRDA), namely town hall meetings, media campaigns and 
digital platforms like ‘APY KI PATHSHALA’ need to be scaled up to ensure that funds 
allotted under APY are fully utilised, making the scheme a more inclusive tool for social 
security, especially for the informal sector. 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions/observations of the Committee are noted, and further, the 
following is submitted: 
1. The target groups are enrolled physically as well as digitally through the extensive 
network of branches of public sector banks, private sector banks, regional rural 
banks, small finance banks, payments banks, cooperative banks, Department of 
Posts. The monitoring is done with the support of State Level Bankers Committees 
(SLBCs)/ Union Territory Level Bankers' Committees (UTLBCs) in each state and 
Lead District Manager (LDM) in each district, who in turn not only utilize the 
individual and corporate BCs but equip them with vernacular scheme details and 
financial literacy sessions. 
2. A focused approach to enhance persistency has been adopted. Constant 
endeavours are made to continuously encourage the APY-SPs, 
SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs and the subscribers to ensure persistency of the accounts 
opened. The efforts are made through the medium of conferences, workshops and 
meetings organised with senior officials of banks, SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs, State 
Governments, RBI, NABARD, SRLMs, bankers, banking correspondents and by 
also calling registered mobile numbers of the APY subscribers through our 
dedicated call centre for informing the subscribers of the implications of non-
persistent accounts and the advantages of having a persistent account vis-à-vis 
the guaranteed pension and other benefits. 
3. Majority of the subscribers are from rural areas, and 45.34% of total subscribers 
belong to age group of 18-25. The subscribers are mostly from low-income 
households, migrant populations and men or women who may not have joined the 
workforce or are not in regular employment. Given that it is possible to upgrade 
the contribution for higher pension slabs subsequently, it is the constant endeavour 
to nudge the subscribers to enrol for higher guaranteed pension available (>1000). 
The same is impressed upon in all meetings and interactions with the APY Service 
Providers (APY-SPs) and SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs. Further, all efforts are being 
made to improve the scenario in all online meetings as well. 

26 
 
In this regard, the following actions/efforts were undertaken by the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA): 
1. Thirty-two APY Outreach programs were planned for the Financial Year 2024-25, 
marking an increase from the previous Financial Year. Out of the 32 planned 
programs, 30 were conducted as of 18-12-2024, in coordination with 
SLBCs/UTLBCs and LDMs of all districts of the state. These programs were 
attended by senior officials from PFRDA, banks, SLBCs, State Governments, RBI, 
NABARD, SRLM, bankers, banking correspondents, and others. During these 
programs, persistency, enrolments in higher pension slabs, and exits were 
discussed in detail, and banks were sensitized to address these issues. Further, 
in order to encourage the APY-SPs/SLBCs/UTLBCs/LDMs, various campaigns 
are organised to reward and recognise their efforts. The Committee’s suggestions 
on upscaling outreach have been noted. 
2. Performance review meetings were conducted with the Nodal Officers and 
SLBCs/UTLBCs on a regular basis wherein the progress of APY enrolments in 
their bank/state/UT was discussed. PFRDA guided the APY-SPs and shared new 
strategies and best practices of other banks with them. All possible support related 
to media content, training, MIS, etc., was provided to the Banks to ensure 
enrolments in higher pension slabs and bringing the non-persistent subscribers to 
persistent again. 
3. Mass-media campaigns in TV, Radio, Print, Social-media and theatres using 
regional languages for better publicity and awareness. 
4. Print advertisement on persistency was released this FY 2024-25 through DAVP. 
5. A specialised campaign called “Power to Persist” was launched to motivate the 
banks to improve their persistency levels. 
6. A specialised campaign called “Mission Upgrade” was launched to motivate the 
banks to enrol subscribers into higher pension slab and also upgrade the existing 
subscribers to higher pension slab. 
7. In the meetings with bankers, PFRDA is sensitising the bank officials on hand 
holding the subscribers who request to exit the scheme. 
8. Subscriber Awareness Programs in vernacular languages are being organized for 
APY subscribers and Banks through training agencies appointed by PFRDA and 

27 
 
CRA. In these programs importance of persistency and the benefits of higher 
pension slab are showcased/discussed. 
9. Efforts have been made to promote pension penetration within the target 
groups/population under schemes and programmes catering to skilling, training, 
employment generation, entrepreneurship, etc., by the concerned ministries such 
as M/o Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, M/o Social Justice and 
Empowerment, M/o Housing and Urban Affairs, M/o Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, M/o of Rural Development and M/o Labour & Employment. The scheme 
details have been shared for further dissemination to beneficiaries of various other 
schemes such as PM SVANidhi, UDYAM, skill trainees, etc. 
10. To host e-APY link on e-Shram portal for enablement of digital enrolment in APY, 
necessary efforts have been taken up with Ministry of Labour and Employment.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  
O.M. No. 07/44/2024-Parl. dated 10.02.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SERVICES CENTRES AUTHORITY (IFSCA) 
The Committee note that the International Financial Services Centres Authority 
(IFSCA) has taken significant steps in accelerating global sustainable capital flows by 
creating a conducive regulatory environment inspired by international best practices. In 
order to encourage the growth of Green Bonds, Social Bonds, Sustainability Bonds, 
Sustainability-linked Bonds and other labelled bonds (collectively referred to as “ESG 
labelled Debt Securities”), IFSCA has specified the necessary regulatory framework and 
has undertaken focused initiatives across three major sources of funding – Debt 
Securities, Loans, and Funds. Its initiatives, such as mandating IFSC Banking Units 
(IBUs) to allocate at least 5% percent of their loans to 
green/social/sustainable/sustainability-linked sectors/facilities, issuing circulars to 
promote consistency, comparability and reliability in disclosures concerning ESG 
schemes and listing billions in ESG-labelled debt securities on IFSC exchanges have led 
to the growth of Gujarat International Finance Tec-City(GIFT City)as a preferred 
jurisdiction for various activities related to sustainable finance. The Committee feel that 
by continuing to refine policies; strengthening regulatory framework and increasing 

28 
 
outreach, IFSCA can further bridge the climate finance gap and play a pivotal role in 
accelerating India’s transition to a sustainable and low-carbon economy. 
Reply of the Government 
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA)  
Steps taken to refine policies and strengthening regulatory framework 
The IFSCA in consultation with the Government has undertaken following initiatives 
recently towards refining existing policies / strengthening regulatory framework: 
i. ESG debt listing framework 
IFSCA has issued its IFSCA (Listing) Regulations, 2024, on August 30, 2024, 
wherein ESG debt listing framework has been updated by broadening the scope 
of ESG labelled debt securities by addition of other labelled debt securities as may 
be specified by IFSCA, in addition to existing “green”, “social”, “sustainability”, 
“sustainability linked” debt securities. 
 
ii. Principles to mitigate the Risk of Greenwashing in ESG labelled debt securities in 
the IFSC 
IFSCA has issued a circular dated November 21, 2024 on “Principles to Mitigate 
the Risk of Greenwashing in ESG Labelled Debt Securities in the IFSC”.  In line 
with the best-in-class global practices, the circular is principle-based with detailed 
guidance notes and illustrative examples for better understanding of the principles. 
The circular outlines five key principles that issuers of ESG-labelled debt securities 
shall adhere to: 
a. Being True to Label - Avoid misleading labels and terminology 
b. Screen the Green - Transparency in methodology for project selection and 
evaluation 
c. Walk the talk - Managing and tracking use of proceeds 
d. Overall Impact - Quantification of Negative Externalities 
e. Be alert - Monitoring and Disclose 
  
iii. Trading and Settlement of Sovereign Green Bonds (SGrBs) in IFSC 

29 
 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on August 29, 2024, has introduced a scheme for 
“Trading and Settlement of Sovereign Green Bonds in the International Financial 
Services Centre in India”, aimed at facilitating the trading and settlement of SGrBs 
in the IFSC. Subsequently, IFSCA vide circular dated September 24, 2024, has 
issued operating guidelines for the trading and settlement of SGrBs in IFSC. The 
said scheme is expected to increase the participation of foreign investors in the 
SGrBs issued by the RBI.  
 
In addition to the above, IFSCA has been active in promoting opportunities for 
sustainable finance through various delegation visits in other global jurisdictions. 
IFSCA also participates in the sector specific events that takes place in India to 
promote GIFT IFSC, as a jurisdiction to mobilize climate finance. Further, from time to 
time, IFSCA either directly or indirectly facilitate various events, conferences, 
roundtable, etc. in IFSC.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) 
File No. 3/3/EM/2020-PartII-Part(4) dated 08.01.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
ACCOUNT AGGREGATOR (AA) 
The Committee note that the Account Aggregator (AA) framework, developed by 
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is designed to facilitate the seamless transmission of 
financial information with explicit customer consent and allows Non-Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) acting as AAs to collect and share financial data from various 
Financial Information Providers (FIPs) such as banks, insurance companies, asset 
management firms etc. to Financial Information Users (FIUs). The Committee are of the 
opinion that the AA framework can help improve access to financial services and foster 
innovation in the financial sector. Hence, the Committee feel that AA framework should 
be scaled up and made more widespread along with enhanced security measures to 
prevent lapses of data breach. The process of data reconciliation of Small Savings 
Schemes should be expedited and after due assessment, the same may also be included 
as financial information under the AA framework. The Committee further recommend that 

30 
 
efforts should be undertaken for integrating more FIPs and developing efficient means for 
monitoring and compliance of AA framework. 
Reply of the Government 
The Reserve Bank has issued the Account Aggregator Framework vide Master 
Direction - Non-Banking Financial Company - Account Aggregator (Reserve Bank) 
Directions dated September 02, 2016. The Account Aggregator (AA) undertakes the 
business of retrieving or collecting information related to financial assets of a customer 
from the specified financial information providers (regulated entities under financial sector 
regulators, viz., RBI, SEBI, IRDA, PFRDA & GSTN) and aggregating/ consolidating the 
same and presenting it to the customers or specified financial information users. AA 
undertake this process based on an explicit consent of the customer.  
Presently, AA framework covers 19 items identified as ‘Financial Information’ 
which are available with Financial Information Providers (FIPs). 
The AA ecosystem has shown significant traction as at end November 2024. The 
AA Framework had 571 Financial Information Users (FI-Us) and 147 Financial 
Information Providers (FIPs) spread across different financial sector regulators resulting 
in approximately 238 crore successful consent based data transferred to FIUs, since 
launch. 
Further, to increase the coverage and scope of AA ecosystem, Reserve Bank has 
taken a number of measures like advising all Regulated Entities (REs) in October 2023 
that REs joining the AA ecosystem as Financial Information User shall necessarily join as 
Financial Information Provider as well if they hold specified ‘Financial Information’ and fall 
under the definition of FIP. Further, with a view to facilitate cash flow-based lending to 
MSMEs, Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN) has been included as a Financial 
Information Provider under Account Aggregator Framework. 
Further to increase the coverage and scope of AA ecosystem, Reserve Bank has 
taken a number of measures as under: 

31 
 
1. Reserve Bank had launched Public Awareness Campaign under ‘RBI Kehta 
Hai’ initiative for the year 2023-24 which will be continued for the year 2024-25 
also.   
2. AAs have been suggested to develop their web/ mobile applications in bilingual/ 
multilingual for ease of use. 
3. With a view to further enhance the usage and coverage of AA system, RBI is 
engaged in enhancing the list of purposes/use cases for which data can be 
shared.  
The regulatory prescriptions on data blindness, explicit consent of the data owners, 
periodic IS Audit, cyber security, IT security, outsourcing, etc. are stipulated to prevent 
data breaches and they are dynamically aligned or new measures added to address any 
evolving concerns. 
The Reserve Bank is actively working towards putting in place a framework for 
recognising Self-Regulatory Organisation (SRO) for Account Aggregator Ecosystem 
(SRO-AA). The SRO-AA is expected to play a role in framing a code of conduct for 
member participants, promote fair competition in the ecosystem, develop standards in 
collaboration with participants and regulators to ensure fair usage of financial information, 
and establish clear standards of conduct for member participants etc. The formation of 
SRO-AA would aid in improving compliance culture among the participants of the AA 
ecosystem. Further, as part of supervisory process, the compliance standards of AA are 
monitored by RBI. 
Reserve Bank has apprised the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) vide  letter 
dated January 25, 2024, that the Bank is following principle-based approach under which 
a financial information may be considered for inclusion under the AA Framework 
provided: 
 such information represents the asset position of a customer and is available in 
electronic/digital format; technological and legal provisions/ enablement to share 
such information with the customer’s consent is available; and 
 concerned Department/Ministry of Government of India agrees to be the deemed 
regulator for this limited purpose of the AA Framework. The authority holding the 

32 
 
data may be designated as Financial Information Provider under the AA 
Framework. 
Accordingly, DEA’s consent was requested for treating information in respect of 
small saving schemes as financial information under the AA ecosystem. It was also 
requested to confirm whether various schemes under small savings comply with the 
criteria of said principle-based approach. 
In this regard, DEA vide letter dated June 14, 2024 has informed that the data 
reconciliation process of small savings schemes is being undertaken in Department of 
Posts and hence the matter related to inclusion of Small Savings Schemes as Financial 
Information in the AA Ecosystem may be considered after the completion of the data 
reconciliation. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  
O.M. No. 07/44/2024-Parl. dated 10.02.2025] 
 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
MICRO, SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (MSMEs) 
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) are the backbone of India’s 
economy, contributing significantly to employment generation, innovation and the overall 
economic growth of the country. The Committee take note of the initiatives of the 
Government and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to support MSMEs in overcoming 
financial barriers which is crucial for their survival and growth through measures such as 
Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) and Unified Lending Interface (ULI), a 
recent RBI pilot programme. The Committee understand that TReDS enables MSMEs to 
access competitive financing by allowing multiple financiers to bid on their trade 
receivables and this competitive bidding results in lower interest rates, making financing 
more affordable. The Committee appreciate that the RBI has permitted all 
entities/institutions who undertake factoring business under Factoring Regulation Act, 
2011, as financiers in TReDS as this would result in better competitive bidding of trade 
receivables, ultimately translating to better interest rates. With respect to Unified Lending 

33 
 
Interface (ULI), the Committee understand that it facilitates seamless and efficient credit 
delivery by lenders for credit appraisal and integrates data from Central and State 
Governments (like land records), Milk Federation, Goods and Services Tax Network 
(GSTN), Account Aggregators (AA), banks, credit information companies and digital 
identity authorities (like Aadhaar), thereby facilitating easy access of credit to MSMEs. 
Consequent upon an encouraging performance during the pilot stage, the Committee 
desire that nationwide rollout of the ULI platform is expedited which would enable MSMEs 
to directly access ULI services through mobile and web applications instead of the current 
scenario wherein banks interface with ULI to process loan applications on behalf of 
MSMEs. The Committee feel that this initiative along with adequate and persistent 
information disseminated through various platforms, workshops and financial literacy 
campaign measures will benefit MSMEs in accessing credit and facilitate smoother 
lending to MSMEs. 
Reply of the Government 
Reserve Bank takes various steps to enhance the scope of entities undertaking 
Factoring transactions through TReDS. Subsequent to amendment to the Factoring 
Regulation Act, the Reserve Bank has issued requisite regulations pertaining to the 
manner of granting the certificate of registration (CoR) to companies which propose to 
undertake factoring business. In addition to NBFC-Factors, all non-deposit taking NBFC-
Investment and Credit Companies (ICCs) with asset size of ₹1,000 crore & above have 
been allowed to undertake factoring business, subject to satisfaction of certain conditions; 
and other NBFCs can undertake factoring business by seeking registration as NBFC-
Factor. Further, Reserve Bank has issued regulations on registration of assignment of 
receivables with Central Registry by TReDS entities, in case factoring transactions 
undertaken on TReDS platform. These steps have been taken to enhance the scope of 
entities eligible to undertake factoring transactions, including on TReDS platform in order 
to aid increased flow of credit to MSMEs. 
 
Since pilot launch in August 2023, Unified Lending Interface (ULI) has onboarded 
36 lenders, including banks, NBFCs, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), and District Central 
Cooperative Banks (DCCBs). It currently supports 12 loan journeys and offers over 55 
data services. Credit Information Companies (CICs) have not been onboarded onto the 

34 
 
Unified Lending Interface (ULI) at this stage. Furthermore, Aadhaar authentication is 
being facilitated through Data Service Provider. 
  
The scope of ULI is expanding. A broader range of loan products, more data 
providers, and a wider array of lenders are being included. In addition, along with 
Business-to-Business (B2B) model (at present) to a Business-to-Customer (B2C) model 
is also envisaged, which will allow access to frictionless credit to customer. The platform 
is expected to undergo further scaling and enhancements to enrich its features. Further, 
a comprehensive awareness campaign is envisaged across various media channels to 
create awareness regarding ULI and promote the same, with the aim to ensure its 
widespread adoption among stakeholders and the public at large. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
O.M. No. 07/44/2024-Parl. dated 10.02.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
The Committee are concerned about the rising risk of cyber fraud with the 
continuous rise in digital transactions. The Committee take note of the various measures 
being undertaken to combat this growing threat by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and 
the Government through several measures such as strict guidelines to implement secure 
coding; multi-factor authentication; regular testing; secure data transmission; timely 
patching of vulnerabilities; establishment of various agencies such as Cyber Security and 
IT Examination (CSITE) Cell, Central Payments Fraud Information Registry (CPFIR), 
Cyber Fraud Mitigation Centre (CFMC); implementing various measures to protect the 
integrity of data and promoting cyber-crime awareness through various modes among the 
masses to help empower customers to protect themselves from fraud. The Committee 
feel that while these measures are vital, cyber security needs to be taken up as a priority 
with risk mitigation plan; enhanced security and awareness measures to stay a step 
ahead of the exponentially rising and innovative ways of duping through cyber crimes. 
The Committee are of the opinion that expanding the reach of public awareness 
campaigns, especially in regional languages may increase the impact of these initiatives. 
Further, creating robust and resilient state of the art technology mechanisms for data-
sharing and cross-sector coordination between various agencies may assist in 

35 
 
safeguarding against evolving threats in the digital space and ensure faster detection and 
response to cybercrimes. 
Reply of the Government 
To create public awareness regarding cybercrimes, the Government and the 
Reserve Bank of India take various measures which inter-alia include: 
 
 On the event of “World Consumer Rights Day” on March 15, 2022, 2023 and 2024 
all RBI Ombudsmen interacted with the local/ regional multimedia channels 
(including regional channels of Doordarshan) in their respective regions, covering 
a wide range of areas such as Frequently Asked Questions on RB-IOS, 2021, 
Charter of Customer Rights, safe digital banking practices, etc. in order to ensure 
deeper and focused percolation of the financial consumer awareness on safe 
banking, RBI’s alternate grievance redress avenues and extant regulations for 
protection of consumer interests. The event was undertaken in English, Hindi and 
vernacular languages and was aired on Doordarshan, Radio and various other 
local private TV channels.   
 RBI has published booklets on BE(A)WARE (available in English, Hindi and 11 
regional languages) and Raju and the Forty Thieves (available in English, Hindi 
and 11 regional languages) covering the modus operandi of frauds and the way to 
escape/ avoid getting trapped by fraudsters and placed on its Website for use by 
members of public and the REs of RBI.  These are also distributed in physical 
programmes conducted by Regional Offices of RBI Ombudsmen.  
 Further, RBI has, on a macro level has taken various initiatives for creating public 
awareness such as: 
a. Making customer aware of RBI instructions on frauds in electronic banking 
transactions limiting the liability of customers in fraudulent electronic 
banking transactions;  
b. Making customer aware of the RB-IOS as an integrated ombudsman 
scheme for all the customers of digital financial services offered by entities 
regulated by RBI; 
c. A multi-media campaign on RB-IOS, 2021 is being carried out at Pan-India 
level;  

36 
 
d. Campaigns on Safe Digital Banking focusing on UPI frauds, impersonation 
frauds, parcel scams and AEPS frauds are also being carried out; 
e. Nation-wide SMS campaigns on various consumer protection themes. 
All these campaigns are aired on Doordarshan and All India Radio, and in other 
national/local dailies to help in reaching the rural areas. These campaigns also 
form a part of the popular TV series “Kaun Banega Crorepati”, which is widely 
watched by public in rural areas. 
 Ombudsman offices carry out Town-hall meetings and Awareness programmes on 
various issues including digital and online frauds related aspects in the areas under 
their jurisdiction, including the rural areas.  
 Awareness is created by participation in major festivals/events such as Rath Yatra 
in Puri, and various exhibitions held in the states etc. RBI’s Regional offices were 
further advised to participate in similar campaigns in regional and state level. 
 To provide efficient and effective redress to victims of cyber frauds, common public 
are made aware of aspects such as Reserve Bank – Integrated Ombudsman 
Scheme, 2021 (RB-IOS), RBI’s circular on Limiting Liability of Customers in 
Unauthorised Electronic Banking Transactions through advertisements and 
campaigns. 
 A Contact Centre with toll free number 14448 also started functioning to provide 
information / clarifications to the public regarding the Alternate Grievance Redress 
(AGR) mechanism of RBI, guide complainants in filing of complaints, as well as for 
obtaining the status of complaints already filed with the Reserve Bank. The contact 
centre with Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS) is available 24x7, while the 
facility to connect to Contact Centre personnel is available from Monday to Friday 
except National Holidays, between 8:00 AM to 10:00 PM for English, Hindi and ten 
regional languages (Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, 
Odia, Punjabi, Telugu and Tamil). 
 Further, Department for Payment and Settlement Systems of RBI, vide circular 
DPSS.CO.OD.No.1934/06.08.005/2019-20 dated June 22, 2020 has advised all 
authorized payment systems operators and participants (banks and non-banks) to 
undertake targeted multi-lingual campaigns by way of SMSs, advertisements in 

37 
 
print and visual media, etc., to educate their users on safe and secure use of digital 
payments. 
 In April 2024, RBI in coordination with Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre 
(I4C), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) organized a Workshop for Law Enforcement 
Agencies (LEAs) and banks on the theme “Cyber Financial Frauds: Challenges 
and Prevention” in Mumbai. The Workshop was attended by senior officials from 
RBI, its regulated entities, as well as Law Enforcement Agencies of various states. 
The workshop facilitated robust deliberations and interactive discussions among 
all participants, enhancing understanding and forging strategies to combat cyber 
financial frauds effectively. Various awareness related booklets covering the 
modus operandi of frauds were also distributed to the participants for further 
circulation and enhancement of awareness on cyber financial frauds. 
 The Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (14C), Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA) has launched a 'Suspect Registry'. This registry has been developed in 
collaboration with the Banks and Financial Institutions and is designed to store and 
share identifiers of cybercriminals. Participant entities contributing to the Suspect 
Registry can use this data to verify the credentials of individuals seeking to open 
new accounts or avail of financial services such as loans, pension plans, and other 
offerings, and monitor fraudulent transactions. During the month of September 
2024, State Bank of India were able to decline more than 4 lakh suspicious debit 
transactions, having 80198 unique customers, accounts and the amount involved 
in these transactions to the tune of Rs. 1120.35 crores. Similarly, ICICI Bank had 
declined the 1657 transactions against featured accounts which has resulted in 
preventing fraudulent proceeds to the tune of Rs. 38.97 Crores. 
 The Department of Financial Services (DFS) regularly conducts meetings with 
senior officers responsible for cybersecurity from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA), and Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) to evaluate their 
preparedness in countering cyber threats, discuss cybersecurity issues, and 
address vulnerabilities within the financial ecosystem. In addition to these 
engagements, DFS undertakes various initiatives to raise awareness about 
cybersecurity threats and prevent cyber incidents. To enhance the awareness of 

38 
 
the citizens, DFS has also created a dedicated section on its website to spread 
awareness about cybercrimes. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
O.M. No. 07/44/2024-Parl. dated 10.02.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
CHANGES IN PROVISIONS FOR LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES 
The Committee note that the changes introduced by Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India’s (IRDAI’s) Master Circular on Life Insurance Products, 
2024, makes it possible to provide wider choices and flexibility to the customers to choose 
products/riders as per their needs and minimises policyholder grievances, enhances 
customer satisfaction and confidence. The Committee feel that the adjustments to the 
methodology for determining Special Surrender Value (SSV) and the shift in the policy 
acquisition and persistency model may affect agents’ commissions, especially if insurers 
adjust their distribution strategies or revise commission structures to reflect new policy 
designs which may reduce their commissions and affect their morale. Thus, the 
Committee are of the opinion that IRDAI should revisit the directions after consultation 
with the various affected stakeholders. 
Reply of the Government 
It is envisaged by IRDAI that due to the recent changes in regulatory framework, 
the life insurance products can be made more attractive and competitive, it can lead to 
increase in their sales, augmenting a sustainable revenue to insurance agents and 
intermediaries. Further, IRDAI has expressed that the insurer can decide commission 
payable to their Agents as per their Board approved policy subject to the limits specified 
in the IRDAI (Expenses of Management, including Commission, of Insurers) Regulations, 
2024. 
  
Considering the broad objective and interest of policyholders including their reasonable 
expectations and the likely overall positive impact of these changes, the timelines for 
compliance of the changes in surrender value was extended by IRDAI till 31.12.2024. 

39 
 
Accordingly, this Department is of the view that the outcome of the revised framework 
may be reviewed after one year. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  
O.M. No. 07/44/2024-Parl. dated 10.02.2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I) 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER - V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES BY THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                              
 
  

43 
 
ANNEXURE 
 Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). The 
Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 hrs in Committee 
Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
 

44 
 
PART I 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance 

45 
 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and Investment 
and Public Asset Management). 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken Reports 
and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * 
  

46 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,  
EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL SERVICES, PUBLIC ENTERPRISES & INVESTMENT 
AND PUBLIC ASSET MANAGEMENT). 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
12  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 
12) 
12 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies  
 
 
NIL -- 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
 
NIL -- 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
 
* * * 