 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
  (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)] 
  
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 20 

ii 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue)] 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
15 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
36 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
37 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
39 
                             APPENDICES   
Appendix-I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025 40 
Appendix-II Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Manish Kumar Committee Officer 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Twentieth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department Revenue).  
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
19 March, 2025. The Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were 
received from the Ministry of Finance (Department Revenue) on 04 July, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July 
2025.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025      
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 19 th March, 2025. The Report contained 10 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
 1.2  Action taken replies in respect of all the 10 Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) on 04th July, 2025. The replies have been analyzed and categorized as 
follows:  
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 
       Total - 09 
(Chapter- II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
                  Total - Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 6 
       Total - 01 
(Chapter -IV) 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. Nil                 
Total - Nil  
(Chapter- V) 
 
 
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of its presentation.  
1.4  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
GSTAT 
1.5 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that The GST Appellate Tribunal (GSTAT) is the 
Appellate Authority established under the Central Goods and Services Tax 
Act, 2017, to hear various appeals under the said Act and the respective 
State/Union Territories GST Acts against the orders of the first appellate 
authority. It consists of a Principal Bench and various State Benches. As per 
the approval of the GST Council, the Government has notified the Principal 
Bench, to be located at New Delhi, and 31 State Benches at various 
locations across the country. The Committee further note that the Tribunal 
will ensure swift, fair, judicious and effective resolution to GST disputes, 
besides significantly reducing the burden on higher courts. It is also 
envisaged that the establishment of the GSTAT would further enhance the 
effectiveness of the GST system in India and foster a more transparent and 
efficient tax environment in the country. However, the Committee find that 
the GSTAT is yet to be operationalised. In regard to progress of work, the 
Ministry has submitted that the constitution of the Principal Bench and State 
Benches of GSTAT has been notified on 31.07.2024, with the President's 
appointment notified on 20.05.2024. Interviews for members are in progress, 
and 953 subordinate staff positions have been created with appointments 
underway. Recruitment rules for Group 'C' have been notified on 
21.06.2024, while those for Group A and B are in progress. The jurisdiction 
of State Benches was notified on 26.11.2024. The Department has also 
assured that hearing of cases will start very soon. The Committee 
acknowledge that numerous considerations, infrastructure developments, 
and formalities need to be addressed before the operationalisation of the 
Tribunal. Nonetheless, given the time that has elapsed since the notification 
for its inception, the Committee recommend that utmost efforts be made to 
expedite and complete the remaining work related to GSTAT, ensuring it is 
operationalised at the earliest so that the envisaged benefits can be reaped 
without any further delay.” 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
have submitted as follows: 
Status of GST Appellate Tribunal 
The Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunal (GSTAT) is constituted 
under Section 109 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (CGST 
Act), which provides for constitution of the GSTAT as the second appellate 

3 
 
authority within the GST framework. The process of original adjudication as 
well as the first appeal happens through individual officers under the Act but 
the second appeal against the orders of the first appellate authorities under 
Central as well as State tax administration lies with the GSTAT constituted 
under the CGST Act. GSTAT has been provided the responsibility to hear 
appeals under all the four GST laws passed by Central as well as State 
officers. Therefore, this is the first forum at which the adjudication process 
converges under all GST laws and across all tax administrations.  
 
Notifications have been issued for the constitution of the Principal Bench and 
31 State Benches of the GSTAT (at 46 locations including Principal Bench) 
vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 3048(E) dated 31.07.2024. A separate 
notification has also been issued specifying the jurisdiction of the said 
Benches and / or the Sittings associated with the said Benches vide Gazette 
Notification No. S.O. 5063(E) dated 26.11.2024 & corrigendum Notification 
dated 29.11.2024.  
  
Appointment of President and Members 
The Search-cum Selection Committee for selection of Members of GST 
Appellate Tribunal except Technical Member (State) of a State Bench under 
the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Sh. Justice Dipankar Datta, Judge, Supreme 
Court of India was constituted vide Department of Revenue’s O.M. dated 5th 
July 2024 which carried out the personal interaction of the candidates for 
appointment.   
  
However, since some of the Members of the ScSC who took the interactions 
demitted office on being appointed to other positions, the Committee could 
not finalise the names to be recommended for appointment and hence the 
Committee was re-constituted under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Mr. 
Justice M.M. Sundresh, Judge, Supreme Court of India vide Department of 
Revenue’s O.M. dated 24th April 2025. In view of the fact that there are new 
Members of the Committee, the Committee decided to conduct personal 
interactions with a shortlist of candidates to assess their suitability. The 
process of personnel interaction was carried out and completed by the 
Committee till 30.05.2025. 
  
With respect to the appointment of Technical Member (State) for the State 
Benches, it is the concerned State Governments under whose jurisdiction 
the bench lies which is entrusted with the responsibility to constitute the 
Search cum Selection Committee for selection of Members under the 
Chairmanship of the respective Chief Justice of that State. Till date, the 
recommendations have been received from Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat, 
Bihar and Maharashtra/Goa, while the process for other states is under 
progress.  
   
Appointment of Supporting Staffs 
Total of 953 posts for supporting staff have been approved to be appointed 
in the GSTAT. One time relaxation has been obtained from the Union Public 
Service Commission (UPSC) to fill the posts through deputation to start the 
initial functioning of the Tribunal. Accordingly, 105 appointments have been 
made at various benches for 2/3 years and the staffs have already started 

4 
 
to join GSTAT. The Principal Bench is staffed with Registrar, Assistant 
Registrar, personal staffs of the President and some other staffs at various 
levels.   
  
The power to frame the Recruitment Rules (RRs) in respect of Group “C” 
post lies with the Administrative Ministry. Accordingly, the RRs for the 5 (five) 
Group “C” posts viz, Stenographer Grade II, Upper Division Clerk, Lower 
Division Clerk, Staffs Car Driver and Multi-Tasking Staff was notified vide 
Gazette Notification G.R.R. 340(E) dated 21.06.2024. 
  
The Appointing Authority, Disciplinary Authority and Appellate Authority in 
the GSTAT for imposing the penalties under the Rule 11 of the Central Civil 
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 was notified vide 
Gazette Notification G.S.R. 454(E) dated 28.07.2024. 
  
Preparation of reservation rosters and obtaining of NOC/NAC from the 
Surplus Cell, DoPT are required before sending requisition from Staffs 
Selection Commission. The reservation roster has been prepared in 
consultation with the Liaison Officers and the process of obtaining the 
NOC/NAC from the Surplus Cell, DoPT is under progress. 
  
RRs for the Group “A” and Group “B” are to be framed in consultation with 
the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) and Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) and the present status are as below:  
a. 8 (Eight) RRs viz, Financial Advisor, Deputy Registrar, Assistant 
Registrar, Principal Private Secretary, Senior Private Secretary, Private 
Secretary, Assistant GSTAT and Stenographer Grade I has been finalised 
by the UPSC/DoPT. The same are undergoing legal vetting.  
b. 4 (Four) RRs viz, Registrar, Joint Register, Court Officer and Legal 
Assistant are being reviewed by the UPSC.  
c. 2 (Two) RRs viz, Accounts Officer and Senior Accountant are being 
reviewed by the DoPT were returned to DoR and have been sent to DoE for 
re-designating the names of the posts. 
  
Software Portal and IT Infrastructure for GSTAT 
GSTAT will be paperless tribunal from day one. E-courts software module 
has been developed by NIC in collaboration with GSTN. UAT has been 
completed. It is expected to rolled on a pilot basis for Principal Bench shortly. 
Tender for IT infrastructure of GSTAT (servers, VC facility etc) has been 
floated by GSTN. Vendor has been selected. Installation would be taken up 
along with physical infrastructure in each of the locations. 
Physical Infrastructure of GSTAT 
Process of identification of buildings of State Benches on rental basis in 45 
locations across the country is progressing well. Out of these, the proposals 
of 36 locations have been received and examined. 20 proposals have been 
approved by the IFU for renting and 8 proposals are under examination of 
DoR/IFU/GST Zones.  
 
Principal Bench is currently located temporarily in a well-furnished 10,000 
SFT office in new Delhi. President and his Staff are operating from the said 
office. Permanent office space with approximately 20,000 SFT has been 
identified in New Delhi and mapping being finalised.  

5 
 
 
Rules for Conduct of Business 
Rules for conduct of business of GSTAT has been notified vide G.S.R. 
256(E) dated 24.04.2025. Anti-profiteering cases have been assigned to the 
Principal Bench.” 
 
1.7 The Committee note developments in operationalising the Goods and 
Services Tax Appellate Tribunal (GSTAT) but remain concerned it is not fully 
operational nationwide. Significant delays persist in appointment of Members, 
particularly Technical Members (State), with recommendations received from 
only a few States, namely Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat, Bihar, and 
Maharashtra/Goa. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to actively 
pursue and coordinate with the remaining State Governments to expedite the 
constitution of Search-cum-Selection Committees and the forwarding of 
recommendations, to make benches functional without further delay. While 
initial support staff appointments on deputation are a positive ad hoc measure, 
the Committee emphasize the need for parallel, regular recruitment for long-
term stability and efficiency. Further, the Committee note that a permanent 
office space of approximately 20,000 square feet for the Principal Bench has 
been identified in New Delhi. While temporary operations have begun from an 
interim facility, the Committee desire that concerted efforts are needed for its 
early development to realize GSTAT’s full benefits. The Committee would like to 
re-emphasise that the persistent delays in Goods and Services Tax Appellate 
Tribunal (GSTAT)’s full functionality adversely impacts the larger GST 
ecosystem, resulting in prolonged litigation, overburdening of High Courts, and 
denial of timely relief to taxpayers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should adopt a time-bound approach to complete all remaining 
formalities. 
 
 
Recommendation No.6 
Bifurcation of Personal Income Tax Data 
 
1.8  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“During the deliberations of the Committee with the Department, it emerged 
that at present, Personal Income Tax (PIT) also includes about Rs. 1.5 lakh 
crore of business (non-corporate) income apart from individual income. The 
Committee observe that there have been instances when concerns have 
been raised from various quarters that the collection of Personal Income Tax 

6 
 
(PIT) in the country has surpassed Corporation Tax as PIT may not 
accurately reflect the true picture. The Committee believe that ideally, there 
should be separate data for Business Income and Individual Income for 
better analysis and understanding of income patterns in the country. This 
would also help in formulating targeted tax policies, identifying areas where 
tax evasion might be occurring, and addressing the peculiar needs and 
challenges of individuals and businesses separately. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that ways and means should be explored to 
segregate the data of Personal Income Tax (PIT) as early as possible. It is 
needless to emphasize that the details of all concrete efforts made in this 
regard will be shared with the Committee when furnishing Action Taken 
Notes.” 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have 
submitted as follows: 
“The Direct Taxes accruing to the Union Government comprise of 
Corporation Tax and Taxes on Income. The Receipt Budget which is part of 
the Annual Budget contains the following classification for collections from 
Direct Taxes:  
a. Corporate Income Tax (CIT): This is a tax levied on the income of 
Companies under the Income-tax Act, 1961.  
b. Personal Income Tax (PIT): This is a tax on the income of Individuals, 
Hindu Undivided Families (HUF), firms (including Limited Liability 
Partnerships), Association of Persons/Body of Individuals (AOP/BOI), 
Trusts, Cooperative Society, Local Authority and Artificial Juridical Person, 
etc. other than Companies, under the Income-tax Act, 1961.  
 2. Companies paying Corporate Income Tax (CIT) file ITR-6, while 
Taxpayers who fall within the ambit of Taxes on Income (PIT) file ITR-1, ITR-
2, ITR-3, ITR-4 and ITR-5. Within these taxpayers, Individuals with no 
business income file ITR-1 and ITR-2, while Individuals with business 
income (non-Corporate) file ITR-3 and ITR-4. Further, ITR-5 is filed by 
persons other than individuals and companies (including firms).  
3. This data for non-corporate business income captured separately, 
combined with data of direct taxes paid by Corporates through ITR-6 will 
provide an accurate picture of data for Business Income and Individual 
income.  
 4.       Presently, taxpayers are segregated into two categories; 
Corporate taxpayers (these are having business income as one of the 
constituents of the total income). Taxes paid by these taxpayers are 
categorized as Corporate Income Tax (CIT). 
Non-corporate tax payers and taxes paid by these taxpayers are categorized 
as Personal Income Tax (PIT) 
The non-corporate taxpayers can be further segregated into two 
categories based on the ITR forms: 
    Non-corporate taxpayer having business income as one of the 
constituents of the total income (it includes income for non-corporate such 
as individual/HUF, firm/LLP, AOP/BOI etc.) (ITR-3, 4 and 5) 
Non-corporate taxpayer not having business income (ITR-1, 2 & 7). 
 Further details of income-tax can be segregated on the basis of type of 
Income-tax form e.g.ITR-1, ITR-2, ITR-3, ITR-4, ITR-5, ITR-6 and ITR-7. 

7 
 
“However, head-wise segregation of income-tax (e.g. Business and 
Profession, Capital Gain, Salary, House Property, Other sources) is not 
feasible as Income-tax return forms are not structured to collect tax details 
head-wise.” 
 
1.10 The Committee find the reply of the Ministry regarding the disaggregation 
of income data to be less than satisfactory, as it does not adequately address 
the fundamental intent behind the recommendation. This disaggregation is vital 
for a clearer understanding of income patterns across individuals and non-
corporate businesses. While the objective was not to prescribe a specific 
methodology, it is essential to leverage available digital systems and structured 
data for generating more meaningful classifications. Given that all income-tax 
data is now computerized, the Committee believe that there exists significant 
scope to analyze and generate reports that reflect a comprehensive picture of 
income sources. The Committee reiterate their recommendation and desire the 
Ministry to sincerely explore avenues and mechanisms to segregate PIT data. 
The Committee expect the Ministry to furnish a detailed action plan, including 
specific milestones and a timeline for implementation in the Action Taken 
Statement. 
 
Recommendation No.7 
Tax Arrears 
 
1.11  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that there are huge cumulative tax arrears of Rs. 
48,73,028 crore, including Rs. 43,07,201 crore pertaining to Direct Taxes 
(upto 14.02.2025) and Rs. 5,65,827 crore to Indirect Taxes (upto Dec. 2024). 
The Committee also find that in respect of Direct Taxes, Rs. 10,55,906 crore 
tax arrears are pending for five or more years. The Committee has been 
given to understand that some of the arrears date back even to the mid-
1990s. The Committee further note that as per tax authorities, out of Rs. 
43,07,201 crore arrears, Rs. 28,95,851 crore which comes to 67%, is difficult 
to collect. The Committee also find that a lot of this demand arrear is also 
fictitious. Before the digitisation of processes, a manual register system was 
in place, which did not account for interest. However, the current system now 
calculates interest annually. Since income tax penalty is very heavy, every 
year of delay will keep on adding to the demand, which is in any case 
remains non-collectible. The Committee express their concern over the 
present scenario and believe that there is a pressing need to review the tax 
assessment system to make it more efficient in collection of taxes, keeping 
in view the ground realities. The Committee are of the view that while 
genuine demands should be strictly collected, the Tax Authorities should 
also undertake a thorough introspection of the existing tax assessment 
system and remain sensitive to the hardships faced by honest taxpayers due 

8 
 
to erroneous or inflated tax demands. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that, since all the tax records have been digitized, it is high time 
to take decisive interventions, including writing off demands/ imposing 
moratoriums, to reduce and trueing up the huge backlog of demand arrears 
in a time-bound manner.” 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
have submitted as follows: 
“CBIC 
 The Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC), vide 
Circular No. 1081/02/2022-CX dated 19.01.2022, has issued 
comprehensive guidelines to the field formations regarding the recovery 
and write-off of arrears related to Indirect Taxes, including Central 
Excise, Service Tax, and Customs. These guidelines provide a structured 
framework for classification of arrears based on their recoverability, 
initiation of appropriate recovery action, and periodic review of the arrear 
cases. 
 As per the Circular, arrears have been categorized into 
recoverable and non-recoverable demands, with further sub-
categorization of non-recoverable demands (e.g., assessee not 
traceable, units closed, liquidation/ bankruptcy, etc.), for effective action. 
The Circular also empowers the jurisdictional authorities to recommend 
write-off of irrecoverable demands. Accordingly, field formations are 
undertaking sustained efforts for recovery of recoverable arrears and 
processing of non-recoverable cases for write-off, wherever justified. 
 The matter is under continuous review and appropriate measures 
are being taken to reduce the pendency of arrears. 
CBDT 
            Active coordination has been carried out with the Assessing 
Officers of various Pr. CCIT Regions, to ensure that the Recoverability 
Status of High Value Demands (i.e. Demands greater than Rs. 1 Crores) 
are correctly marked in the Demand Recovery Module of Income Tax 
Business Applications (ITBA). 
2.    Due to these efforts, the Net Collectible Demand has been reduced 
from Rs 33,75,763 Cr. out of total Outstanding demand of Rs. 41,65,064 
Cr. (as on 30.06.2024) to Rs. 13,47,631 Crores out of the Total 
Outstanding Demand of Rs.48,17,763 Crores (as on 31.03.2025). This 
means that during the period (30.06.2024 to 31.03.2025), the Net 
Collectible Demand has been reduced by Rs.20,28,132 Crores. 
3.   Out of the demands uploaded from manual registers during the 
process of Digitisation, it has been found that certain entries that appear 
to be duplicate have been uploaded by the AOs. Since these demands 
are not verifiable on the system, a letter has been addressed to all the 
Pr. CCIT's requesting them to direct their Assessing Officers to verify 
these demands vis-à-vis the manual records and rectify fictitious 

9 
 
/duplicate demands. Demand Facilitation Centre (DFC) has also 
identified certain likely duplicate demands and notified the AOs 
separately. Consequently. during the month of March 2025, an amount 
of Rs. 25,834.93 crores have been reduced by the Assessing Officers as 
duplicate demands. 
4.     The data in respect of Order Giving Effect (OGs) pending to be 
passed for CIT(A) Orders, wherein the CITIA)s have partly or fully 
allowed Tax payers appeals, has been shared with each of the Pr CCITs. 
5.      The data of tax demands disagreed both by the Assessing Officer 
& Tax payer has been shared with respective Pr CCITs for initiating 
necessary action by the respective AOs for reduction of the Outstanding 
Demands. 
6.       Mail Campaigns has been undertaken in respect of taxpayers in all 
cases where tax demands raised under Section u/s, 143(1) are 
outstanding, urging them to either pay up the demand or file suitable 
applications for rectifications, in case the tax demand is claimed to be 
incorrect. 
7.       Demands raised u/s. 143(1) due to disallowance of exemptions 
claimed u/s 11 on account of late filing of Forms 9A, 10, 10B, 10BB have 
been identified. A mail campaign for educating the respective Tax payers 
for filing of Condonation applications u/s. 119(2)(b) based on Circular No. 
16 of 2024 has been carried out. 
 
8.  Extinguishment of demands: 
 
a. In accordance with CBDT Order in F. No. 375/02/2023-IT-Budget 
dated 13-02-2024, the eligible demands for extinguishment are 
identified on the following criteria: 
Asst. Years to which the 
entries of outstanding tax 
demands as on 31-01-2024 
pertain 
Monetary limit of entries of 
outstanding tax demands which 
are to be remitted and 
extinguished (in Rupees) 
Up to AY 2010-11 Each demand entry up to Rs. 
25,000/-  
AY 2011-12 to AY 2015-16 Each demand entry up to Rs. 
10,000/- 
 
b.    Details of demands extinguished are as below: 
Sl. 
No 
Range Count of 
Demands 
1 Up to AY 2010-11 56,41,503 
2 AY 2011-12 to AY 2015-16 56,57,660 
Total  1,12,99,163 
 
Total Number of PANs involved:   77,39,239 
Value of demand extinguished:  Rs. 3,338.40 Crore” 
 
 

10 
 
1.13 The Committee acknowledge CBDT’s several measures to address the 
issue of large outstanding tax arrears, such as verification of legacy demands, 
correction of duplicate entries, targeted mail campaigns, and sharing of relevant 
data with field formations. As a result of these efforts, the Net Collectible 
Demand has been significantly reduced from Rs. 33.75 lakh crore (as on 
30.06.2024) to Rs. 13.47 lakh crore (as on 31.03.2025), a reduction of over Rs. 
20.28 lakh crore. The Committee also note that over 1.12 crore demand entries 
totaling Rs. 3,338.40 crore in value and involving 77.39 lakh PANs, have been 
extinguished through CBDT’s recent rationalisation drive. While appreciating 
these efforts, the Committee stress that substantial arrears remain. The 
Committee desire that continuous and time-bound efforts must be made to 
further bring down the outstanding demand. The Committee also find that no 
specific data on indirect tax arrears has been furnished by CBIC. The Committee 
desire that such details be provided at the time of submission of the Action 
Taken Statement. 
Recommendation No.8 
Faceless Assessment and Appeals 
 
1.14  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that faceless e-Assessment Scheme was notified in 
2019 and subsequently a Faceless Income Tax Appeals was launched in 
2020, with a view to extend greater convenience to the taxpayers, ease of 
compliance, ensure fairness in the process and to minimise litigation. The 
Committee are of the opinion that these initiatives were the need of the hour 
and also have achieved their endeavour to a great extent. The Committee, 
however, observe that there are certain issues that are causing hardship to 
taxpayers in some cases that need to be addressed to make the system 
more convenient and effective. The Committee note that under faceless 
assessment, cases are allocated randomly, so there may be possibility that 
a peculiar type of a case is assigned to an assessing officer who may not 
have expertise in that area. Therefore, the Committee recommend that there 
is a need to make the system intelligent enough to match cases with the 
appropriate group of assessing officers who are better equipped to assess 
the income and address issues. Under faceless appeal system also, there 
are instance where taxpayers face challenges with online filing and hearings, 
as adapting to the digital format can pose difficulties for some individuals. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that these issues should be 
addressed promptly by taking appropriate corrective measures to improve 
overall faceless eco-system. Furthermore, the Committee believe that 
conducting a regular survey to understand the perceptions/ experiences/ 
challenges faced by taxpayers in filing/ assessment/ appeal processes will 
go a long way in gathering valuable feedbacks for making necessary 
changes and improvements to the existing system.” 

11 
 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
have submitted as follows: 
“1. Computerized random allocation is carried out in faceless 
assessment, as per the CBDT approved allocation rules. The faceless 
allocation rules take into account the complexity of the assessment cases, 
seniority of officer and senior and competent officers are allocated complex 
cases on an anonymized and randomized basis.  
 The faceless assessment cases are differentiated into several 
categories based on the type of ITR filed, turnover, total income and 
underlying issues that require verification. The complex category of cases 
are allocated to Assessment Units (AUs) located in Metro charges or AUs 
staffed by senior officer in the rank of Deputy/ Assistant Commissioner of 
Income Tax. The simpler cases are allocated to the officers in the rank of 
Income Tax Officer.  
2. The Committee has observed that there are instances where 
taxpayers face challenges with online filing and hearings, as adapting to the 
digital format can pose difficulties for some individuals. The Committee has, 
therefore, recommended that these issues should be addressed promptly by 
taking appropriate corrective measures to improve the overall Faceless eco-
system.  
 In this regard, in the earlier years of implementing the Faceless 
Assessment there have been teething problems in respect of online filings 
and hearings faced by the taxpayers due to technical issues. However, over 
the last couple of years these problems have duly taken care of and have 
gradually reduced. Presently, there are very few of number of such instances 
that have been reported by the taxpayers. 
3. The Committee has observed/ recommended that conducting a 
regular survey to understand the perceptions/experiences/ challenges faced 
by taxpayers in filing/assessment/ appeal processes will go a long way in 
gathering valuable feedback for making necessary changes and 
improvements to the existing system. 
 In this regard, as recommended by the Committee, the NaFAC has 
carried out 5 outreach programs with the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies/ 
tax professionals' fraternity during Financial Year 2024-25 to collect 
feedback. These were as below: 
3.1 With FICCI at New Delhi on 10.01.2025 
3.2 With the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies/ tax professionals' fraternity 
at Chennai on 28.01.2025 
3.3. With the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies/ tax professionals’ fraternity 
at Kolkata on 07.02.2025 
3.4 With the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies/tax professionals’ fraternity 
at Ahmedabad on 13.02.2025 
3.5 With the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies tax professionals’ fraternity 
at Guwahati on 20.02.2025 & 21.02.2025 

12 
 
 The inputs received in the above outreach programs are under 
process to be taken up as action points with the Systems Directorate 
for incorporating suitable improvements in the digital processes to 
mitigate the difficulties/ glitches reported to be faced by the external 
stakeholders. 
 
1.16 The Committee note the Ministry’s clarification that faceless assessment 
cases are now allocated based on complexity and income level, with complex 
cases assigned to more experienced officers. The Committee also take note of 
the Ministry’s assurance that early technical issues in online filings and 
hearings which had previously posed difficulties for tax payers, have been 
largely resolved, with only limited instances currently being reported. While, the 
Committee desire that this claim be thoroughly corroborated with relevant data 
in the upcoming Action Taken Statement, they particularly welcome the 
Ministry’s proactive approach in conducting outreach programmes as 
recommended. The Committee expect to be fully informed of the concrete 
system improvements resulting from this valuable feedback, which is currently 
being processed by the Systems Directorate. 
 
Recommendation No.9 
Tax Litigation Pendency 
 
1.17  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the total numbers of appeals pending at various 
fora has increased from 5,53,678 in 2021-22 to 6,21,344 in 2024-25. 
Similarly, the amount involved has also risen from Rs. 20,82,699 crore to 
Rs. 29,79,470 crore during this period. Despite the introduction of the Joint 
Commissioners of Income tax (Appeals) [JCIT(A)] alongside the 
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals)[CIT(A)] in 2023, no Improvement 
has been observed at the Departmental Appellate level. Instead of 
decreasing, the number of appeals has slightly increased from 5,48,278 in 
2023-24 to 5,49,666 in 2024-25. The committee also observe that there is a 
40% shortage of manpower at first appellate level. The Committee further 
observe that only 40,597 eligible assessees opted for the Direct Tax Vivad-
Se- Vishwas Scheme, 2024, between 1.10.2024 and 18.02.2025, compared 
to 1,39,384 eligible assessees who opted for the previous Direct Tax Vivad-
Se- Vishwas Scheme, 2020. Although the Department is optimistic and 
expects more taxpayers to opt for the scheme in the future as it is still 
ongoing, this remains an issue warranting attention. The Committee further 
note that the cost of litigation to the Government was above Rs. 108 core in 
2023-24. The Committee express their concern over the pendency of tax- 
related litigation in the country and emphasize the need for systemic 
reforms, at the measures taken so far have not succeeded in bringing out 
any significant improvement in the prevailing condition. The Committee 

13 
 
believe that the focus of the Government on simplification of tax-related Acts 
and Rules would certainly reduce a lot of litigation. However, the issue of the 
existing pendency of tax litigation, which is considerable in number, amount 
and duration, also need to be addressed in a mission mode. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should constitute and expert 
panel to meticulously examine this matter and propose appropriate remedial 
measures. The Committee also desire that this matter should be addressed 
with utmost sincerity and urgency.  
1.18 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
have submitted as follows: 
“Vide 9th Report of Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for 
Grants(2025-26) under the head Tax Litigation Pendency the Committee 
has inter-alia made the following observations: 
“…..However, the issue of the existing pendency of tax litigation, which is 
considerable in number, amount and duration, also needs to be addressed 
in a mission mode. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should constitute an expert panel to meticulously examine this 
matter and propose appropriate remedial measures. The Committee also 
desire that this matter should be addressed with utmost sincerity and 
urgency.” 
2. In view of the above, a Committee on expeditious disposal of appeal 
and litigation management is being constituted. The Terms of Reference 
(ToR) of the committee are as following:- 
2.1 In depth examination of the reasons of rising litigation at various 
appellate level and     measures that can be undertaken for litigation 
management. 
2.2 Suggest the measures that can be undertaken to enable the first 
appellate authorities to expedite the disposal for instance bunching of 
appeals. 
2.3 Examine the possibility of introduction of any out of the box solution 
to reduce the ageing of appeals and manage litigation.  
2.4   Examine the impact of new measures/ targets and approach 
introduced by Central Action Plan 2025-26 on pendency of litigation 
and take feedback from Income Tax Department. 
2.5 To consider any issue related to litigation management in the 
department that may lead to expeditious dispute resolution, reduce 
grievances of tax payers and make the appellate provisions tax payer 
friendly. 
2.6 Any suggestion which provides mechanism for faster disposal of 
pendency of appeals. 
2.7 The Chairperson of Committee may also examine and prescribe any 
other issue or points as deemed fit in his/her opinion for addressing 
the issue of existing pendency of tax litigation. 
 
1.19 The Committee are glad to note that the Ministry has taken cognizance of 
their recommendation and is in the process of constituting a Committee on 
Expeditious Disposal of Appeals and Litigation Management. The Committee 

14 
 
appreciate this initiative and its comprehensive Terms of Reference (ToR) which 
focus on examining the root causes of pendency, proposing innovative 
solutions, and enhancing taxpayer-friendliness in appellate processes. The 
Committee desire that the matter be pursued with urgency and in a mission-
mode approach and expect that the newly constituted expert committee 
submits its findings with actionable outcomes in a time-bound manner. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 1) 
Budgetary Allocation  
 
Demand No.35 
The Committee note that, with regard to Demand No. 35, which pertains to the 
Department of Revenue (HQ), there is a Budgetary Estimate (BE) of Rs. 1,33,880.25 
crore for the Financial Year (FY) 2025-26. This includes Rs. 1,33,271.01 crore under 
the Revenue Section and Rs. 609.24 crore under the Capital Section. The 
Committee’s scrutiny reveals that, although the Budgetary Estimate (BE) for the 
Capital Section has increased by 14.5% compared to the previous year, there was a 
shortfall in utilization during the previous year. For 2024-25 the BE of Rs. 531.96 was 
reduced to Rs. 475.74 crore at the stage of Revised Estimate (RE) and the actual 
utilization (till 11.02.2025) is only Rs. 119.42 crore. The Committee observe that the 
Capital Section has some important components such as ‘Information Computer, 
Telecommunications (ICT) equipment’ and ‘Building and Structure’ which are vital for 
the effective functioning of the Department. For ICT, the BE of Rs. 78.42 crore was 
revised upward to Rs. 140.67 crore; however, the actual utilization (upto December, 
2024) is Rs. 39.38 crore only. Similarly, for Building and Structure, BE of Rs. 134.52 
crore was reduced to Rs. 51.62 crore, and the actual utilization stands at only Rs. 0.02 
crore. The Committee believe that the underutilization of funds under the Capital 
Section may not only result in delayed or deprived intended services or outcomes, but 
there is always a risk of cost escalation due to factors such as inflation, fluctuations in 
material prices, and the potential for increased labor costs over time. The Committee 
also note that the enhanced funds of Rs. 140.67 crore under ICT at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage are allocated for FINnet 2.0—an advanced platform utilized by 
the Financial Intelligence Unit - India (FIU-IND) to improve the processes of receiving, 
processing, analyzing, and disseminating information related to suspicious financial 
transactions - and the Budgetary Estimate (BE) for 2025-26 for ICT has been set at 
Rs. 147.53 crore, the Committee emphasize the need for close monitoring of the 
project progress. This will ensure the optimum utilization of funds for the timely 
execution of these critical projects without any delays. The Committee would also like 

16 
 
to be apprised of the progress made regarding the FINnet 2.0 project at the time of 
furnishing Action Taken Notes. 
Reply of the Government 
The funds amounting to Rs. 140.67 crore and Rs. 147.53 crore under ICT head at the 
Revised Estimate (RE) stage perhaps pertains to the Department of Revenue. As 
such, in FY 2024–25, only Rs. 26.56 crore and Rs. 76.33 crore were allocated to FIU-
India under the ICT head at the Budget Estimate (BE) and Revised Estimate (RE) 
stages, respectively. Further in FY 2025-26, the amount allotted under ICT in the BE 
is Rs. 43 crores, which will be utilized for payment of the Managed Service Provider, 
Project Monitoring Unit, DC & DR & MPLS/ ILL for the Operation & Maintenance phase 
of Project FINnet 2.0. 
 A Project Steering Committee has been constituted to review the progress of 
implementation as well as operation phase of FINnet 2.0 with external members from 
CBDT, NICSI & DoT, and regular Project Steering Committee (PSC) meetings are 
held to review/ monitor the progress of the project. 
 In addition, a Project Monitoring Unit team has been instituted to review and 
suggest preventive and corrective measures where-ever a delay or non-conformity is 
observed in Project FINnet 2.0 and the same is taken up before the appropriate 
authorities and the PSC for timely resolution. 
 The Project FINnet 2.0 became live on 1st February 2024 and currently it is 
under the second year of operation & maintenance phase. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 2) 
GSTAT 
The Committee note that The GST Appellate Tribune (GSTAT) is the Appellate 
Authority established under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, to hear 
various appeals under the said Act and the respective State/Union Territories GST 
Acts against the orders of the first appellate authority. It consists of a Principal Bench 
and various State Benches. As per the approval of the GST Council, the Government 
has notified the Principal Bench, to be located at New Delhi, and 31 State Benches at 

17 
 
various locations across the country. The Committee further note that the Tribunal will 
ensure swift, fair, judicious and effective resolution to GST disputes, besides 
significantly reducing the burden on higher courts. It is also envisaged that the 
establishment of the GSTAT would further enhance the effectiveness of the GST 
system in India and foster a more transparent and efficient tax environment in the 
country. However, the Committee find that the GSTAT is yet to be operationalised. In 
regard to progress of work, the Ministry has submitted that the constitution of the 
Principal Bench and State Benches of GSTAT has been notified on 31.07.2024, with 
the President's appointment notified on 20.05.2024. Interviews for members are in 
progress, and 953 subordinate staff positions have been created with appointments 
underway. Recruitment rules for Group 'C' have been notified on 21.06.2024, while 
those for Group A and B are in progress. The jurisdiction of State Benches was notified 
on 26.11.2024. The Department has also assured that hearing of cases will start very 
soon. The Committee acknowledge that numerous considerations, infrastructure 
developments, and formalities need to be addressed before the operationalisation of 
the Tribunal. Nonetheless, given the time that has elapsed since the notification for its 
inception, the Committee recommend that utmost efforts be made to expedite and 
complete the remaining work related to GSTAT, ensuring it is operationalised at the 
earliest so that the envisaged benefits can be reaped without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
STATUS OF GST APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
The Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunal (GSTAT) is constituted under 
Section 109 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (CGST Act), which 
provides for constitution of the GSTAT as the second appellate authority within the 
GST framework. The process of original adjudication as well as the first appeal 
happens through individual officers under the Act but the second appeal against the 
orders of the first appellate authorities under Central as well as State tax 
administration lies with the GSTAT constituted under the CGST Act. GSTAT has been 
provided the responsibility to hear appeals under all the four GST laws passed by 
Central as well as State officers. Therefore, this is the first forum at which the 
adjudication process converges under all GST laws and across all tax 
administrations.  
 

18 
 
Notifications have been issued for the constitution of the Principal Bench and 
31 State Benches of the GSTAT (at 46 locations including Principal Bench) vide 
Gazette Notification No. S.O. 3048(E) dated 31.07.2024. A separate notification has 
also been issued specifying the jurisdiction of the said Benches and / or the Sittings 
associated with the said Benches vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 5063(E) dated 
26.11.2024 & corrigendum Notification dated 29.11.2024.  
 
Appointment of President and Members 
The Search-cum Selection Committee for selection of Members of GST 
Appellate Tribunal except Technical Member (State) of a State Bench under the 
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Sh. Justice Dipankar Datta, Judge, Supreme Court of India 
was constituted vide Department of Revenue’s O.M. dated 5th July 2024 which carried 
out the personal interaction of the candidates for appointment.   
 However, since some of the Members of the ScSC who took the interactions 
demitted office on being appointed to other positions, the Committee could not finalise 
the names to be recommended for appointment and hence the Committee was re-
constituted under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.M. Sundresh, Judge, 
Supreme Court of India vide Department of Revenue’s O.M. dated 24th April 2025. In 
view of the fact that there are new Members of the Committee, the Committee decided 
to conduct personal interactions with a shortlist of candidates to assess their 
suitability. The process of personnel interaction was carried out and completed by the 
Committee till 30.05.2025. 
 With respect to the appointment of Technical Member (State) for the State 
Benches, it is the concerned State Governments under whose jurisdiction the bench 
lies which is entrusted with the responsibility to constitute the Search cum Selection 
Committee for selection of Members under the Chairmanship of the respective Chief 
Justice of that State. Till date, the recommendations have been received from Uttar 
Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat, Bihar and Maharashtra/Goa, while the process for other 
states is under progress.  
Appointment of Supporting Staffs 
Total of 953 posts for supporting staff have been approved to be appointed in 
the GSTAT. One time relaxation has been obtained from the Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) to fill the posts through deputation to start the initial functioning 
of the Tribunal. Accordingly, 105 appointments have been made at various benches 

19 
 
for 2/3 years and the staffs have already started to join GSTAT. The Principal Bench 
is staffed with Registrar, Assistant Registrar, personal staffs of the President and 
some other staffs at various levels.   
 The power to frame the Recruitment Rules (RRs) in respect of Group “C” post 
lies with the Administrative Ministry. Accordingly, the RRs for the 5 (five) Group “C” 
posts viz, Stenographer Grade II, Upper Division Clerk, Lower Division Clerk, Staffs 
Car Driver and Multi-Tasking Staff was notified vide Gazette Notification G.R.R. 
340(E) dated 21.06.2024. 
 The Appointing Authority, Disciplinary Authority and Appellate Authority in the 
GSTAT for imposing the penalties under the Rule 11 of the Central Civil Services 
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 was notified vide Gazette Notification 
G.S.R. 454(E) dated 28.07.2024. 
 Preparation of reservation rosters and obtaining of NOC/NAC from the Surplus 
Cell, DoPT are required before sending requisition from Staffs Selection Commission. 
The reservation roster has been prepared in consultation with the Liaison Officers and 
the process of obtaining the NOC/NAC from the Surplus Cell, DoPT is under progress. 
 RRs for the Group “A” and Group “B” are to be framed in consultation with the 
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) and Union Public Service Commission 
(UPSC) and the present status are as below:  
a. 8 (Eight) RRs viz, Financial Advisor, Deputy Registrar, Assistant 
Registrar, Principal Private Secretary, Senior Private Secretary, Private 
Secretary, Assistant GSTAT and Stenographer Grade I has been 
finalised by the UPSC/DoPT. The same are undergoing legal vetting.  
b. 4 (Four) RRs viz, Registrar, Joint Register, Court Officer and Legal 
Assistant are being reviewed by the UPSC.  
c. 2 (Two) RRs viz, Accounts Officer and Senior Accountant are being 
reviewed by the DoPT were returned to DoR and have been sent to DoE 
for re-designating the names of the posts. 
Software Portal and IT Infrastructure for GSTAT  
GSTAT will be paperless tribunal from day one. E-courts software module has 
been developed by NIC in collaboration with GSTN. UAT has been completed. It is 
expected to rolled on a pilot basis for Principal Bench shortly. Tender for IT 
infrastructure of GSTAT (servers, VC facility etc) has been floated by GSTN. Vendor 

20 
 
has been selected. Installation would be taken up along with physical infrastructure in 
each of the locations. 
Physical Infrastructure of GSTAT 
Process of identification of buildings of State Benches on rental basis in 45 
locations across the country is progressing well. Out of these, the proposals of 36 
locations have been received and examined. 20 proposals have been approved by 
the IFU for renting and 8 proposals are under examination of DoR/IFU/GST Zones.  
Principal Bench is currently located temporarily in a well-furnished 10,000 SFT 
office in new Delhi. President and his Staff are operating from the said office. 
Permanent office space with approximately 20,000 SFT has been identified in New 
Delhi and mapping being finalised.  
Rules for Conduct of Business 
Rules for conduct of business of GSTAT has been notified vide G.S.R. 256(E) 
dated 24.04.2025. Anti-profiteering cases have been assigned to the Principal Bench. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
Demand No.36 
The Committee note that the Demand No.36 pertains to Direct Taxes. Direct 
Taxes has no Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The entire 
budget is for Salaries/Administrative expenses pertaining to field offices of Central 
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT). Despite this the Committee find that there have been 
considerable variations in BE, RE and Actual figure related to this Demand. For the 
year 2024-25, the Budgetary Estimate of Rs. 10,340.38 crore was revised upward to 
Rs. 11575.17 crore; whereas, the actual utilization (upto 31.12.2024) is Rs. 7712.55 
crore which is 66.63% of the RE.  Under Capital Section, the underutilization of fund 
is more significant as against the RE of Rs. 2,372.82 crore only Rs. 761.20 crore could 
be utilized (upto 31.12.2024) which work out to just 32.08% of the RE. In regard to the 
reason for the same, it has been submitted that the major change in the RE was due 
to the increase in Object Head 4075 which was increased by around Rs. 1,000 crores. 
It has been assured that the amount is likely to be utilized as the bills are pending 
under the Object Head 4075. Nevertheless, the Committee would like to recommend 
that sincere efforts be made to ensure the optimal utilization of funds allocated under 

21 
 
this Head. Further, the Committee also emphasize the necessity of stronger financial 
discipline to prevent underutilization or the bunching of expenditures towards the end 
of the fiscal year in future. 
Reply of the Government 
During the Financial Year 2024-25, an expenditure of Rs 11441.27 crores has been 
incurred against the allocated budget of Rs 11573.1 crores which is 98.86% of RE 
2024-25. Hence, this Directorate has made sincere efforts for optimal utilization of the 
funds and the performance has considerably improved. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 4) 
In regard to observation of the Committee in their previous year’s Report on 
DFGs (2024-25) pertaining to the Demand No.36 that the Directorate of Expenditure 
Budget, as well as the Budget Controlling Authorities (BCAs) and the Sub-BCAs, did 
not have a proficient mechanism to monitor the requirement of funds or the 
expenditure incurred by the Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs), the Department 
has stated that the Directorate of Expenditure Budget has digitized the Budget related 
data, automated the allocation of funds; integrated the expenditure data which 
facilitated the monitoring of their budget. The Committee express their satisfaction 
with the efforts made by the Department to strengthen the budgetary monitoring 
system and hope that these efforts will lead to the optimal and balanced utilization of 
allocated funds. The Committee also expect to be informed about the effectiveness of 
the new system when furnishing the Action Taken Notes. 
Reply of the Government 
With the help of Google work sheet it is possible maintain, track fund allocation and 
have a bird's eye view of the Reserves available on a real-time basis of all the 58 
BCAs. By using this application of Google Worksheet, it is very helpful for the 
department to rationalize expenditure across various heads and subheads. With 
extensive efforts, it was possible to minimize the surrender amount of budget fund to 
near-about zero during this period. The new system also helps this Directorate to 

22 
 
monitor day to day expenditure of all the BCAs which can be tallied to the PFMS 
Expenditure Data Sheet. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 5) 
Demand No.37 
 
The Committee note that the budgetary provisions under Demand No. 37- 
Indirect Taxes is for establishment related expenditure for the field offices of Central 
Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (CBIC) and provision for Central Sector Schemes 
such as Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) and various 
other Scrips-Based Schemes. The Committee find that there is a budgetary estimate 
of Rs. 42,889.33 crore for the year 2025-26, consisting of Rs. 40,904.73 crore under 
the Revenue Section and Rs. 1,984.6 crore under the Capital Section. However, the 
Committee also find that the past track record under the Demand No.37 as far as 
optimum utilization of funds are concerned leaves much to be desired. Even for the 
year 2024-25, the actual utilization (up to 20.02.2025) is Rs. 31,875.35 crore, which 
is 78.2% of the revised estimate (RE) of Rs. 40,752.17 crore, with only about a month 
remaining in the fiscal year. The underutilization of funds is more conspicuous under 
the Capital Section, where only 46% of the Revised Estimate could actually be utilized 
till the said period. In regard to efforts being made to ensure optimum utilization of 
funds, the Committee have been apprised that the field formations have been 
sensitized about the importance of sending accurate estimates of funds to ensure 
optimum utilization of the budget allocated through regular Emails and letters. Further, 
the expenditure incurred by the field formations is being monitored on monthly basis 
through e-lekha portal. The CBIC has already developed BEAMS application which is 
being utilized for better monitoring of expenditure vis –a –vis allocated funds. 
However, the Committee find that these efforts are yet to be translated into improved 
performance by the Department in terms of utilization of the allocated funds. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend stricter monitoring of the budgetary assessment 
and fund utilization processes at the highest level to ensure that the efforts being made 
in this regard also yield the desired results.  

23 
 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of the committee have been duly noted for compliance. This office 
will take all necessary steps to further narrow the gap between allocation and 
utilization of budget. The field formations are being sensitized about the importance 
of sending accurate estimates of funds to ensure optimum utilization of the budget 
allocated through regular Emails letters and various advisories. A team of officers from 
EMC would be visiting the field formations and carry out hand holding exercise with 
the  officers handling sizeable Revenue/ Capital Expenditure for realistic Budget 
forecasting and optimum utilization of funds. Further, regular and timely follow up with 
CPWD shall also be done regarding utilization of the funds transferred to them. 
Furthermore, this section is in process of formulating a SOP wherein stakeholders of 
all capital projects meet on bi-monthly basis and monitor its progress. This office is 
conducting regular webinars for educating field formations about optimum utilization 
of budget and addressing any other issue being faced by them, etc. The EMC officers 
would be monitoring the budget utilization trend with the senior officers of all the 
Budget Controlling authorities to ensure the highest level of monitoring. Fine tuning of 
BEAMS to push data in PFMS is under development and will address issues 
pertaining to mapping/ Surrender and effective utilization of funds.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 7) 
Tax Arrears 
The Committee note that there are huge cumulative tax arrears of Rs. 
48,73,028 crore, including Rs. 43,07,201 crore pertaining to Direct  
Taxes (upto 14.02.2025) and Rs. 5,65,827 crore to Indirect Taxes (upto Dec. 2024). 
The Committee also find that in respect of Direct Taxes, Rs. 10,55,906 crore tax 
arrears are pending for five or more years. The Committee has been given to 
understand that some of the arrears date back even to the mid-1990s. The Committee 
further note that as per tax authorities, out of Rs. 43,07,201 crore arrears, Rs. 
28,95,851 crore which comes to 67%, is difficult to collect. The Committee also find 
that a lot of this demand arrear is also fictitious. Before the digitisation of processes, 
a manual register system was in place, which did not account for interest. However, 

24 
 
the current system now calculates interest annually. Since income tax penalty is very 
heavy, every year of delay will keep on adding to the demand, which is in any case 
remains non-collectible. The Committee express their concern over the present 
scenario and believe that there is a pressing need to review the tax assessment 
system to make it more efficient in collection of taxes, keeping in view the ground 
realities. The Committee are of the view that while genuine demands should be strictly 
collected, the Tax Authorities should also undertake a thorough introspection of the 
existing tax assessment system and remain sensitive to the hardships faced by honest 
taxpayers due to erroneous or inflated tax demands. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that, since all the tax records have been digitized, it is high time to take 
decisive interventions, including writing off demands/ imposing moratoriums, to 
reduce and trueing up the huge backlog of demand arrears in a time-bound manner.  
Reply of the Government 
CBIC 
 The Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC), vide Circular No. 
1081/02/2022-CX dated 19.01.2022, has issued comprehensive guidelines to the field 
formations regarding the recovery and write-off of arrears related to Indirect Taxes, 
including Central Excise, Service Tax, and Customs. These guidelines provide a 
structured framework for classification of arrears based on their recoverability, 
initiation of appropriate recovery action, and periodic review of the arrear cases. 
 As per the Circular, arrears have been categorized into recoverable and non-
recoverable demands, with further sub-categorization of non-recoverable demands 
(e.g., assessee not traceable, units closed, liquidation/ bankruptcy, etc.), for effective 
action. The Circular also empowers the jurisdictional authorities to recommend write-
off of irrecoverable demands. Accordingly, field formations are undertaking sustained 
efforts for recovery of recoverable arrears and processing of non-recoverable cases 
for write-off, wherever justified. 
 The matter is under continuous review and appropriate measures are being 
taken to reduce the pendency of arrears. 
CBDT 

25 
 
            Active coordination has been carried out with the Assessing Officers of various 
Pr. CCIT Regions, to ensure that the Recoverability Status of High Value Demands 
(i.e. Demands greater than Rs. 1 Crores) are correctly marked in the Demand 
Recovery Module of Income Tax Business Applications (ITBA). 
2.    Due to these efforts, the Net Collectible Demand has been reduced from Rs 
33,75,763 Cr. out of total Outstanding demand of Rs. 41,65,064 Cr. (as on 
30.06.2024) to Rs. 13,47,631 Crores out of the Total Outstanding Demand of 
Rs.48,17,763 Crores (as on 31.03.2025). This means that during the period 
(30.06.2024 to 31.03.2025), the Net Collectible Demand has been reduced by 
Rs.20,28,132 Crores. 
3.   Out of the demands uploaded from manual registers during the process of 
Digitisation, it has been found that certain entries that appear to be duplicate have 
been uploaded by the AOs. Since these demands are not verifiable on the system, a 
letter has been addressed to all the Pr. CCIT's requesting them to direct their 
Assessing Officers to verify these demands vis-à-vis the manual records and rectify 
fictitious /duplicate demands. Demand Facilitation Centre (DFC) has also identified 
certain likely duplicate demands and notified the AOs separately. Consequently. 
during the month of March 2025, an amount of Rs. 25,834.93 crores have been 
reduced by the Assessing Officers as duplicate demands. 
4.     The data in respect of Order Giving Effect (OGs) pending to be passed for CIT(A) 
Orders, wherein the CITIA)s have partly or fully allowed Tax payers appeals, has been 
shared with each of the Pr CCITs. 
5.      The data of tax demands disagreed both by the Assessing Officer & Tax payer 
has been shared with respective Pr CCITs for initiating necessary action by the 
respective AOs for reduction of the Outstanding Demands. 
6.       Mail Campaigns has been undertaken in respect of taxpayers in all cases where 
tax demands raised under Section u/s, 143(1) are outstanding, urging them to either 
pay up the demand or file suitable applications for rectifications, in case the tax 
demand is claimed to be incorrect. 
7.       Demands raised u/s. 143(1) due to disallowance of exemptions claimed u/s 11 
on account of late filing of Forms 9A, 10, 10B, 10BB have been identified. A mail 

26 
 
campaign for educating the respective Tax payers for filing of Condonation 
applications u/s. 119(2)(b) based on Circular No. 16 of 2024 has been carried out. 
8.  Extinguishment of demands: 
a. In accordance with CBDT Order in F. No. 375/02/2023-IT-Budget 
dated 13-02-2024, the eligible demands for extinguishment are 
identified on the following criteria: 
Asst. Years to which the entries of 
outstanding tax demands as on 
31-01-2024 pertain 
Monetary limit of entries of outstanding 
tax demands which are to be remitted 
and extinguished (in Rupees) 
Up to AY 2010-11 Each demand entry up to Rs. 25,000/-  
AY 2011-12 to AY 2015-16 Each demand entry up to Rs. 10,000/- 
 
b.    Details of demands extinguished are as below: 
Sl. No Range Count of Demands 
1 Up to AY 2010-11 56,41,503 
2 AY 2011-12 to AY 2015-16 56,57,660 
Total  1,12,99,163 
 
Total Number of PANs involved:   77,39,239 
Value of demand extinguished:  Rs. 3,338.40 Crore  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 8) 
Faceless Assessment and Appeals  
 
The Committee note that faceless e-Assessment Scheme was notified in 2019 
and subsequently a Faceless Income Tax Appeals was launched in 2020, with a view 
to extend greater convenience to the taxpayers, ease of compliance, ensure fairness 
in the process and to minimise litigation. The Committee are of the opinion that these 
initiatives were the need of the hour and also have achieved their endeavour to a great 
extent. The Committee, however, observe that there are certain issues that are 
causing hardship to taxpayers in some cases that need to be addressed to make the 

27 
 
system more convenient and effective. The Committee note that under faceless 
assessment, cases are allocated randomly, so there may be possibility that a peculiar 
type of a case is assigned to an assessing officer who may not have expertise in that 
area. Therefore, the Committee recommend that there is a need to make the system 
intelligent enough to match cases with the appropriate group of assessing officers who 
are better equipped to assess the income and address issues. Under faceless appeal 
system also, there are instance where taxpayers face challenges with online filing and 
hearings, as adapting to the digital format can pose difficulties for some individuals. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that these issues should be addressed 
promptly by taking appropriate corrective measures to improve overall faceless eco-
system. Furthermore, the Committee believe that conducting a regular survey to 
understand the perceptions/ experiences/ challenges faced by taxpayers in filing/ 
assessment/ appeal processes will go a long way in gathering valuable feedbacks for 
making necessary changes and improvements to the existing system. 
Reply of the Government 
 1. Computerized random allocation is carried out in faceless assessment, as per 
the CBDT approved allocation rules. The faceless allocation rules take into 
account the complexity of the assessment cases, seniority of officer and senior 
and competent officers are allocated complex cases on an anonymized and 
randomized basis.  
 The faceless assessment cases are differentiated into several categories 
based on the type of ITR filed, turnover, total income and underlying issues that 
require verification. The complex category of cases are allocated to Assessment Units 
(AUs) located in Metro charges or AUs staffed by senior officer in the rank of Deputy/ 
Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax. The simpler cases are allocated to the officers 
in the rank of Income Tax Officer.  
2. The Committee has observed that there are instances where taxpayers face 
challenges with online filing and hearings, as adapting to the digital format can pose 
difficulties for some individuals. The Committee has, therefore, recommended that 
these issues should be addressed promptly by taking appropriate corrective measures 
to improve the overall Faceless eco-system.  
 In this regard, in the earlier years of implementing the Faceless Assessment 
there have been teething problems in respect of online filings and hearings faced by 

28 
 
the taxpayers due to technical issues. However, over the last couple of years these 
problems have duly taken care of and have gradually reduced. Presently, there are 
very few of number of such instances that have been reported by the taxpayers. 
3. The Committee has observed/ recommended that conducting a regular survey 
to understand the perceptions/experiences/ challenges faced by taxpayers in 
filing/assessment/ appeal processes will go a long way in gathering valuable feedback 
for making necessary changes and improvements to the existing system. 
 In this regard, as recommended by the Committee, the NaFAC has carried out 
5 outreach programs with the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies/ tax professionals' 
fraternity during Financial Year 2024-25 to collect feedback. These were as below: 
3.1 With FICCI at New Delhi on 10.01.2025 
3.2 With the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies/ tax professionals' fraternity at 
Chennai on 28.01.2025 
3.3. With the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies/ tax professionals’ fraternity at 
Kolkata on 07.02.2025 
3.4 With the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies/tax professionals’ fraternity at 
Ahmedabad on 13.02.2025 
3.5 With the taxpayers, industry/ trade bodies tax professionals’ fraternity at 
Guwahati on 20.02.2025 & 21.02.2025 
 The inputs received in the above outreach programs are under process to be 
taken up as action points with the Systems Directorate for incorporating suitable 
improvements in the digital processes to mitigate the difficulties/ glitches reported to 
be faced by the external stakeholders. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I) 
  

29 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 9) 
Tax Litigation Pendency 
The Committee note that the total numbers of appeals pending at various fora 
has increased from 5,53,678 in 2021-22 to 6,21,344 in 2024-25. Similarly, the amount 
involved has also risen from Rs. 20,82,699 crore to Rs. 29,79,470 crore during this 
period. Despite the introduction of the Joint Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) 
[JCIT(A)] alongside the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT(A)] in 2023, no 
improvement has been observed at the Departmental Appellate level. Instead of 
decreasing, the number of appeals has slightly increased from 5,48,278 in 2023-24 to 
5,49,666 in 2024-25. The Committee also observe that there is a 40% shortage of 
manpower at first appellate level. The Committee further observe that only 40,597 
eligible assessees opted for the Direct Tax Vivad-Se-Vishwas Scheme, 2024, 
between 1.10.2024 and 18.02.2025, compared to 1,39,384 eligible assessees who 
opted for the previous Direct Tax Vivad-Se-Vishwas Scheme, 2020. Although the 
Department is optimistic and expects more taxpayers to opt for the scheme in the 
future as it is still ongoing, this remains an issue warranting attention. The Committee 
further note that the cost of litigation to the Government was about Rs. 108 crore in 
2023-24. The Committee express their concern over the pendency of tax-related 
litigation in the country and emphasize the need for systemic reforms, as the 
measures taken so far have not succeeded in bringing out any significant 
improvement in the prevailing condition. The Committee believe that the focus of the 
Government on simplification of tax-related Acts and Rules would certainly reduce a 
lot of litigation. However, the issue of the existing pendency of tax litigation, which is 
considerable in number, amount and duration, also needs to be addressed in a 
mission mode. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should 
constitute an expert panel to meticulously examine this matter and propose 
appropriate remedial measures. The Committee also desire that this matter should be 
addressed with utmost sincerity and urgency. 
Reply of the Government 
        Vide 9th Report of Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants(2025-
26) under the head Tax Litigation Pendency the Committee has inter-alia made the 
following observations: 

30 
 
“…..However, the issue of the existing pendency of tax litigation, which is considerable 
in number, amount and duration, also needs to be addressed in a mission mode. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should constitute an expert 
panel to meticulously examine this matter and propose appropriate remedial 
measures. The Committee also desire that this matter should be addressed with 
utmost sincerity and urgency.” 
2. In view of the above, a Committee on expeditious disposal of appeal and 
litigation management is being constituted. The Terms of Reference (ToR) of the 
committee are as following:- 
2.8 In depth examination of the reasons of rising litigation at various appellate level 
and     measures that can be undertaken for litigation management. 
2.9 Suggest the measures that can be undertaken to enable the first appellate 
authorities to expedite the disposal for instance bunching of appeals. 
2.10 Examine the possibility of introduction of any out of the box solution to reduce 
the ageing of appeals and manage litigation.  
2.11   Examine the impact of new measures/ targets and approach introduced by 
Central Action Plan 2025-26 on pendency of litigation and take feedback from 
Income Tax Department. 
2.12 To consider any issue related to litigation management in the department that 
may lead to expeditious dispute resolution, reduce grievances of tax payers 
and make the appellate provisions tax payer friendly. 
2.13 Any suggestion which provides mechanism for faster disposal of pendency of 
appeals. 
2.14 The Chairperson of Committee may also examine and prescribe any other 
issue or points as deemed fit in his/her opinion for addressing the issue of 
existing pendency of tax litigation. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I) 
  

31 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 10) 
Strengthening Tax Administration 
The Committee observe that in recent years, several technological initiatives 
have been undertaken to strengthen tax administration in the country. The role of 
technology in tax administration is evolving continuously, and its importance has 
increased manifold. The Committee also observe that data handling requirements are 
increasing, necessitating system upgrades, which involve a considerable amount of 
funds. The Committee further feel that cybersecurity threats to such a massive data 
system are a genuine concern that requires utmost attention. In the calendar year 
2024, the total number of attempted cybersecurity attacks on CBIC's IT ecosystem 
was 1.27 crores. Although none of these attempts succeeded, the sheer number itself 
speaks volumes. The Committee also believe that Artificial Intelligence (AI) can play 
a vital role in enhancing user experience, detecting and preventing fraud – particularly 
related to Input Tax Credit (ITC) of GST – and analyzing data to promote better tax 
compliance. Another issue brought to the Committee's attention is that, despite tax 
agencies collecting lakhs of crores in revenue, a significant number of their buildings 
are still rented. Considering the tax department performs a sovereign function that is 
not of a temporary nature, investing in owning buildings seems both a logical and 
prudent decision. In view of this, the Committee, emphasize that no compromises 
should be made concerning the technological and infrastructure requirements of tax 
agencies, as these will ultimately serve as crucial tools to enhance revenue collection 
in the country. However, they desire that there should be a clear-cut roadmap to 
ensure that these projects are executed timely and properly, without cost or time 
overruns. The Committee expect that such a roadmap will be shared with them at the 
time of furnishing Action Taken Notes. 
Reply of the Government 
The Goods and Services Tax (GST) is administered through the Front Office 
Portal for taxpayers (www.gst.gov.in) and the Back Office Portal for tax officers, both 
developed and maintained by GSTN (Goods and Services Tax Network). GSTN 
provides the technological backbone for the GST system and is one of the DPI under 
the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance.  

32 
 
Additionally, GSTN operates the BIFA (Business Intelligence and Fraud 
Analytics) module for tax officers, which leverages advanced machine learning and 
artificial intelligence to generate leads for enforcement actions. This has significantly 
enhanced tax administration and enforcement efforts, improving compliance 
monitoring. 
The GST system continuously works towards automation of business 
processes by introducing system-based checks, nudging mechanisms, red flags 
reports, auto-populated statements, and other features. For example, it has 
implemented sequential filing of returns and automatic notices such as DRC-01B and 
DRC-01C, which address discrepancies between GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B as well as 
GSTR-2B and GSTR-3B. Thus, improving ease of compliance for taxpayers and ease 
of enforcement for tax administration. 
Furthermore, GSTN has introduced several new technologies, including e-
invoicing, biometric authentication at the time of registration, and a mobile app for 
Aadhaar-based face authentication. It has also integrated data from third-party 
sources such as CBDT, PFMS, and PDS to assess risks associated with registration 
applications. Additionally, GSTN has incorporated geocoding of addresses at the time 
of registration for precise address collection by integrating a geocoding module from 
MapmyIndia. 
To further improve tax compliance and enforcement, GSTN has recently 
introduced GSTR-1A, enabling taxpayers to make amendment in GSTR-1, ensuring 
greater accuracy in return filing. The newly launched Invoice Management System 
allows taxpayers to accept, reject, or keep an invoice pending, which forms the basis 
for GSTR-2B generation, this helps in improving the Input Tax Credit (ITC) 
reconciliation and reduce the number of notices issued, ultimately strengthening the 
credit chain. Additionally, GSTN is working on starting a pilot project  on B2C e-
invoicing in selected states, with a Proof of Concept (POC) already completed. This 
initiative would allow consumers to receive e-invoices, which they can verify via the 
GST portal or mobile app, promoting transparency and compliance in the B2C chain. 
These developments reflect GSTN’s commitment to leveraging technology to 
enhance efficiency, ease of compliance, and enforcement capabilities.  

33 
 
GSTN remains at the forefront of technological adoption, ensuring that the GST 
system leverages the best available technological innovations. Final policy decisions 
regarding implementation of these initiatives rest with the Government. 
CBIC 
 The recommendation has been taken note of. All out efforts are being taken to 
improve infrastructure and security measures. 
 At present most of the infrastructure/system upgradation as well as 
cybersecurity needs are predominantly met through the "Saksham" contract, 
additional purchases of cybersecurity products are made outside the Saksham 
contract depending on need and the changing cyber-threat landscape. Accordingly, 
a Zero-trust solution has been procured. Sometimes the Govt. of India helps 
organisations under it to enhance their cybersecurity posture by providing free-of-cost 
products and solutions which can be used across all Central Government 
organisations. The provision of Honeypot sensors is a case in point. The same has 
been provided by Cert-IN free-of-cost for which the PoC is concluded and the same 
is being deployed in the CBIC’s IT ecosystem to enhance the cybersecurity posture 
of CBIC. 
 To sum up, the system upgradation and cybersecurity needs are 
predominantly met through the Saksham contract supported with additional 
purchases made by DCCS as well as support provided by the Government of India 
through organisations/Ministries such as Cert-In and MeitY". 
AI plays the following role in streamlining collection of taxes and widening the tax 
base: 
i. Stopping Fraud & Duplication: Al can detect fake Aadhaar IDs, bogus GST 
claims, and shell companies involved in tax fraud. 
ii. Simplifying Tax Filing: AI-powered assistants can help businesses and 
individuals    file GST and income tax easily, reducing errors and delays. 
iii. Expanding the Tax Base: AI can analyze transactions to identify potential 
taxpayers who aren't currently in the tax net. 
iv. Faster Compliance &Support: AI chatbots can provide instant help for tax-
related queries, making compliance smoother. 

34 
 
v. AI can make the GST and customs related matters like classification and 
valuation of goods more transparent and bring uniformity. 
 The field formations of CBIC, assess their infrastructure requirements and 
process as per CBIC Manual on Infrastructure 2022, wherever approval of the 
Ministry is required, the proposals are submitted to DGHRD (I&W / EMC) and 
processed as per CBIC Manual on Infrastructure 2022. 
 Further, those field formations under which construction projects are running, 
are requested to conduct regular meetings with the project manager to monitor the 
progress of the project and are advised to inform DGHRD (I&W / EMC)  if any issue 
arises which is leading to delay in completion of projects. Moreover, they are directed 
to send the MPR timely. Letters are issued to the field formations for optimum 
utilization of funds released for the construction and also deprives the public of the 
intended benefits of the project. To check and sensitize the field formations that there 
is no delay in completion of ongoing construction projects, video conferences are 
conducted time to time with all the field formations." 
CBDT 
  The CBDT through its various Information Technology (IT) projects has 
significantly enhanced the efficiency and transparency of tax-related processes by 
streamlining various tasks through IT-driven automation, reducing manual 
interventions. Robust cyber security measures have been implemented to protect 
sensitive taxpayer data from unauthorized access and cyber threats. The projects 
under the purview of DIT(S) such as Income Tax Business Application (ITBA), Project 
Insight, CPC-TDS, Integrated e-filing and Central processing center (IEC 2.0) conform 
to the extant cyber security standards. In this context, specific steps taken are as 
follows: 
1.1 Declaration of four CBDT projects as Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) 
1.2 Comprehensive Security Audit (CSA) 
1.3 Cyber Crisis Management Plan and Incident Response Plan 
1.4 Regular audits and Risk Assessments 
2. Further, the field offices of ITD are spread across India having presence in 
almost every district. There are a total of 723 buildings from where the ITD offices 

35 
 
operate. Out of the total, 312 are Government owned buildings and 411 are rented 
buildings.  
 Regular efforts have been made to shift ITD offices into Government owned 
buildings. In past three years, new Aaykar Bhawans have been constructed in Bhopal, 
Rajkot, Lucknow, Srinagar, Kochi and Gorakhpur. New IT office buildings are also 
under construction at Mumbai, Gurgaon, Kanpur and Delhi. Further, suitable plots of 
lands are being identified to construct more Government owned offices.  
 As ITD has entered into Faceless Assessment regime, the reliance on 
Information Technology (IT) infrastructure has grown exponentially. Currently, some 
of the Directorate of Systems and entire CPC operations (mainly in Delhi and 
Bengaluru) are housed in rented buildings, which present significant limitations. 
Therefore, suitable steps are being taken so that Government owned buildings could 
be constructed for Directorate of Systems and CPC. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

37 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Sl No. 6) 
Bifurcation of Personal Income Tax Data 
During the deliberations of the Committee with the Department, it emerged that 
at present, Personal Income Tax (PIT) also includes about Rs. 1.5 lakh crore of 
business (non-corporate) income apart from individual income. The Committee 
observe that there have been instances when concerns have been raised from various 
quarters that the collection of Personal Income Tax (PIT) in the country has surpassed 
Corporation Tax as PIT may not accurately reflect the true picture. The Committee 
believe that ideally, there should be separate data for Business Income and Individual 
Income for better analysis and understanding of income patterns in the country. This 
would also help in formulating targeted tax policies, identifying areas where tax 
evasion might be occurring, and addressing the peculiar needs and challenges of 
individuals and businesses separately. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
ways and means should be explored to segregate the data of Personal Income Tax 
(PIT) as early as possible. It is needless to emphasize that the details of all concrete 
efforts made in this regard will be shared with the Committee when furnishing Action 
Taken Notes.   
Reply of the Government 
The Direct Taxes accruing to the Union Government comprise of Corporation Tax and 
Taxes on Income. The Receipt Budget which is part of the Annual Budget contains 
the following classification for collections from Direct Taxes:  
a. Corporate Income Tax (CIT): This is a tax levied on the income of Companies under 
the Income-tax Act, 1961.  
b. Personal Income Tax (PIT): This is a tax on the income of Individuals, Hindu 
Undivided Families (HUF), firms (including Limited Liability Partnerships), Association 
of Persons/Body of Individuals (AOP/BOI), Trusts, Cooperative Society, Local 
Authority and Artificial Juridical Person, etc. other than Companies, under the Income-
tax Act, 1961.  

38 
 
 2. Companies paying Corporate Income Tax (CIT) file ITR-6, while Taxpayers who 
fall within the ambit of Taxes on Income (PIT) file ITR-1, ITR-2, ITR-3, ITR-4 and ITR-
5. Within these taxpayers, Individuals with no business income file ITR-1 and ITR-2, 
while Individuals with business income (non-Corporate) file ITR-3 and ITR-4. Further, 
ITR-5 is filed by persons other than individuals and companies (including firms).  
3. This data for non-corporate business income captured separately, combined 
with data of direct taxes paid by Corporates through ITR-6 will provide an accurate 
picture of data for Business Income and Individual income.  
 4.       Presently, taxpayers are segregated into two categories; 
(i) Corporate taxpayers (these are having business income as one of the 
constituents of the total income). Taxes paid by these taxpayers are 
categorized as Corporate Income Tax (CIT). 
(ii) Non-corporate tax payers and taxes paid by these taxpayers are 
categorized as Personal Income Tax (PIT) 
          The non-corporate taxpayers can be further segregated into two categories 
based on the ITR forms: 
(i)     Non-corporate taxpayer having business income as one of the constituents 
of the total income (it includes income for non-corporate such as individual/HUF, 
firm/LLP, AOP/BOI etc.) (ITR-3, 4 and 5) 
(ii) Non-corporate taxpayer not having business income (ITR-1, 2 & 7). 
 Further details of income-tax can be segregated on the basis of type of Income-
tax form e.g.ITR-1, ITR-2, ITR-3, ITR-4, ITR-5, ITR-6 and ITR-7. 
“However, head-wise segregation of income-tax (e.g. Business and Profession, 
Capital Gain, Salary, House Property, Other sources) is not feasible as Income-tax 
return forms are not structured to collect tax details head-wise.” 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-Parl. Dated 04.07.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I) 
 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025      
07Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                    
 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
  

40 
 
APPENDIX-I 
Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-
25). The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 
hrs in Committee Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
PART I 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 

41 
 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and 
Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 

42 
 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken 
Reports and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to 
the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
 
  

43 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 9TH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
10  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9 & 10) 
 
09 90% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ( vide 
Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 6) 
 
01 10% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 
 