 
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE         (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)   [Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Sixty Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Performance Review and Regulation of Insurance Sector’]   SEVENTH REPORT         LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 07 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)MINISTRY OF FINANCE(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)    Presented to Lok Sabha on      Laid in Rajya Sabha on  LOK SABHA SECRETARIATDecember, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)  ii 
  SEVENTH REPORT    STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)      MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)    Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 December, 2024 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06 December, 2024 03.2023             LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 


iii 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                (v) 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report       1 
Chapter – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
18 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
43 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
44 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government are still awaited 
52 
 ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 04.12.2024 53 
 APPENDIX  
 Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Sixty-Sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Performance Review and Regulation of 
Insurance Sector’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services). 
55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
             MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Manish Kumar Committee Officer 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
   I, the Chairperson, of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on action taken by Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Sixty-Sixth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Performance Review and Regulation of Insurance Sector’.  
 
2. The Sixty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of 
Rajya Sabha on 06 February, 2024. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from the Government vide their 
communication dated 4 July, 2024.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on            
04 December, 2024.       
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of                  
Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
4 December, 2024 
13 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Sixty-
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Performance Review and Regulation of 
Insurance Sector' pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 6th 
February, 2024. The Report contained 19 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
 2.  Action taken replies in respect of all the 19 Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) on 4th July, 2024. The replies have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows:  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 
and 19 
       Total - 16 
(Chapter- II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No. – Nil - 
                  Total - Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 7, 12 and 18 
       Total - 3  
(Chapter -IV) 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. – Nil -                   
Total - Nil  
(Chapter- V) 
 
 

2 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of its presentation.  
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Promotion of Microinsurance 
5. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee find that microinsurance protects low-income people from 
financial losses with affordable products. This section of society faces many 
risks that make them vulnerable to uncertainty, therefore, microinsurance is 
essential to help them cope and recover. microinsurance could be an 
important tool for financial inclusion and poverty alleviation in India, where a 
large section of the population lacks access to formal insurance services. 
The Committee note that IRDAI had issued the IRDAI (Micro 
Insurance) Regulations, 2015, which define the eligibility criteria, product 
features, distribution channels, and reporting requirements for 
microinsurance. The Committee further note that in the promotion of 
microinsurance, there are several challenges such as small ticket size 
coupled with high transaction and service delivery costs, absence of a 
business model that can attract good intermediaries, capacity building of 
intermediaries, and lack of basic awareness and knowledge on how 
insurance works. The Committee, therefore, recommend that new 
microinsurance products need to be developed and provided as affordably 
as possible for the financial protection and security of the low-income and 
vulnerable sections of society who are exposed to various risks such as 
health, crop, life, etc. The Committee believe that it can bring about a 
positive change in poor people’s perceptions of insurance. Current 
microinsurance products such as PM Suraksha Bima Yojana and Jeevan 
Jyoti Bima Yojana have already been very successful. Therefore, 
developing innovative and customized products that suit the needs and 
preferences of the target population is vitally important. The Committee feel 
that this may require encouraging smaller, niche players in various 
geographic areas. The Committee, therefore, also recommend that the 
capital requirement of Rs. 100 crores may be reduced for such players.” 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 
“IRDAI has informed that they support to reduce the minimum capital 
requirement for smaller insurance companies. This proposal involves: 
 Amending the Insurance Act, 1938 to remove the fixed capital 
requirement of Rs. 100 crore. 
 Enabling IRDAI to set capital requirements through regulations based 
on factors like company size, business type, and complexity. 

3 
 
This change aims to promote financial inclusion by making insurance more 
accessible to low-income groups. 
 
The IRDAI (Rural, Social Sector, and Motor Third Party Obligations) 
Regulations, 2024 consolidate erstwhile regulations pertaining to minimum 
business obligations of insurers in rural, social sector and motor third party 
business for insurers. Compliance and measurement of these statutory 
obligations has been revised where the unit of measurement under the rural 
obligations will now be Gram Panchayat, the scope of social sector has 
been extended to cover cardholders and beneficiaries under various 
schemes.  
 
Obligations of the insurers in Rural Sector 
(a) Life Insurance 
Financial year 
following 
notification of 
Regulations 
Minimum number of 
gram panchayats 
Minimum percentage of 
lives to be covered in a 
gram panchayat 
First year 25,000 10% 
 
(b) General Insurance (General Insurers other than stand-alone health 
insurer (SAHI), Agriculture Insurance Co. Ltd (AIC) and ECGC) –     
Financial 
year 
following 
notification of 
Regulations 
Minimum number 
of gram 
panchayats 
Minimum 
percentage of 
dwellings and 
shops to be 
covered in a 
gram panchayat 
Minimum 
percentage of 
vehicles to be 
covered under 
motor insurance in 
a gram panchayat 
First year 25,000 10% 10% 
 
(c) Health Insurance (General Insurers including SAHI other than AIC and 
ECGC) 
Financial 
year 
following 
notification 
of 
Regulations 
Minimum number 
of gram 
panchayats 
Minimum 
percentage of 
lives to be 
covered in a 
gram panchayat 
under health 
insurance 
Minimum 
percentage of lives 
to be covered in a 
gram panchayat 
under personal 
accident insurance 
First year 25,000 10% 10% 
 
Obligations of the insurers in Social Sector: 
In respect of all Insurers (Life, General and Standalone Health, excluding 
AIC and ECGC) 
Financial Year following 
notification of Regulations 
Minimum percentage of lives to be 
covered as a proportion of total lives 
covered 
First year 10% 
 

4 
 
PSGICs have informed that they offer various micro insurance products by 
leveraging various channels to distribute micro insurance products in 
rural areas, including:  
 Cattle, Horse/Pony, Pig, Camel, and Duck Sukshma Bima Policies 
 Agricultural Pumpset Insurance 
 Animal Driven Cart, Lift Irrigation, Sheep & Goat, and Poultry Sukshma 
Bima Policies 
 Farmers' Package, Hut Sukshma Bima Policies 
PSICs remains committed to increasing micro insurance sales in rural areas 
through its distribution channels.” 
 
7. In regard to the recommendation of the Committee to consider a 
reduction of the capital requirement of Rs. 100 crores, the Ministry have 
submitted that IRDAI supports this. They have also stated that the proposal 
involves amending the Insurance Act, 1938, to remove the fixed capital 
requirement of Rs. 100 crore and enabling IRDAI to set capital requirements 
through regulations based on factors like company size, business type, and 
complexity. The Committee, however, also observe that the Ministry have not 
given any roadmap as to how the said recommendation will be implemented. 
The Committee therefore, expect the Ministry to furnish the same at the time of 
providing the Final Action Taken Statement.  
            Further, in regard to the recommendation of the Committee that new 
microinsurance products need to be developed and provided as affordably as 
possible, the Committee observe that the Ministry have enumerated existing 
schemes and products being offered. Therefore, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to also provide details of any new initiatives taken by them in view of 
the recommendation of the Committee. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Insurance Companies may be permitted to offer Value Added Services 
 
8.  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee are of the belief that insurance is not just about the 
underwriting of risk but also the management of risk and value-added 
services. Preventive risk mitigation activities on a standalone basis would 
not only help in the popularization and penetration of insurance but would 
also help to reduce the incidence of losses, thereby resulting in better-priced 
products and lower overall risk for the nation. Further, insurers would be 
able to provide a comprehensive risk mitigation solution to customers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended that insurance companies be 

5 
 
permitted to provide risk management and value-added services that are 
ancillary to the insurance business.” 
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 
“IRDAI has informed that the insurance industry is seeking regulatory 
amendments to allow insurers to offer value-added services (VAS) beyond 
core insurance products as the industry is exploring innovative ways to deliver 
new and valuable services to customers.  
Rationale for VAS: 
 Permitting VAS would enable insurers to:  
o Expand product offerings. 
o Enhance customer satisfaction through additional benefits. 
o Increase market competitiveness. 
o Offer risk mitigation services, potentially leading to lower 
premiums. 
IRDAI has provided following examples of VAS: 
 Health Insurance:  
o Embedding VAS and wellness covers in retail health policies. 
o Offering basic healthcare services like annual check-ups. 
o Organizing health camps in rural areas. 
 Property Insurance:  
o Providing risk mitigation services like:  
 Roadside assistance. 
 Safety consultations. 
 Disaster preparedness guidance. 
 Offering anti-theft alarms or fire extinguishers as add-ons. 
 General Insurance:  
o Risk inspections with suggestions for loss prevention. 
o SMS alerts during disasters to safeguard life and property. 
o Valuation services for optimal asset coverage. 
Benefits for Policyholders: 
 Access to a wider range of services beyond financial 
compensation. 
 Potential for lower premiums due to risk mitigation strategies. 
 Improved risk management and preparedness. 
The proposal to enable insurers and insurance intermediaries to provide 
services related or incidental to the insurance business as specified by IRDAI 
is under consideration.” 
 
10. The Committee are satisfied that their recommendation has been taken 
positively. The Ministry have stated that the proposal to enable insurers and 
insurance intermediaries to provide services related or incidental to the 
insurance business as specified by IRDAI is under consideration. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to apprise the Committee of the 
developments in this regard at the time of furnishing Final Action Taken 
Statement.  

6 
 
Recommendation No.5 
Allow composite license for life and non-life insurance 
 
11. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Insurance Act, 1938, and the regulations of 
the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority of India do not allow 
composite licensing for an insurer to undertake life, general, or health 
insurance under one entity. However, the Committee are of the view that 
allowing composite licensing could provide further impetus to the insurance 
sector owing to its various benefits. It can cut costs and compliance hassles 
for insurers, as they can run different insurance lines under one roof. It can 
also offer customers more choice and value, such as a single policy that 
covers life, health, and savings. It can boost insurance reach and 
awareness in India, as customers can get all-in-one insurance from one 
provider, with lower premiums and easier claims. The Committee are aware 
that to enable composite licensing in India, the Government and the IRDAI 
are planning to bring amendments to the existing insurance legislation. 
However, there are some challenges and issues that need to be resolved, 
such as the capital and solvency requirements for the composite insurers, 
as they have to deal with different risks and returns from different types of 
insurance; the accounting and reporting standards for the composite 
insurers, as they have to keep separate funds and records for different 
types of insurance; etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should hold deliberations with stakeholders to find solutions to 
these issues. They further recommend the Government to introduce a 
provision for composite licensing for insurance companies and make the 
related amendment in legislation at the earliest.” 
 
12. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 
 
“IRDAI has informed that they have proposed amendments to the Insurance 
Act, 1938, allowing for composite insurance businesses. This means an 
insurer could apply for registration to offer both life and non-life insurance 
products. Upon approval, IRDAI will develop regulations for composite 
insurers. These regulations will address risk profiles, business dynamics, 
and ensure a smooth transition through consultations with industry 
stakeholders. The proposal of IRDAI is under consideration.” 
 
13. The Committee note that IRDAI has proposed amendments to the 
Insurance Act, 1938, allowing for composite insurance businesses and the 
same is under consideration of the Ministry. The Committee expect the 
Ministry to expedite the matter to enable insurer to offer both life and non-life 
products.    
 
 
 

7 
 
Recommendation No.7 
Health Insurance – Missing Middle 
 
14.  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that according to NITI Aayog's report, ‘Health 
Insurance for India’s Missing Middle’, the Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana(AB-PMJAY), and State Government extension 
schemes, provide comprehensive hospitalization cover to the bottom 50% of 
the population - around 70 crore individuals. Around 20% of the population - 
25 crore individuals – are covered through social health insurance, and 
private voluntary health insurance. These innovative insurance solutions 
have transformed health insurance in the country and become enormously 
popular. Moreover, this demand increase has increased the availability of 
health care services through the growth of the hospitals and medical 
professionals. 
The Committee further note that, as per the Economic Survey 2022–
23,the out-of-pocket expenditure on health has reduced substantially from 
64.2% in 2013–14 to 48.2% in 2018–19 due to an increase in government 
health expenditure from 28.6% to 40.6% during the said period. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts made by the government to reduce out-of-
pocket expenditure. The Committee, therefore, recommend that steps such 
as increasing consumer awareness, developing simple and standardized 
health insurance products, sharing government data and infrastructure, 
ensuring the quality of services, and partial financing of health insurance 
should be initiated to increase health insurance coverage.  
The Committee, considering that many people in the country are just 
one medical bill away from slipping into poverty, believe that insurance 
products with affordable premiums and cashless settlement facilities would 
be instrumental in encouraging more people to opt for health insurance. The 
Committee also feel that the coverage of OPD, the diagnostic and wellness 
component, for regular medical claim insured, including group medical 
insurance, would reduce the financial burden of significant recurrent 
expenses, particularly for patients with chronic illnesses.  
The Committee are of the view that the Ayushman Bharat Scheme is 
an outstanding and highly successful initiative of the government to provide 
much-needed health insurance coverage to low-income families. The 
Committee feel that the scheme can be further strengthened by making it 
possible for the Missing Middle to participate on a paid basis would close a 
major insurance gap that exists in society.Providing such health insurance 
solutions will require close coordination with the Health Ministry and the 
National Health Authority (NHA). The Committee believe that an Inter-
Ministerial Working Group with participation from IRDA, NHA, other 
concerned agencies, consumers, health care providers, and health care 
insurance companies should be established to develop a long-term plan to 
be able to cover all sections of society with tailored government and private 
sector health insurance solutions.” 
 
15. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 
 

8 
 
“IRDAI has informed that they have been taking various steps for increasing 
the Health Insurance coverage, consumer awareness etc. some of the recent 
measures are as under: 
 Use and File procedure facilitates faster launch of products. Insurers are 
facilitated with faster launch of products as per the market needs by Use 
and File procedure vide circular dated 01.06.2022. 
 Dedicated products for Health Insurance coverage to Disabled persons. 
IRDAI issued Model product to the Insurers vide circular dated 27.02.2023. 
 Insurers shall ensure to offer Health Insurance products to cater to all the 
age groups 
 Insurers are advised to design products specifically for Senior Citizens, 
Students, Children, Maternity etc. 
 Insurers shall endeavour to offer coverage for persons with all types of 
existing medical conditions. 
 Insurers are advised to establish connectivity with NHCX (National Health 
Claim Exchange) for faster settlement of claims 
 Insurers are advised to create ABHA (Ayushman Bharat Health Account) 
ID. So that they can be part of National Health Digital eco-system 
 Regarding cashless settlement, it is submitted that 
o IRDAI has been monitoring cashless claims settlements and promoting 
100% cashless. 
o Mandated Insurers to establish connectivity with NHCX and such 
connectivity help to seamless integration of Hospitals with the Insurers 
and would promote cashless settlements. 
Towards reinforcing empowerment of policyholders and bolstering inclusive 
health insurance, IRDAI has issued a comprehensive Master Circular on 
Health Insurance Products. The Master Circular has brought in one place the 
entitlements in a health insurance policy available to a Policyholder/prospects 
for their easy reference and also emphasizes measures towards providing 
seamless, faster and hassle-free claims experience to a policyholder 
procuring health insurance policy and ensuring enhanced service standards 
across the health insurance sector. 
Some of the salient features of the Master Circular are: 
 Wider choice to be provided by the Insurers by making available 
products/addons/riders by offering diverse insurance products catering to 
all ages, regions, occupational categories, medical conditions/ treatments, 
all types of Hospitals and Health Care Providers to suit the affordability of 
the policyholders/prospects. 
 Customer Information Sheet (CIS) which is provided by the Insurer along 
with every policy document. It explains the basic features of insurance 
policies in simple words like type of insurance, sum insured, coverage 
details, exclusions, sub-limits, deductibles, and waiting periods  
 Customer to be provided with the flexibility to choose 
products/addons/riders as per his/her medical conditions/specific needs. 
 A Policyholder with multiple health insurance policies gets to choose the 
policy (s) under which he/she can get the admissible claim amount. The 
primary insurer with whom claim is first submitted shall coordinate and 
facilitate settlement of balance amount from the other insurers.  
 Insurer to decide on cashless authorization requests immediately and 
within one hour and final authorization on discharge from hospital within 
three hours of request from the hospital.” 

9 
 
 
16. The Committee, with a view to fill the major health insurance gap that 
exists in society, had desired that an Inter-Ministerial Working Group with 
participation from IRDA, NHA, other concerned agencies, consumers, health 
care providers, and health care insurance companies should be established to 
develop a long-term plan to be able to cover all sections of society with 
tailored government and private sector health insurance solutions. However, 
the Committee find that though the Ministry, in their reply, have enumerated 
various other initiatives, they have not mentioned anything about their efforts 
for the formation of such an Inter-Ministerial Working Group. Since the task of 
covering the gap in health insurance is complex and involves multiple 
agencies, close coordination among them would immensely help in 
formulating and executing a comprehensive plan. The Committee, therefore, 
would like to reiterate their recommendation and expect the Ministry to make 
sincere efforts at the appropriate level for the formation of such a group. 
 
             Further, the Committee also note that IRDAI has issued a 
comprehensive Master Circular on Health Insurance Products which inter alia 
provides Insurer to decide on cashless authorization requests immediately 
and within one hour and final authorization on discharge from the hospital 
within three hours of a request from the hospital. The Committee, while 
welcoming such steps, would also like to emphasize that these provisions are 
strictly implemented at the ground to reduce the hassle for the beneficiaries. 
All the grievances in this regard should be taken seriously and resolved 
promptly. 
 
Recommendation No.8 
Reduce GST for health insurance and microinsurance products 
 
17. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee feel that there is a need to rationalize the GST rate on 
insurance products, especially health and term insurance, which is 18% at 
present. The high rate of GST results in a high premium burden, which acts 
as a deterrent to getting insurance policies. The Committee, with a view to 
make insurance more affordable, recommend that GST rates applicable to 
health insurance products, particularly retail policies for senior citizens and 
microinsurance policies (up to limits prescribed under PMJAY, presently Rs. 
5 lakh), and term policies may be reduced.” 
 

10 
 
18. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 
 
“IRDAI has informed that several developed countries, including the 
European Union and Canada, exempt insurance products from VAT or 
GST. This reinforces the argument for providing similar benefits in India to 
encourage greater insurance penetration. 
Supporting Arguments 
 Increased longevity and healthcare needs necessitate greater health 
insurance adoption. 
 Extending GST exemption to micro-insurance and senior citizen health 
policies would benefit disadvantaged sections. 
 The current inconsistency where medical services are exempt but 
premiums attract GST creates an unfair burden. 
To give relief to disadvantageous and vulnerable sections of society, IRDAI 
has suggested to extend exemption from GST for retail health policies 
offered to senior citizens, micro-Insurance policies and term insurance 
policies upto a suitable limit. This Department supports the proposal of 
reduction of GST.” 
 
19. The Committee are glad that the IRDAI is in agreement with the 
recommendation of the Committee to reduce GST rates. Moreover, the 
Department of Financial Services also supports this proposal. However, the 
Committee note that the reply does not contain any roadmap as to how the 
recommendation of the Committee would be implemented. Since, the matter 
also involves the GST Council and the Department of Revenue, the Committee, 
therefore, expect the Ministry of Finance to coordinate and do the needful so 
that a decision in this regard may be taken.   
 
Recommendation No.9 
Home and Property insurance in disaster prone areas 
 
20. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that India has been ranked 3rd, after the US and 
China, in recording the highest number of natural disasters since 1900. By 
disaster type, India is marred mostly by floods. The Committee feel that the 
natural disasters can cause a lot of damage to infrastructure in India, a 
country that faces many natural hazards because of its demographic and 
geographic features. Also, many houses are not safe enough to resist 
earthquakes and floods. These factors make them very prone to damages 
resulting from natural disasters. Considering the increased occurrence of 
unforeseen and erratic natural calamities in recent times, the Committee 
recommend that the government should explore options as to how homes 
and properties, especially those of economically vulnerable groups, can be 
insured in areas susceptible to catastrophic damages with the aid of 
Central/State Government. This may require a specialized insurance 

11 
 
business to be set up by one of the Public Sector General Insurance 
Companies with subsidized premiums for disaster-prone areas. Such 
insurance businesses have been established in many other areas, such as 
Florida which is subject to regular hurricane damage. Similarly, the 
government may need to consider how to provide insurance for projects that 
have to deal with extreme weather such as glacial lake outbursts. This 
happened recently to the Teesta III dam in Sikkim. These additional 
insurance products will require extensive consultation with general 
insurance companies, reinsurers, and enterprises that are facing such risks. 
The Committee therefore proposes that IRDA set up a Working Group with 
all concerned stakeholders to examine all these issues in detail and then 
provide appropriate policy recommendations to address this important set of 
issues.” 
 
21. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 
 
“IRDAI has informed that the issue of providing insurance to economically 
vulnerable groups in disaster-prone areas is already under the consideration 
of various committees constituted by different organizations such as NDMA. 
It is also important to consider mandating the homeowners, through 
respective RERAs home insurance for all, especially, those living in 
disaster-prone areas. The above issues have to be deliberated at length 
with various stakeholders, then only a proposal to provide insurance to 
economically vulnerable groups in disaster-prone areas can be considered. 
The insurance sector supports catastrophic insurance to which requires 
collaboration between the government, insurers, reinsurers and regulators. 
While discussions are ongoing, specific solutions like subsidized premiums 
and specialized insurance businesses are under consideration. Additionally, 
parametric insurance offers significant advantages including faster claims 
payment, cost efficiency, clear triggers for pay-outs and financial stability for 
the insured following disasters. 
NDMA has constituted a working group, Committee on Disaster Risk 
Reduction (CoDRR) to make single peril parametric insurance product 
available to Indian market. DFS is the member of the said working group.” 
 
 
22. The Committee note that NDMA has constituted a working group, 
Committee on Disaster Risk Reduction (CoDRR) to make single peril 
parametric insurance product available to Indian market and the Department of 
Financial Service is the member of the said working group. The Committee 
expect that due deliberation with stakeholders will be conducted expeditiously, 
ensuring that, among other things, insurance at subsidized premiums is 
provided to economically vulnerable groups in disaster-prone areas.  
 
 
 
 

12 
 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 
Public Sector General Insurance Companies Competitiveness Roadmap 
23.  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that the financial condition of 4 Public Sector 
General Insurance Companies needs to be strengthened. They lack 
adequate capital and have lagging insolvency ratios. In regard to their 
performance, the Committee have been apprised that their overexposure in 
health insurance business, i.e., 50% of their total business, has been one of 
the reasons, as the same has led to Rs. 26,000 crore of losses in five years 
from 2016–17 to 2020–21. Further, wage revisions which were affected in 
2017 and 2023, and COVID-19 losses which were a wider industry-level 
phenomenon, have been assigned as the other causes of their performance 
decline. In regard to remedial steps being taken, the Committee have been 
given to understand that almost Rs. 17,000 crore has already been infused 
in terms of capital into these 4 Public Sector Companies over the past 3-4 
years; more capital is also being infused now through the Supplementary 
Demand for Grants. It has also been stated that the focus area for improving 
their performance such as the need to exit from unprofitable lines of 
business and rebalance the business mix, improve underwriting capacity, 
improve the retail business portfolio controllable expenses, improvement in 
technology, rationalization of office rentals, and organizational restructuring 
involving bringing more people on the marketing side of their operations 
rather than sitting in the back office, have been identified. The Committee, in 
view of the above, recommend that an appropriate strategic roadmap to 
implement all the intended remedial steps, should be established for these 
companies to improve their competitiveness and enable them to attract 
sufficient capital and talent to grow. This roadmap should have appropriate 
timelines for demonstrable performance improvement. If performance does 
not improve sufficiently quickly, there should be further aggressive 
measures that should be evaluated. The Board of each of these Public 
Sector General Insurance Companies should approve these strategic 
roadmaps and commit to performance improvements. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the details of such roadmap drawn and the concrete 
action taken thereof to improve the performance of these companies.” 
 
24. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 
 
“IRDAI has informed that they had highlighted the deteriorating financial 
position of National Insurance Company Limited (NICL), Oriental Insurance 
Company Limited (OICL), and United India Insurance Company Limited 
(UIIC) since FY 2016-17. They have urged the Department of Financial 
Services (DFS) to consider measures like  
 capital infusion,  
 stricter performance monitoring, and  
 corrective plans to improve the companies' solvency and  
 overall financial health.  
 

13 
 
IRDAI has also emphasized the possibility of taking regulatory actions to 
protect policyholder interests. 
The financial health of National, Oriental, and United India requires 
improvement. While the government considers options like capital infusion 
and potential privatization, IRDAI continues its focus on regulatory 
measures. Each company has outlined strategies to achieve sustainable 
growth and profitability. Addressing these concerns is crucial for ensuring a 
strong and secure public sector general insurance market in India. 
Further, companies have been advised to formulate a strategic roadmap 
with appropriate timelines and get the same approved by their Board.” 
 
25. The Committee note that the Ministry in their reply, apart from that the 
companies have been advised to formulate a strategic roadmap with 
appropriate timelines and get the same approved by their Board has not 
mentioned any concrete action to improve their financial conditions. The 
Committee therefore, desire the Ministry to provide all the details of the action 
that have been taken or planned to be taken in this regard.  It is needless to 
emphasize that the concerns of the Public Sector Insurance Companies would 
also be appropriately addressed by the Ministry.  
 
Recommendation No.12 
Level Playing Field for Public Sector Companies 
 
26.  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee find that at present, TDS on GST applies to insurance 
provided by the Public Sector Insurance Companies, whereas it doesn't 
apply to insurance offered by Private Sector Insurance Companies. The 
Committee also find that the Public Sector Insurance Companies have to 
mandatorily participate in government-run insurance schemes which 
impacts their profitability. The Committee with a view to ensure a level 
playing field, recommend that such provisions be uniformly applied to all 
players.” 
 
27. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 
 
“IRDAI has informed that the Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) insurers are 
required to deduct TDS (Tax Deduction at Source) at a rate of 2% (CGST + 
SGST) on payments exceeding Rs. 2.5 lakh, while private insurers are not. 
This is due to a notification extending the TDS requirement to entities 
specified under Section 51 of the CGST Act, 2017. The Committee 
recommends removing the TDS requirement for PSU insurers and de-
notifying them from the relevant section. This would create a level playing 
field between public and private insurers. 

14 
 
Both private and public insurers participate in government insurance 
schemes like PMFBY (Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana), PMJJBY 
(Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana), PMSBY (Pradhan Mantri 
Suraksha Bima Yojana), and PMJAY (Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana). 
Recommendation by the Insurers 
o Favors a uniform tax structure for all non-life insurers (public and private) 
instead of TDS. 
o Supports mandatory participation by private players in government 
schemes for wider coverage. 
Highlights existing delegation from IRDAI (Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India) to insurer boards for areas like commission 
payments, agent appointments, intermediary utilization, and management 
expenses. This delegation allows insurers to set their priorities and act 
independently within regulatory guidelines.” 
 
28. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry ambiguous. It seems that 
the Ministry have not examined the matter as to how the anomaly in regard to 
treatment of Public and Private Sector be removed. Rather they have 
presented the factual positions. The Committee while reiterating their 
recommendation would like the Ministry to examine the matter and come up 
with the solutions to ensure fair parity for the two sectors.  
 
 
Recommendation No.18 
Policy Roadmap  
29. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that ‘Insurance for All by 2047’ is a mission set by the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) to 
increase insurance penetration and coverage in the country. According to 
the IRDAI, the objective is to ensure that every citizen has appropriate life, 
health, and property insurance cover and that every enterprise is supported 
by appropriate insurance solutions. The IRDAI also aims to make the Indian 
insurance sector globally attractive and competitive by moving to principles-
based regulation and streamlining regulatory processes. The Committee 
appreciate IRDAI for this much-needed initiative and believe that it will not 
only give a boost to the insurance sector but also pave the way for 
sustainable economic and social development in the country. The 
Committee, however, find that at present, there is no Policy Roadmap for 
achieving the envisaged ambitious target of Insurance for All by 2047. They, 
therefore, recommend that a Policy Roadmap White Paper be prepared with 
comprehensive stakeholder consultation so that it can act as a beacon for 
all stakeholders with a view to sustaining the insurance sector with 
affordable and useful products.” 
 
30. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows: 

15 
 
“IRDAI has informed that it aligns with the Government of India’s vision of 
Viksit Bharat@2047, committed to promoting a congenial business 
environment for "Insurance for all by 2047." 
The Indian insurance sector, currently the tenth-largest globally, is poised 
for significant growth. As per a report by the reinsurer Swiss Re, Indian 
Insurance market is poised to become the sixth-largest by 2032. This 
growth potential is attributed to India's large and unique market, supported 
by a robust economy, an expanding middle class, a young population, 
growing disposable incomes, and widespread technology usage. 
IRDAI has further informed that it is pursuing structured regulatory reforms 
to foster development of insurance sector.  A number of initiatives to 
promote ease of doing business are also taken as part of overall regulatory 
reforms.  The overall objective of these reforms is to enhance insurance 
penetration while safeguarding policyholder interests.   
Over the past two years, IRDAI has implemented a series of reforms aimed 
at promoting ease of doing business and reducing compliance burdens for 
insurers which include, inter alia,  
 extending ‘Use and File’ procedure for all the health and general 
insurance products and most of the life insurance products;  
 simplifying the process of registration of insurance companies, raising 
investment threshold for individual investors and specifying indicative 
criteria for determination of ‘Fit and proper’ status of investors and 
promoters;  
 increasing the period for considering state/ central government dues for 
calculation of solvency margin and reduction of solvency factor related to 
crop insurance;  
 revising factor for calculation of solvency for Unit Linked Business 
(without guarantees) and Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana 
(PMJJBY);  
 increasing the roles and responsibilities of Appointed Actuaries;  
 increasing the threshold for companies to raise other forms of capital 
(viz., subordinated debt and/or preference shares);  
 increasing the experimentation period of regulatory sandbox to test 
innovative products;  
 increasing the maximum limit of tie-ups for corporate agents and 
insurance marketing firms with insurers;  
 revamping the guidelines for cross-border reinsurers; and  
 revising expenses of management (EoM) and commission limits for 
insurers.  To further incentivize insurers to invest in insurance 
awareness, IRDAI allowed insurers to spend an additional 5% of 
allowable expenses for management of both life and general insurance. 
 Requiring Insurers to issue concise and updated Customer Information 
Sheet (CIS) to the policyholders (CIS contains all important information 
about health insurance policy with details such as coverage, exclusions, 
and key concepts in health insurance policy) 
 Issuing guidelines on Bima Vahaks, a women-centric dedicated 
distribution channel, for enhancing insurance inclusion and awareness 
with a focus on rural areas 

16 
 
 Amendments to reinsurance regulations with an objective to promote 
more favorable business environment, including requiring Indian 
reinsurers to maintain a minimum retention of 50% within India, 
simplifying the Order of Preference for reinsurance placements, relaxing 
compliance requirements, and reducing the minimum capital 
requirement for new FRBs.  
In response to the dynamic changes in the Indian insurance market, IRDAI 
has informed that it is comprehensively reviewing the regulatory architecture 
to move to principle-based regulations, from the existing rule-based 
regulatory framework.   The reforms/ initiatives towards the same include 
the following: 
 Formation of Mission mode teams to implement a Risk Based 
Supervisory (RBS) framework and a Risk Based Capital (RBC) regime 
with an objective to align the insurance sector with global standards and 
industry dynamics. 
 Continuing its reform agenda, IRDAI has undertaken a comprehensive 
review of the regulatory framework, leading to the approval of nine 
principle-based consolidated regulations.   These regulations replaced 
37 regulations with seven regulations and introduction of two new 
regulations enhancing clarity and coherence in the regulatory landscape. 
These regulations encompass key domains such as safeguarding of 
policyholders' interests, rural and social sector responsibilities, electronic 
insurance marketplace, insurance products and operation of foreign 
reinsurance branches, as well as aspects of registration, actuarial, 
finance, investment and corporate governance.  
 IRDAI is committed to supporting digital initiatives, with the development 
of the 'Bima Sugam' e-marketplace platform and the issuance of related 
regulations.  
 The comprehensive framework laid down in the recently notified IRDAI 
(Registration, Capital Structure, Transfer of Shares & Amalgamation 
Insurers) Regulations, 2024) aims to foster the growth of the insurance 
sector by simplifying various processes, including registration of 
insurers, transfer of shareholding, capital structure, amalgamation of 
insurers, and listing of shares on stock exchanges. By streamlining these 
procedures, the regulations seek to enhance the ease of doing business 
within the insurance industry, facilitating smoother operations and 
promoting overall sectoral growth.  
The reforms so far undertaken are also showing results with a number of 
domestic investors establishing new insurance companies.  In the last 
preceding two years itself, IRDAI has issued Certificate of Registration to 
six insurance companies after a gap of 11 years in case of life insurers 
and 5 years in case of non-life insurers.   
 De-notified tariffs of insurance products to allow competitive pricing 
and designing of products by the insurance companies to the serve a 
broad range of population. 
 Recommendations are also made to DFS for effecting certain 
important amendments to the provisions of Insurance Act, 1938 to 
further expand the insurance market and deepen the insurance 
penetration.  

17 
 
These reforms, coupled with recommendations for amendments to the 
Insurance Act, 1938, demonstrate IRDAI's commitment to expanding the 
insurance market and deepening penetration.” 
 
31. The Committee note that the Ministry in their reply have stated that the 
IRDAI aligns with the Government of India’s vision of Viksit Bharat@2047 and 
committed to promoting a congenial business environment for "Insurance for 
all by 2047". They have also enumerated various steps that have been taken as 
well as planned by the IRDAI for the development of the Sector. Moreover, the 
Ministry have indicated that there may be amendments to the Insurance Act, 
1938 in this regard. However, the Committee observe that the reply of the 
Ministry is silent on their specific recommendation of preparing a Policy 
Roadmap White Paper for achieving the envisaged target of ‘Insurance for All 
by 2047’. The Committee firmly believe that having a Policy Roadmap would 
not only provide clear direction and impetus to the Insurance Sector but also 
dispel any lingering uncertainties. The Committee while reiterating their 
recommendation would expect the Ministry to make concrete efforts in this 
regard by having comprehensive consultation with the stakeholders and come 
up with a Policy Roadmap White Paper.   
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
4 December, 2024 
13 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 1) 
INSURANCE COVERAGE 
Increasing Awareness through Public Campaigns  
2.1 The Committee note that the insurance penetration in India in 2021 was 4.2%, 
while the global average was 7%. Similarly, insurance density in India was $91, 
whereas the global average was $874. Moreover, the Indian insurance sector is 
heavily tilted towards the life insurance segment which has a share of 76%. 
Whereas, globally, the share of life insurance business in total premium was 43.7% 
and the share of non-life insurance premium was 56.3%. The gap in coverage is 
more in the general and health insurance segments. 
 
2.2 The Committee find that the insurance sector is a vital component of modern-
day economies, offering protection and risk management to individuals and 
enterprises. It safeguards citizens’ lives, health, and assets, providing financial 
support to them and their dependents while serving as a safety net for low-income 
sections. For enterprises, it not only ensures continuity and cushions against 
untoward incidents but also enables scalability. A vibrant insurance sector fosters 
market stability, absorbs financial shocks, provides long-term patient capital, attracts 
Foreign Direct Investment, and generates employment. Moreover, insurance aids 
governments by ensuring citizen protection, covering businesses, strengthening the 
economy, and attracting long term investment in government securities and other 
investments. 
2.3 The Committee are, therefore, of the view that there is an imminent need to 
create mass-level awareness about the need and benefits of having necessary 
insurance protection of diverse insurance products, not just life insurance. The 
Committee acknowledge that the Association of Mutual Funds of India (AMFI) has 
done a stellar public awareness campaign in building up awareness about investing 
in the stock markets, particularly through systematic investment plans (SIPs). The 
Committee recommend that a similar campaign be launched to educate consumers 
about the benefits of different types of insurance products, claims paid during 
COVID-19, and how claims have uplifted families in the country, how the insurance 

19 
 
sector has helped in large claims during floods, cyclones, etc.. This awareness 
campaign should be launched jointly by insurance companies and IRDAI and feature 
life, health, and general insurance products. Reputed and credible celebrities can 
highlight that they have purchased different insurance products such as for motor, 
home, and health and recommend that the general public should also purchase such 
products for their family’s security. 
Reply of the Government 
 IRDAI has informed that they acknowledge the importance of insurance 
awareness campaigns and are undertaking a multi-pronged approach involving 
various stakeholders. The insurance industry is undertaking a variety of initiatives to 
raise awareness about the importance of insurance and its benefits.  
 
 The Insurance Councils, along with insurance companies are actively 
engaged in awareness campaigns to reach a diverse audience: 
 Mass Media: Utilizing television, social media, and prominent public spaces 
like railway stations and airports for widespread reach. 
 Rural Outreach: Tailored programs using WhatsApp and local language 
communication to bridge the gap in rural areas (as implemented by NIACL). 
 Joint Initiatives: Collaborating with the General Insurance Council for the 
"BIMA SUGAM" platform, a comprehensive resource for all insurance needs 
(as highlighted by NIACL). 
 National Events: Leveraging National Insurance Awareness Day (June 28th) 
for focused campaigns to raise public consciousness (mentioned by both 
NIACL and UIICL). 
 
 Additionally, companies are implementing specific strategies: 
 Radio FM: Public awareness campaigns for various purposes, including claim 
settlements, new product launches and agent recruitment. 
 Print Media: Targeted newspaper advertisements for special insurance offers 
(e.g., Women's Day discounts). 
 Digital Media: Utilizing social media platforms like YouTube and Facebook for 
educational content (e.g., safety measures during disasters) and positive 
testimonials (e.g., Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojna beneficiaries 
highlighted). Continued expansion into newer platforms like launch of a 
WhatsApp channel. 

20 
 
 Out-of-Home Media: Product advertisements in prominent locations with plans 
for expansion to Tier II & III cities through metro trains, bus branding, and 
airports  
 Event Sponsorships: Collaborations with institutions like The Hindu Group and 
National Insurance Academy to promote insurance awareness. 
 Public Campaigns: Distributing flyers, product brochures, and conducting 
training sessions for staff, agents, and intermediaries. 
 State Insurance Plan: Focused awareness programs in adopted states and 
allocated districts. This involves activities like awareness camps in schools, 
colleges, village markets, and Gram Panchayats, distribution of local 
language pamphlets on relevant insurance products, and agent/POS 
recruitment to generate local employment opportunities. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 2) 
Promotion of Microinsurance 
2.4 The Committee find that microinsurance protect low-income people from 
financial losses with affordable products. This section of society faces many risks 
that make them vulnerable to uncertainty, therefore, microinsurance is essential to 
help them cope and recover. microinsurance could be an important tool for financial 
inclusion and poverty alleviation in India, where a large section of the population 
lacks access to formal insurance services. 
The Committee note that IRDAI had issued the IRDAI (Micro Insurance) 
Regulations, 2015, which define the eligibility criteria, product features, distribution 
channels, and reporting requirements for microinsurance. The Committee further 
note that in the promotion of microinsurance, there are several challenges such as 
small ticket size coupled with high transaction and service delivery costs, absence of 
a business model that can attract good intermediaries, capacity building of 
intermediaries, and lack of basic awareness and knowledge on how insurance 
works. The Committee, therefore, recommend that new microinsurance products 
need to be developed and provided as affordably as possible for the financial 
protection and security of the low-income and vulnerable sections of society who are 
exposed to various risks such as health, crop, life, etc. The Committee believe that it 
can bring about a positive change in poor people’s perceptions of insurance. Current 

21 
 
microinsurance products such as PM Suraksha Bima Yojana and Jeevan Jyoti Bima 
Yojana have already been very successful. Therefore, developing innovative and 
customized products that suit the needs and preferences of the target population is 
vitally important. The Committee feel that this may require encouraging smaller, 
niche players in various geographic areas. The Committee, therefore, also 
recommend that the capital requirement of Rs. 100 crores may be reduced for such 
players. 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that they support to reduce the minimum capital requirement for 
smaller insurance companies. This proposal involves: 
 Amending the Insurance Act, 1938 to remove the fixed capital requirement of 
Rs. 100 crore. 
 Enabling IRDAI to set capital requirements through regulations based on 
factors like company size, business type, and complexity. 
This change aims to promote financial inclusion by making insurance more 
accessible to low-income groups. 
 
The IRDAI (Rural, Social Sector, and Motor Third Party Obligations) Regulations, 
2024 consolidate erstwhile regulations pertaining to minimum business obligations of 
insurers in rural, social sector and motor third party business for insurers. 
Compliance and measurement of these statutory obligations has been revised where 
the unit of measurement under the rural obligations will now be Gram Panchayat, the 
scope of social sector has been extended to cover cardholders and beneficiaries 
under various schemes.  
Obligations of the insurers in Rural Sector 
(a) Life Insurance 
Financial year following 
notification of Regulations 
Minimum number of gram 
panchayats 
Minimum percentage of lives 
to be covered in a gram 
panchayat 
First year 25,000 10% 
 
(b) General Insurance (General Insurers other than stand-alone health insurer 
(SAHI), Agriculture Insurance Co. Ltd (AIC) and ECGC) –     

22 
 
Financial year 
following notification 
of Regulations 
Minimum number of 
gram panchayats 
Minimum percentage 
of dwellings and 
shops to be covered 
in a gram panchayat 
Minimum percentage 
of vehicles to be 
covered under motor 
insurance in a gram 
panchayat 
First year 25,000 10% 10% 
 
 
(c) Health Insurance (General Insurers including SAHI other than AIC and ECGC) 
Financial year 
following notification 
of Regulations 
Minimum number of 
gram panchayats 
Minimum percentage 
of lives to be covered 
in a gram panchayat 
under health 
insurance 
Minimum percentage 
of lives to be covered 
in a gram panchayat 
under personal 
accident insurance 
First year 25,000 10% 10% 
 
Obligations of the insurers in Social Sector: 
In respect of all Insurers (Life, General and Standalone Health, excluding AIC and 
ECGC) 
Financial Year following notification of 
Regulations 
Minimum percentage of lives to be covered 
as a proportion of total lives covered 
First year 10% 
 
PSGICs have informed that they offer various micro insurance products by 
leveraging various channels to distribute micro insurance products in rural areas, 
including:  
 Cattle, Horse/Pony, Pig, Camel, and Duck Sukshma Bima Policies 
 Agricultural Pumpset Insurance 
 Animal Driven Cart, Lift Irrigation, Sheep & Goat, and Poultry Sukshma 
Bima Policies 
 Farmers' Package, Hut Sukshma Bima Policies 
 
PSICs remains committed to increasing micro insurance sales in rural areas through 
its distribution channels. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
  

23 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
DISTRIBUTION NETWORK 
Open Architecture for Agents 
2.5 The Committee note that, as per the Insurance Act of 1938, insurance agents 
can associate with one life, one non-life, and one health insurance company for the 
distribution of insurance business. However, the Committee, during deliberation on 
the subject, felt that in order to facilitate a larger outreach of insurance products and 
a stronger distribution infrastructure, Open Architecture for insurance agents is 
required. Open Architecture enables agents to associate with multiple insurance 
companies, resulting in higher insurance penetration while accelerating financial 
inclusion and lower distribution costs. It will also provide an equitable footing for the 
insurance agents vis-à-vis the insurance intermediaries. Also, customers would have 
access to more options at a competitive price. However, the Committee recommend 
extensive industry consultations on this matter to ensure that policies provide a level 
playing field to all players and do not unduly disadvantage incumbents. Additionally, 
any changes should be implemented over a period of time to enable all participants 
to prepare for these major changes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the committee is noted.  The strength of agency force of 
leading life insurance companies as on 31.03.2024 is: - 
Sr. no  Life insurance 
company No. of agents 
Percentage 
share of 
agents 
Percentage of 
Market share 
(Individual First 
year premium) 
1 
Bajaj Allianz Life 
Insurance Company 
Limited 
1,50,841 5.21% 4.57% 
2 
TATA AIA Life 
Insurance Company 
Limited 
1,17,656 4.06% 5.49% 
3 
ICICI Prudential Life 
Insurance Company 
Limited 
2,09,521 7.24% 5.91% 
4 Max Life Insurance 
Company Limited 1,02,693 3.5% 6.18% 
5 HDFC Life Insurance 
Company Limited 2,14,275 7.40% 9.92% 
6 SBI Life Insurance 
Company Limited 2,46,078 8.50% 15.90% 

24 
 
7 Life Insurance 
Corporation of India 14,14,743 48.87% 38.44% 
  Total 24,55,807 85% 86.41% 
 
LIC has submitted that out of total 28.94 lakh individual agents of life insurance 
industry, their agency force consists of around 14.15 lakh agents i.e. approx. 49% of 
the total life insurance agency force bringing in 96% business of LIC. LIC gives a lot 
of long-term benefits to its agents in the form of gratuity, Medi-claim, group insurance 
etc., as per the LIC of India (Agents) Regulations, 2017. LIC also ensures growth 
and professional training of the agents. LIC being a Domestic Systemically Important 
Insurer, its performance and stability is of vital significance to the citizens and the 
economy as a whole.  
It is further submitted that life insurance policies are generally long-term 
commitments and the policyholders require services of the agents from time to time. 
In case of open architecture, agents may switch over from one insurer to another, 
which could be detrimental to the interest of the policyholders and have a 
disbalancing effect on life insurance companies as enumerated from the table above. 
 
At present, insurance can be also distributed through Brokers, Corporate Agents, 
Web Aggregators, Point Of Sales Persons, Insurance Marketing Firms, etc. In order 
to enable the policyholders/prospects to have wider choice and access to insurance 
through various distribution channels, the maximum number of tie-ups for Corporate 
Agents (CA) and Insurance Marketing Firms (IMF) have been increased. Now, a CA 
can tie up with 9 insurers (earlier 3 insurers), and IMF can tie up with 6 insurers 
(earlier 2 insurers) in each line of business of life, general and health for distribution 
of their insurance products.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 4) 
Insurance Companies may be permitted to offer Value Added Services 
2.6 The Committee are of the belief that insurance is not just about the 
underwriting of risk but also the management of risk and value-added services. 
Preventive risk mitigation activities on a standalone basis would not only help in the 

25 
 
popularization and penetration of insurance but would also help to reduce the 
incidence of losses, thereby resulting in better-priced products and lower overall risk 
for the nation. Further, insurers would be able to provide a comprehensive risk 
mitigation solution to customers. The Committee, therefore, recommended that 
insurance companies be permitted to provide risk management and value-added 
services that are ancillary to the insurance business. 
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that the insurance industry is seeking regulatory amendments to 
allow insurers to offer value-added services (VAS) beyond core insurance products 
as the industry is exploring innovative ways to deliver new and valuable services to 
customers.  
Rationale for VAS: 
 Permitting VAS would enable insurers to:  
o Expand product offerings. 
o Enhance customer satisfaction through additional benefits. 
o Increase market competitiveness. 
o Offer risk mitigation services, potentially leading to lower premiums. 
IRDAI has provided following examples of VAS: 
 Health Insurance:  
o Embedding VAS and wellness covers in retail health policies. 
o Offering basic healthcare services like annual check-ups. 
o Organizing health camps in rural areas. 
 Property Insurance:  
o Providing risk mitigation services like:  
 Roadside assistance. 
 Safety consultations. 
 Disaster preparedness guidance. 
 Offering anti-theft alarms or fire extinguishers as add-ons. 
 General Insurance:  
o Risk inspections with suggestions for loss prevention. 
o SMS alerts during disasters to safeguard life and property. 
o Valuation services for optimal asset coverage. 
Benefits for Policyholders: 
 Access to a wider range of services beyond financial compensation. 

26 
 
 Potential for lower premiums due to risk mitigation strategies. 
 Improved risk management and preparedness. 
The proposal to enable insurers and insurance intermediaries to provide services 
related or incidental to the insurance business as specified by IRDAI is under 
consideration. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 5) 
Allow composite license for life and non-life insurance 
2.7 The Committee note that the Insurance Act, 1938, and the regulations of the 
Insurance Regulatory Development Authority of India do not allow composite 
licensing for an insurer to undertake life, general, or health insurance under one 
entity. However, the Committee are of the view that allowing composite licensing 
could provide further impetus to the insurance sector owing to its various benefits. It 
can cut costs and compliance hassles for insurers, as they can run different 
insurance lines under one roof. It can also offer customers more choice and value, 
such as a single policy that covers life, health, and savings. It can boost insurance 
reach and awareness in India, as customers can get all-in-one insurance from one 
provider, with lower premiums and easier claims. The Committee are aware that to 
enable composite licensing in India, the Government and the IRDAI are planning to 
bring amendments to the existing insurance legislation. However, there are some 
challenges and issues that need to be resolved, such as the capital and solvency 
requirements for the composite insurers, as they have to deal with different risks and 
returns from different types of insurance; the accounting and reporting standards for 
the composite insurers, as they have to keep separate funds and records for 
different types of insurance; etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should hold deliberations with stakeholders to find solutions to these 
issues. They further recommend the Government to introduce a provision for 
composite licensing for insurance companies and make the related amendment in 
legislation at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that they have proposed amendments to the Insurance Act, 
1938, allowing for composite insurance businesses. This means an insurer could 

27 
 
apply for registration to offer both life and non-life insurance products. Upon 
approval, IRDAI will develop regulations for composite insurers. These regulations 
will address risk profiles, business dynamics, and ensure a smooth transition through 
consultations with industry stakeholders. The proposal of IRDAI is under 
consideration. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 6) 
Actuarial  
2.8 Actuaries play an important role in the insurance sector as they are skilled in 
the risk analysis for different insurance products and provide support in designing 
and pricing of policies and financial modelling. The Actuaries Act, 2006 governs the 
profession of actuaries in India. As of now there are about 1000 actuaries including 
app. 600 Fellow Members of Institute of Actuaries of India which is too few given the 
projected growth of insurance sector. An enabling environment for the growth of 
actuarial profession in India should be created by building awareness in 
schools/colleges, encouraging more people to take the exam, coaching classes, and 
providing better career prospects. Further, as of now actuaries are used only in 
Insurance Sector, but their competence in financial modelling, risk analysis etc. could 
be used in government, banking, asset management, and other financial services 
sectors as well.  
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that the Institute of Actuaries of India (IAI), a statutory body 
formed under the Actuaries Act, 2006, has been established to promote and regulate 
Actuarial profession in India.  IRDAI is involved in promoting actuarial profession in 
the following manner: 
 
1. Member (Actuary) is ex-officio member of the Council of Institute of Actuaries of 
India (IAI). The Council is the apex body for decision making. The president of 
IAI is a member of Insurance Advisory Committee. 
2. The Institute of Insurance and Risk Management (IIRM), Hyderabad is a leading 
education institution jointly promoted by IRDAI and Government of Telangana. 

28 
 
IIRM actively promotes Actuarial Science within its educational programs, 
offering a range of specialized courses including Post Graduate Diplomas 
specializing in Actuarial Science and Executive Post Graduate Diplomas for 
working professionals. Additionally, it also plans to introduce advanced diploma 
programs to enhance expertise in this field. 
3. Further, IIRM is in the process of collaborating with Institute of Actuaries of India 
(IAI) whereby its students can receive exemptions for certain specific subjects. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 8) 
Reduce GST for health insurance and microinsurance products 
2.9 The Committee feel that there is a need to rationalize the GST rate on 
insurance products, especially health and term insurance, which is 18% at present. 
The high rate of GST results in a high premium burden, which acts as a deterrent to 
getting insurance policies. The Committee, with a view to make insurance more 
affordable, recommend that GST rates applicable to health insurance products, 
particularly retail policies for senior citizens and microinsurance policies (up to limits 
prescribed under PMJAY, presently Rs. 5 lakh), and term policies may be reduced.  
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that several developed countries, including the European Union 
and Canada, exempt insurance products from VAT or GST. This reinforces the 
argument for providing similar benefits in India to encourage greater insurance 
penetration. 
Supporting Arguments 
 Increased longevity and healthcare needs necessitate greater health insurance 
adoption. 
 Extending GST exemption to micro-insurance and senior citizen health policies 
would benefit disadvantaged sections. 
 The current inconsistency where medical services are exempt but premiums 
attract GST creates an unfair burden. 
To give relief to disadvantageous and vulnerable sections of society, IRDAI has 
suggested to extend exemption from GST for retail health policies offered to senior 

29 
 
citizens, micro-Insurance policies and term insurance policies upto a suitable limit. 
This Department supports the proposal of reduction of GST. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 9) 
GENERAL INSURANCE 
Home and Property insurance in disaster prone areas 
2.10 The Committee note that India has been ranked 3rd, after the US and China, 
in recording the highest number of natural disasters since 1900. By disaster type, 
India is marred mostly by floods. The Committee feel that the natural disasters can 
cause a lot of damage to infrastructure in India, a country that faces many natural 
hazards because of its demographic and geographic features. Also, many houses 
are not safe enough to resist earthquakes and floods. These factors make them very 
prone to damages resulting from natural disasters. Considering the increased 
occurrence of unforeseen and erratic natural calamities in recent times, the 
Committee recommend that the government should explore options as to how 
homes and properties, especially those of economically vulnerable groups, can be 
insured in areas susceptible to catastrophic damages with the aid of Central/State 
Government. This may require a specialized insurance business to be set up by one 
of the Public Sector General Insurance Companies with subsidized premiums for 
disaster-prone areas. Such insurance businesses have been established in many 
other areas, such as Florida which is subject to regular hurricane damage. Similarly, 
the government may need to consider how to provide insurance for projects that 
have to deal with extreme weather such as glacial lake outbursts. This happened 
recently to the Teesta III dam in Sikkim. These additional insurance products will 
require extensive consultation with general insurance companies, reinsurers, and 
enterprises that are facing such risks. The Committee therefore proposes that IRDA 
set up a Working Group with all concerned stakeholders to examine all these issues 
in detail and then provide appropriate policy recommendations to address this 
important set of issues. 
 

30 
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that the issue of providing insurance to economically vulnerable 
groups in disaster-prone areas is already under the consideration of various 
committees constituted by different organizations such as NDMA. 
It is also important to consider mandating the homeowners, through respective 
RERAs home insurance for all, especially, those living in disaster-prone areas. The 
above issues have to be deliberated at length with various stakeholders, then only a 
proposal to provide insurance to economically vulnerable groups in disaster-prone 
areas can be considered. 
The insurance sector supports catastrophic insurance to which requires collaboration 
between the government, insurers, reinsurers and regulators. While discussions are 
ongoing, specific solutions like subsidized premiums and specialized insurance 
businesses are under consideration. Additionally, parametric insurance offers 
significant advantages including faster claims payment, cost efficiency, clear triggers 
for pay-outs and financial stability for the insured following disasters. 
NDMA has constituted a working group, Committee on Disaster Risk Reduction 
(CoDRR) to make single peril parametric insurance product available to Indian 
market. DFS is the member of the said working group.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 10) 
Motor Insurance Enforcement 
2.11 The Committee observe that, as per the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, all vehicles 
that operate in any public space must have motor vehicle insurance coverage; 
however, its enforcement is an issue. The Committee also note that, as per the 
Motor Annual Report, 2019–20, of the Insurance Information Bureau of India (IIB), of 
the over 25.33 crore vehicles on the road in India as on 31st March 2020, the 
percentage of uninsured vehicles was nearly 56%. This indicates that a large 
number of vehicles (particularly commercial vehicles) are plying on the roads without 
any insurance cover, which poses a risk to the owners and third parties in case of 
accidents or damages. In particular, many innocent victims suffer due to accidents 
caused by commercial vehicles. There is no proper insurance coverage that can be 
identified after the accident and this often leads to local communities shutting down 

31 
 
traffic till appropriate compensation is provided. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that, apart from taking other measures to enhance the compliance of 
motor vehicles, they should examine the implementation of E-Challan enforcement 
across states by leveraging data integration by IIB, mPrivahan, and National 
Informatics Centre data. Individual states should also report data on vehicle 
registrations and insurance coverage so that appropriate follow-up action can be 
identified. Financial institutions should also consider whether they should provide 
auto and commercial vehicles loans when they have proof of insurance coverage. 
IRDA and Reserve Bank of India should evaluate these requirements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that even though Motor Vehicle (MV) Act mandates compulsory 
third party motor insurance for all vehicles plying on Indian roads, there are still 
around 50% of the vehicles which are uninsured.  This requires strict implementation 
of provisions of Motor Vehicles Act by State Enforcement Authorities. It is, therefore, 
important that Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) may issue 
necessary directions to all State Governments and UTs for strict enforcement of the 
provisions of the MV Act.  MoRTH should also monitor the progress of 
implementation on a regular basis to ensure that every vehicle is insured. It is 
suggested that MoRTH may consider various measures like issuance of SMS by 
State RTAs to uninsured vehicle owners for insuring vehicles, mandating issuance of 
TP Insurance to obtain Fastag, renewal of driving licenses, Pollution Certificate and 
at petrol bunks etc. These initiatives may be undertaken in consultation with State 
Governments. 
 
Further, DFS vide D.O. Letter dt. 07/11/2023 and 05/06/2024 requested the chief 
secretaries & Administrator of all states /UTs to ensure that all uninsured vehicles 
are duly insured in accordance with the Law. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 11) 
PUBLIC SECTOR INSURANCE COMPANIES 
Public Sector General Insurance Companies Competitiveness Roadmap 

32 
 
2.12 The Committee observe that the financial condition of 4 Public Sector General 
Insurance Companies needs to be strengthened. They lack adequate capital and 
have lagging insolvency ratios. In regard to their performance, the Committee have 
been apprised that their overexposure in health insurance business, i.e., 50% of their 
total business, has been one of the reasons, as the same has led to Rs. 26,000 
crore of losses in five years from 2016–17 to 2020–21. Further, wage revisions 
which were affected in 2017 and 2023, and COVID-19 losses which were a wider 
industry-level phenomenon, have been assigned as the other causes of their 
performance decline. In regard to remedial steps being taken, the Committee have 
been given to understand that almost Rs. 17,000 crore has already been infused in 
terms of capital into these 4 Public Sector Companies over the past 3-4 years; more 
capital is also being infused now through the Supplementary Demand for Grants. It 
has also been stated that the focus area for improving their performance such as the 
need to exit from unprofitable lines of business and rebalance the business mix, 
improve underwriting capacity, improve the retail business portfolio controllable 
expenses, improvement in technology, rationalization of office rentals, and 
organizational restructuring involving bringing more people on the marketing side of 
their operations rather than sitting in the back office, have been identified. The 
Committee, in view of the above, recommend that an appropriate strategic roadmap 
to implement all the intended remedial steps, should be established for these 
companies to improve their competitiveness and enable them to attract sufficient 
capital and talent to grow. This roadmap should have appropriate timelines for 
demonstrable performance improvement. If performance does not improve 
sufficiently quickly, there should be further aggressive measures that should be 
evaluated. The Board of each of these Public Sector General Insurance Companies 
should approve these strategic roadmaps and commit to performance 
improvements. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of such 
roadmap drawn and the concrete action taken thereof to improve the performance of 
these companies.  
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that they had highlighted the deteriorating financial position of 
National Insurance Company Limited (NICL), Oriental Insurance Company Limited 
(OICL), and United India Insurance Company Limited (UIIC) since FY 2016-17. They 
have urged the Department of Financial Services (DFS) to consider measures like  

33 
 
 capital infusion,  
 stricter performance monitoring, and  
 corrective plans to improve the companies' solvency and  
 overall financial health.  
IRDAI has also emphasized the possibility of taking regulatory actions to protect 
policyholder interests. 
The financial health of National, Oriental, and United India requires improvement. 
While the government considers options like capital infusion and potential 
privatization, IRDAI continues its focus on regulatory measures. Each company has 
outlined strategies to achieve sustainable growth and profitability. Addressing these 
concerns is crucial for ensuring a strong and secure public sector general insurance 
market in India. 
 
Further, companies have been advised to formulate a strategic roadmap with 
appropriate timelines and get the same approved by their Board. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 25 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 13) 
 
Delegation of Power 
2.13 During the deliberations on the subject, the Committee raised the issue of 
gratuity and term insurance for LIC agents, which had been proposed long before 
but were pending with the Ministry for approval. The Committee note with 
satisfaction that the said proposal has now been approved by the Ministry. The 
Committee believes that there is a need for a complete delegation of power by 
empowering the Board to deal with such matters. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the government should expeditiously examine this issue and apprise the 
Committee of the outcome at the time of submitting action-taken notes. 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that they had granted insurers flexibility by allowing them to 
establish Board-approved policies within notified regulations and guidelines. These 
areas include: 

34 
 
o Payment of Commission to agents 
o Appointment of Insurance Agents 
o Utilization of Insurance Marketing Firms (IMFs) 
o Expenses of Management 
Level Playing Field: Delegation creates a more level playing field for insurers by 
allowing each company to independently set priorities and take action within the 
regulatory framework. 
 
The current delegation structure empowers boards to make key decisions while 
maintaining government oversight and adhering to IRDAI regulations. This approach 
aims to balance autonomy with accountability, allowing these companies to operate 
strategically within the insurance market. 
 
Further, the recommendation of Committee regarding complete delegation of power 
to Board of LIC by empowering the Board to deal with such matters is under active 
consideration. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 14) 
Government-Run Insurance Schemes 
2.14 The Committee observe that Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana 
(PMJJBY), Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojna (PMSBY), Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY), and Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna (PMFBY) are 
excellent microinsurance products introduced by the government, and they have 
been instrumental in plugging the insurance protection gap in the country to a great 
extent. The Committee observe that there have been some issues related to these 
schemes that need to be addressed to make them more effective. In regard to 
PMFBY, the Committee have observed that there are issues such as delay in 
processing of claim settlement, high premium rates, etc. The Committee also note 
that there are claims amounting to Rs. 2,761 crore (as on 30.06.2023) pending under 
the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that an effective mechanism 
should be devised to expedite the process of claim settlement. The Committee 

35 
 
further desire that efforts should be made to make premium under the scheme more 
affordable to increase its reach and for the overall benefit of farmers. 
Reply of the Government 
As informed by Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, the Pradhan Mantri Fasal 
Bima Yojana (PMFBY) is a yield index based Insurance scheme and Restructured 
Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS), a weather index-based 
insurance scheme was launched by the Government of India from Kharif 2016 to 
provide simple and affordable crop insurance, ensure comprehensive risk cover for 
crops of farmers against all nonpreventable natural risks from pre-sowing to post 
harvest, provide adequate claim amount and timely settlement of claims. 
 
As against erstwhile Crop Insurance Schemes, PMFBY covers increased risks of the 
entire crop cycle, from pre-sowing to post-harvest against non-preventable natural 
risks.  
 
While actuarial/bided premium rates are payable to the insurance companies for 
ensuring risk coverage, farmers have to pay a maximum 2% for Kharif & 1.5% for 
Rabi food & oilseed crops and 5% for commercial/ horticultural crops. Balance of 
actuarial/bided premium is shared by the Central and State Government on 50:50 
basis except in North Eastern Region (from Kharif 2020 season) and Himalayan 
States (from Kharif 2023 season), where the centre to state sharing ratio is 90:10. 
 
Several interventions have been implemented recently in the scheme, as 
 a. Freedom to States to choose alternative risk management mechanisms in 
addition to original PMFBY, 
 b. Provision of escrow account for States for timely release of premium subsidy for 
facilitating timely settlement of claims,  
c. New technological initiatives to increase transparency and rationalize yield 
estimation and premium rates, namely  
 Yield Estimation System Based on Technology (YES-TECH)- for gradual 
migration to Remote-Sensing based yield estimation to help assess fair and 
accurate crop yield estimation,  

36 
 
 Weather Information Network and Data System (WINDS) - for establishing 
network of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) & Automatic Rain-Gauges 
(ARG) for collecting hyper-local weather data at GP & Block level; 
 Collection of Realtime photos and Observations of Crops (CROPIC) - for Geo 
tagged photographs for validation of sown Crop with Insured Crop and use of 
pictorial analytics for Objective Crop Damage Assessment & Crop Yield 
Estimation;  
 Development of a dedicated module namely, "DigiClaim" module on National 
Crop Insurance Portal through which claim settlement process has been 
automated using Public Financial Management System (PFMS). ln this 
module, the claims are calculated and timely remittance of claims amount is 
being made directly to farmers account w.e.f. Kharif 2022 claims. This has 
also helped the Government both Central and State in tracking and monitoring 
of claim settlement process. Claims of over Rs.16,000 crore to about 1 crore 
farmers have been settled through Digiclaim module. 
 
As a result of these interventions, there has been a steady reduction of average 
premium rates from 16.7% in 2021-2022 lo 14.5% in 2022-2023 and further to 11.1% 
in 2023-2024. Further, there has been a significant improvement in timelines and 
transparency of claim settlement process under the scheme. As a result of these 
interventions, the cumulative amount of claims as of 31.03.24 stands at Rs. 2043.6 
Cr only, which is primarily on account of  
 non-release of subsidy share by State government; 
 pendency of yield data and disputes thereon; and 
 decisions pending from State Government regarding over-insurance. 
 
Department is taking all necessary steps, in consultation with stakeholders, to 
ensure timely release of all claims, including the pending claims. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
  

37 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 15) 
CUSTOMER PROTECTION 
Repudiation of claims 
2.15 The Committee observe that due to the competition in the sector, some 
private companies are offering heavy discounts on premiums. Though the customers 
benefit from this, the claim settlement is being adversely impacted as insurance 
companies deliberately try to avoid settling claims. As the premium collected by the 
companies falls short, they have been resorting to repudiation/delay of large claims, 
particularly in Fire and other specialized areas, which leads to long and cumbersome 
legal battles. The Committee, therefore, recommend that there should be a provision 
for levying hefty penalties in such cases that can act as a deterrent. The Committee 
further desire that this should also be addressed in any new legislation being 
considered by the government. 
Reply of the Government 
As per Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Protection of 
Policyholders’ Interests, Operations and Allied Matters of Insurers) Regulations, 
2024: 
(1) Every insurer shall have a system, including IT systems, and a procedure for 
receiving, registering and disposing of grievances in each of its offices. Every insurer 
shall publicize its grievance redressal procedure and ensure that it is specifically 
made available on its website. 
(2) Every insurer and where relevant, the distribution channel, shall have in place 
robust procedures and effective mechanism to resolve grievances of policyholders 
and/ or claimants efficiently, effectively and 
in a timely manner. 
(3) No insurer or distribution channel shall prohibit, bar or discourage any 
policyholder or claimant from lodging any grievance to the Authority. 
(4) The Grievance Redressal Procedure as may be specified shall be followed by all 
insurers and distribution channels. 
(5) Insurers shall widely publish the availability of option to the complainant for taking 
up grievance with Insurance Ombudsman, in case the grievance is not resolved to 
the satisfaction of the complainant. 
 

38 
 
Insurance Ombudsman System: The Insurance Ombudsman System, established 
under the Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 2017, offers a quick and cost-effective way 
for policyholders to resolve grievances with insurance companies and intermediaries. 
If a complaint isn't resolved in the policyholder's favor, they can approach the 
relevant Ombudsman. The Ombudsman must resolve the issue within three months, 
and their decisions are legally binding on insurers and intermediaries. This system 
promotes transparency and trust in the insurance industry. 
 
Centralized Public Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System 
(CPGRAMS): Monitored directly by the Department of Administrative Reforms & 
Public Grievances, Government of India, it is an online portal available to citizens to 
lodge their complaints to the public authorities on any subject related to service 
delivery. It is a single portal connected to all the Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India and States. 
 
IRDAI conducts meetings with GROs of all insurers on periodical basis to review the 
redressal of grievances.  IRDAI also have periodical interactions with CEOs or 
Senior Management of Insurers to apprise the need for robust grievance 
management system.   In the event of any deviations or violations noticed by IRDAI 
either during on-site or off-site inspections, IRDAI issues suitable directions to bring 
about corrective action by the insurers.   
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
Recommendation (Sl No. 16) 
Central Portal for unclaimed policies 
2.16 The Committee observe that UDGAM (Unclaimed Deposits: Gateway to 
Access information), a centralized web portal, has been launched by the Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) to help citizens find and claim their unclaimed deposits across 
different banks. The Committee are of the view that such an initiative can be useful 
for the insurance sector also as there are a significant number of unclaimed policies 
that are currently being transferred to the Senior Citizen Fund. The Committee were 
apprised by the IRDAI that they have already given a direction to all the insurance 
companies to make a provision on their respective websites for the purpose of 
checking the amounts that are due to an individual. Further, in regard to disclosures 
of the unclaimed amounts, it was stated that these disclosures form part of the public 

39 
 
disclosures made by the insurance companies in their respective public disclosures. 
However, the Committee feel that checking the individual websites of the companies 
would not fully serve the purpose of making the process hassle-free. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a central portal like UDGAM be created for unclaimed 
insurance policies. The Committee also desire that IRDAI should make it mandatory 
for insurance companies to disclose and share information in this regard. 
Simultaneously, the Committee also recommend that there should be provision for 
insurance companies to reach and deliver the insurance benefits at the doorstep of 
the nominee/survivor in case of the death of a policyholder. This provision will not 
only ensure prompt relief for the nominee but also create trust and goodwill among 
people for the insurance industry.     
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that that efforts are already underway to address unclaimed 
amounts in insurance policies through various measures: 
a) Individual links to access unclaimed amounts of all insurers have been 
consolidated on the home page of Bhima Bharosa – Grievance redressal 
portal of IRDAI (bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in/Home/Unclaimed Amount). 
b) Insurance companies are mandated to settle claims promptly, not exceeding   
30 days after receipt of claim intimation from the claimant, with penalties for 
delays. 
c) Insurers are mandated to transfer the claim amount directly to the bank 
account of the claimant/ Nominee and collect bank details at the point of sale. 
d) Life insurers are obligated to provide policyholders with annual status reports, 
disclosing pertinent information regarding their policies. 
e) In the proposed draft master circular on policyholder matters to be issued, 
insurers are instructed to verify and update policyholders' contact information 
and bank account details annually.  
Further, to make penal provisions more stringent, IRDAI has proposed amendments 
to Insurance Act, 1938, which includes an increase in the maximum penalty from one 
crore to ten crores for default in complying with the Insurance Act or the IRDA Act or 
rules or regulations made thereunder. The proposal is under consideration. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 

40 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 17) 
Consumer-friendly ecosystem 
2.17 The Committee feel that there is a need to develop a consumer-friendly 
environment to alleviate their hardship in regard to the selection of appropriate and 
affordable policies; prevent them from various frauds and mal-practices such as mis-
selling, misleading marketing practices, delay, and unfair denial of claims, and 
provide speedy and satisfactory grievance redressal. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the required steps be taken to improve customer experience and 
satisfaction by offering personalized and customized products, simplifying the 
application and claim processes, providing timely and transparent communication, 
and resolving grievances effectively with the aid of technology. The Committee are 
also of the opinion that creating a common platform for coordination and information 
sharing among various stakeholders, such as IRDAI, insurers, ombudsmen, 
consumer forums, and consumer associations, and establishing a single-window 
system for grievance registration and tracking across all channels, such as online, 
offline, etc., can go a long way in improving customer satisfaction. The Bima Sugam 
platform developed by IRDAI is therefore very much required. The Bima Sugam 
platform should be able to dramatically streamline policy discovery, policy purchase, 
premium payments, and claim settlements making it much easier for customers to 
find suitable insurance schemes.  The Reserve Bank of India has instituted a formal 
ombudsperson system to deal with consumer grievances associated with banks and 
NBFCs. IRDA may also consider instituting a similar system to ensure high-quality 
customer service. IRDA may also want to establish a Consumer Charter for retail 
insurance coverage that is binding on the industry and elevates service levels. 
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that they have taken several steps to enhance policyholder 
protection: 
 Bima Sugam Platform: “Bima Sugam” shall be an insurance electronic market 
place to empower and protect the interest of policyholders, to increase 
penetration of insurance in India and to enhance availability, accessibility and 
affordability. Development is progressing with regulations already in place. This 
platform aims to simplify insurance products and make them more accessible. 
 
 

41 
 
 Enhanced Grievance Redressal: 
o The existing Insurance Ombudsman system with 17 centers nationwide has 
been strengthened. 
o The compensation limit has been increased to Rs. 50 lakh. 
o Insurers are now mandated to: 
 Comply with Ombudsman awards within 30 days. 
 Pay interest to complainants for delayed settlements as per IRDAI 
regulations (2024). 
 Investor Protection: Following the Union Budget 2021-22, 19 out of 21 citizen 
rights have been incorporated into regulations (March 2024). The remaining two 
rights will be covered in a proposed master circular. 
 Customer-Centric Measures (IRDAI Regulations, 2024): 
o Extended free-look period for policy review. 
o Requirement for insurers to collect bank and nominee details. 
o Provision of customer information sheets for greater transparency. 
o Reduced timelines for various insurance services offered to customers. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 19) 
Long Dated Bonds 
2.18 The Committee note that to address the issue of underinsurance in the 
country, considering the growth of GDP in India and across the world, it has been 
estimated that capital to the tune of Rs. 40,000 to Rs. 50,000 crore would be 
required. The Committee with a view to ensure adequate capital for the desired 
growth of the insurance sector in the country, recommend that the RBI on behalf of 
the Government of India, may issue ‘on-tap’ bonds of various maturities up to 50 
years as against the current maximum tenure of 40 years for investment by 
insurance companies. The government may also explore avenues to earmark a 
portion of long-dated securities for insurance sector subscriptions as part of their 
annual borrowing programme.  
 
 

42 
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that they agreed with the recommendation of the committee to 
issue ‘on-tap’ bonds of various maturities upto 50 years against the current 
maximum tenure of 40 years for investment by insurance companies. This will 
facilitate the Life Insurers to meet long term liabilities like payment of annuities. 
However, earmarking a portion of long dated securities may not be required as it will 
place an obligation on the insurers to subscribe. Further it is noticed that RBI during 
November 2023 issued Securities with Maturity period of 50 years amounting to 
Rs.30,000 crore. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

44 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Sl No. 7) 
HEALTH INSURANCE 
Health Insurance – Missing Middle 
2.19 The Committee note that according to NITI Aayog's report, ‘Health Insurance 
for India’s Missing Middle’, the Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana(AB-PMJAY), and State Government extension schemes, provide 
comprehensive hospitalization cover to the bottom 50% of the population - around 70 
crore individuals. Around 20% of the population - 25 crore individuals – are covered 
through social health insurance, and private voluntary health insurance. These 
innovative insurance solutions have transformed health insurance in the country and 
become enormously popular. Moreover, this demand increase has increased the 
availability of health care services through the growth of the hospitals and medical 
professionals. 
The Committee further note that, as per the Economic Survey 2022–23,the 
out-of-pocket expenditure on health has reduced substantially from 64.2% in 2013–
14 to 48.2% in 2018–19 due to an increase in government health expenditure from 
28.6% to 40.6% during the said period. The Committee appreciate the efforts made 
by the government to reduce out-of-pocket expenditure. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that steps such as increasing consumer awareness, developing simple 
and standardized health insurance products, sharing government data and 
infrastructure, ensuring the quality of services, and partial financing of health 
insurance should be initiated to increase health insurance coverage.  
The Committee, considering that many people in the country are just one 
medical bill away from slipping into poverty, believe that insurance products with 
affordable premiums and cashless settlement facilities would be instrumental in 
encouraging more people to opt for health insurance. The Committee also feel that 
the coverage of OPD, the diagnostic and wellness component, for regular medical 
claim insured, including group medical insurance, would reduce the financial burden 
of significant recurrent expenses, particularly for patients with chronic illnesses.  
The Committee are of the view that the Ayushman Bharat Scheme is an 
outstanding and highly successful initiative of the government to provide much-

45 
 
needed health insurance coverage to low-income families. The Committee feel that 
the scheme can be further strengthened by making it possible for the Missing Middle 
to participate on a paid basis would close a major insurance gap that exists in 
society. Providing such health insurance solutions will require close coordination with 
the Health Ministry and the National Health Authority (NHA). The Committee believe 
that an Inter-Ministerial Working Group with participation from IRDA, NHA, other 
concerned agencies, consumers, health care providers, and health care insurance 
companies should be established to develop a long-term plan to be able to cover all 
sections of society with tailored government and private sector health insurance 
solutions.  
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that they have been taking various steps for increasing the 
Health Insurance coverage, consumer awareness etc. some of the recent measures 
are as under: 
 Use and File procedure facilitates faster launch of products. Insurers are 
facilitated with faster launch of products as per the market needs by Use and File 
procedure vide circular dated 01.06.2022. 
 Dedicated products for Health Insurance coverage to Disabled persons. IRDAI 
issued Model product to the Insurers vide circular dated 27.02.2023. 
 Insurers shall ensure to offer Health Insurance products to cater to all the age 
groups 
 Insurers are advised to design products specifically for Senior Citizens, Students, 
Children, Maternity etc. 
 Insurers shall endeavour to offer coverage for persons with all types of existing 
medical conditions. 
 Insurers are advised to establish connectivity with NHCX (National Health Claim 
Exchange) for faster settlement of claims 
 Insurers are advised to create ABHA (Ayushman Bharat Health Account) ID. So 
that they can be part of National Health Digital eco-system 
 Regarding cashless settlement, it is submitted that 
o IRDAI has been monitoring cashless claims settlements and promoting 100% 
cashless. 

46 
 
o Mandated Insurers to establish connectivity with NHCX and such connectivity 
help to seamless integration of Hospitals with the Insurers and would 
promote cashless settlements. 
 
Towards reinforcing empowerment of policyholders and bolstering inclusive health 
insurance, IRDAI has issued a comprehensive Master Circular on Health Insurance 
Products. The Master Circular has brought in one place the entitlements in a health 
insurance policy available to a Policyholder/prospects for their easy reference and 
also emphasizes measures towards providing seamless, faster and hassle-free 
claims experience to a policyholder procuring health insurance policy and ensuring 
enhanced service standards across the health insurance sector. 
Some of the salient features of the Master Circular are: 
 
 Wider choice to be provided by the Insurers by making available 
products/addons/riders by offering diverse insurance products catering to all 
ages, regions, occupational categories, medical conditions/ treatments, all 
types of Hospitals and Health Care Providers to suit the affordability of the 
policyholders/prospects. 
 Customer Information Sheet (CIS) which is provided by the Insurer along with 
every policy document. It explains the basic features of insurance policies in 
simple words like type of insurance, sum insured, coverage details, 
exclusions, sub-limits, deductibles, and waiting periods  
 Customer to be provided with the flexibility to choose products/addons/riders 
as per his/her medical conditions/specific needs. 
 A Policyholder with multiple health insurance policies gets to choose the 
policy (s) under which he/she can get the admissible claim amount. The 
primary insurer with whom claim is first submitted shall coordinate and 
facilitate settlement of balance amount from the other insurers.  
 Insurer to decide on cashless authorization requests immediately and within 
one hour and final authorization on discharge from hospital within three hours 
of request from the hospital. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 

47 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 12) 
Level Playing Field for Public Sector Companies 
2.20 The Committee find that at present, TDS on GST applies to insurance 
provided by the Public Sector Insurance Companies, whereas it doesn't apply to 
insurance offered by Private Sector Insurance Companies. The Committee also find 
that the Public Sector Insurance Companies have to mandatorily participate in 
government-run insurance schemes which impacts their profitability. The Committee 
with a view to ensure a level playing field, recommend that such provisions be 
uniformly applied to all players.  
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that the Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) insurers are required 
to deduct TDS (Tax Deduction at Source) at a rate of 2% (CGST + SGST) on 
payments exceeding Rs. 2.5 lakh, while private insurers are not. This is due to a 
notification extending the TDS requirement to entities specified under Section 51 of 
the CGST Act, 2017. The Committee recommends removing the TDS requirement 
for PSU insurers and de-notifying them from the relevant section. This would create 
a level playing field between public and private insurers. 
Both private and public insurers participate in government insurance schemes like 
PMFBY (Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana), PMJJBY (Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti 
Bima Yojana), PMSBY (Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana), and PMJAY 
(Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana). 
Recommendation by the Insurers 
o Favors a uniform tax structure for all non-life insurers (public and private) 
instead of TDS. 
o Supports mandatory participation by private players in government schemes 
for wider coverage. 
Highlights existing delegation from IRDAI (Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India) to insurer boards for areas like commission payments, agent 
appointments, intermediary utilization, and management expenses. This delegation 
allows insurers to set their priorities and act independently within regulatory 
guidelines. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 

48 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 28 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 18) 
POLICY 
 
Policy Roadmap  
2.21 The Committee note that ‘Insurance for All by 2047’ is a mission set by the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) to increase 
insurance penetration and coverage in the country. According to the IRDAI, the 
objective is to ensure that every citizen has appropriate life, health, and property 
insurance cover and that every enterprise is supported by appropriate insurance 
solutions. The IRDAI also aims to make the Indian insurance sector globally 
attractive and competitive by moving to principles-based regulation and streamlining 
regulatory processes. The Committee appreciate IRDAI for this much-needed 
initiative and believe that it will not only give a boost to the insurance sector but also 
pave the way for sustainable economic and social development in the country. The 
Committee, however, find that at present, there is no Policy Roadmap for achieving 
the envisaged ambitious target of Insurance for All by 2047. They, therefore, 
recommend that a Policy Roadmap White Paper be prepared with comprehensive 
stakeholder consultation so that it can act as a beacon for all stakeholders with a 
view to sustaining the insurance sector with affordable and useful products. 
 
Reply of the Government 
IRDAI has informed that it aligns with the Government of India’s vision of Viksit 
Bharat@2047, committed to promoting a congenial business environment for 
"Insurance for all by 2047." 
The Indian insurance sector, currently the tenth-largest globally, is poised for 
significant growth. As per a report by the reinsurer Swiss Re, Indian Insurance 
market is poised to become the sixth-largest by 2032. This growth potential is 
attributed to India's large and unique market, supported by a robust economy, an 
expanding middle class, a young population, growing disposable incomes, and 
widespread technology usage. 

49 
 
 
IRDAI has further informed that it is pursuing structured regulatory reforms to foster 
development of insurance sector.  A number of initiatives to promote ease of doing 
business are also taken as part of overall regulatory reforms.  The overall objective 
of these reforms is to enhance insurance penetration while safeguarding policyholder 
interests.   
Over the past two years, IRDAI has implemented a series of reforms aimed at 
promoting ease of doing business and reducing compliance burdens for insurers 
which include, inter alia,  
 extending ‘Use and File’ procedure for all the health and general insurance 
products and most of the life insurance products;  
 simplifying the process of registration of insurance companies, raising 
investment threshold for individual investors and specifying indicative criteria 
for determination of ‘Fit and proper’ status of investors and promoters;  
 increasing the period for considering state/ central government dues for 
calculation of solvency margin and reduction of solvency factor related to crop 
insurance;  
 revising factor for calculation of solvency for Unit Linked Business (without 
guarantees) and Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY);  
 increasing the roles and responsibilities of Appointed Actuaries;  
 increasing the threshold for companies to raise other forms of capital (viz., 
subordinated debt and/or preference shares);  
 increasing the experimentation period of regulatory sandbox to test innovative 
products;  
 increasing the maximum limit of tie-ups for corporate agents and insurance 
marketing firms with insurers;  
 revamping the guidelines for cross-border reinsurers; and  
 revising expenses of management (EoM) and commission limits for insurers.  
To further incentivize insurers to invest in insurance awareness, IRDAI 
allowed insurers to spend an additional 5% of allowable expenses for 
management of both life and general insurance. 
 Requiring Insurers to issue concise and updated Customer Information Sheet 
(CIS) to the policyholders (CIS contains all important information about health 
insurance policy with details such as coverage, exclusions, and key concepts 
in health insurance policy) 

50 
 
 Issuing guidelines on Bima Vahaks, a women-centric dedicated distribution 
channel, for enhancing insurance inclusion and awareness with a focus on 
rural areas 
 Amendments to reinsurance regulations with an objective to promote more 
favorable business environment, including requiring Indian reinsurers to 
maintain a minimum retention of 50% within India, simplifying the Order of 
Preference for reinsurance placements, relaxing compliance requirements, 
and reducing the minimum capital requirement for new FRBs.  
 
In response to the dynamic changes in the Indian insurance market, IRDAI has 
informed that it is comprehensively reviewing the regulatory architecture to move to 
principle-based regulations, from the existing rule-based regulatory framework.   The 
reforms/ initiatives towards the same include the following: 
 Formation of Mission mode teams to implement a Risk Based Supervisory 
(RBS) framework and a Risk Based Capital (RBC) regime with an objective to 
align the insurance sector with global standards and industry dynamics. 
 Continuing its reform agenda, IRDAI has undertaken a comprehensive review 
of the regulatory framework, leading to the approval of nine principle-based 
consolidated regulations.   These regulations replaced 37 regulations with 
seven regulations and introduction of two new regulations enhancing clarity 
and coherence in the regulatory landscape. These regulations encompass 
key domains such as safeguarding of policyholders' interests, rural and social 
sector responsibilities, electronic insurance marketplace, insurance products 
and operation of foreign reinsurance branches, as well as aspects of 
registration, actuarial, finance, investment and corporate governance.  
 IRDAI is committed to supporting digital initiatives, with the development of 
the 'Bima Sugam' e-marketplace platform and the issuance of related 
regulations.  
 The comprehensive framework laid down in the recently notified IRDAI 
(Registration, Capital Structure, Transfer of Shares & Amalgamation Insurers) 
Regulations, 2024) aims to foster the growth of the insurance sector by 
simplifying various processes, including registration of insurers, transfer of 
shareholding, capital structure, amalgamation of insurers, and listing of shares 
on stock exchanges. By streamlining these procedures, the regulations seek 

51 
 
to enhance the ease of doing business within the insurance industry, 
facilitating smoother operations and promoting overall sectoral growth.  
The reforms so far undertaken are also showing results with a number of 
domestic investors establishing new insurance companies.  In the last 
preceding two years itself, IRDAI has issued Certificate of Registration to six 
insurance companies after a gap of 11 years in case of life insurers and 5 
years in case of non-life insurers.   
 De-notified tariffs of insurance products to allow competitive pricing and 
designing of products by the insurance companies to the serve a broad range 
of population. 
 Recommendations are also made to DFS for effecting certain important 
amendments to the provisions of Insurance Act, 1938 to further expand the 
insurance market and deepen the insurance penetration.  
 
These reforms, coupled with recommendations for amendments to the Insurance 
Act, 1938, demonstrate IRDAI's commitment to expanding the insurance market and 
deepening penetration. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. eF.No. H-12013/5/2023-Ins.II (E 300593396), Dated 3rd July, 2024] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 31 of Chapter I) 
 
  

52 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
4 December, 2024 
13 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

53 
 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 04 December, 2024 from 1500 hrs to 
1530 hrs in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
           PRESENT 
 
          MEMBERS 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
5.  Shri Kishori Lal  
6. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
7. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
8. Thiru Arun Nehru  
9. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
10. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
11. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
12. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
14. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
15. Shri Sanjay Seth 
16. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
17. Smt. Darshana Singh 
18. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana  - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan            - Deputy Secretary  
 

54 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
i. First Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services, Investment & Public Asset Management and Public 
Enterprises).  
ii. Second Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
iii. Third Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
iv. Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
v. Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
vi. Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 59th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Cyber Security and Rising Incidence of Cyber/White Collar Crimes’. 
vii. Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 66th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on the subject ‘Performance Review and Regulation of Insurance 
Sector’. 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports with 
minor modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
Reports to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  

55 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) ON THE SUBJECT ‘PERFORMANCE REVIEW AND 
REGULATION OF INSURANCE SECTOR' 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of 
Recommendations 
19  
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 
3,4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 
16, 17 and 19) 
16 84.21% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations 
which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies  
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations 
in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 7, 12 
and 18)  
03 15.79% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations 
in respect of which final reply of 
the Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 