 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation] 
 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD  REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
23 

 
 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation’] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


 
 
CONTENT 
 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                          iv 
Introduction                                                                                                                         v 
PART-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter-I Report  1 
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
6 
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
21 
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
22 
Chapter-V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited  
23 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29 July, 2025 24 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations Contained in the Twelfth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on Demands for Grants (2025-26)  
 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10.Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11.Thiru Arun Nehru  
12.Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13.Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14.Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15.Prof. Sougata Ray  
16.Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17.Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18.Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19.Shri Manish Tewari  
20.Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21.Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Smt. Mradula Dubey Assistant Committee Officer 
(iv) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Third Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report 
of the Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 19 March, 2025.  The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were 
received from the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation on 14 May, 
2025.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 
July, 2025.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi;                 BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
29 July, 2025                                                                                                 Chairperson                                                           
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Twelfth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 19 March, 2025.  
 
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the seven recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,5, 6 and 7 
       (Total: 07) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation No. NIL 
                  (Total: NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Recommendation No.  NIL 
       (Total : NIL)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL          (Total: NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 

 
 
2 
 
1.3  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on their 
recommendations. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Minimize Time overrun and cost escalation  
1.5 The Infrastructure Projects Monitoring Division (IPMD) of MoSPI undertakes the 
monitoring of projects above ₹ 150 crore.  One of the significant contributions of the 
IPMD has been implementing systemic improvements periodically to expedite the 
project implementation.  MoSPI publishes a monthly/ quarterly report on ongoing 
projects worth Rs. 150 crore & above, encapsulating a range of key parameters such as 
Original/Revised/ Anticipated Cost & Date of commissioning, cumulative Expenditure, 
Physical Progress etc. based on information reported by Implementing 
Agencies/Ministry/ Department on the MoSPI’s OCMS (online Computerized Monitoring 
System) web application. MoSPI also sends the periodic communications to apprise the 
administrative Ministries/ Departments of the projects having time and cost overrun, and 
the data gaps in reporting. These are helpful to the stakeholders in managing the 
project execution at their end.   
The Committee note that as of 31st January 2025, there were 1719 projects that 
have incurred time and cost overrun under MoSPI’s monitoring (as per reporting on the 
OCMS portal by the Line Ministries/ Project Implementing Agencies). Out of which, 
there were a total of 461 projects having cost overrun with respect to the original cost, 
amounting to overrun value of Rs. 5,35,384.25 Crore. Further, a total 771 projects were 
having time overrun with respect to the Original Date of Commissioning, with an 
average delay of around 34 months which is approximately ten per cent of the budget 
itself.  The Committee note that the Government has taken major steps like (i) Periodic 
reviews under PRAGATI (ii) rigorous project appraisal (iii) Online Computerized 
Monitoring System (OCMS) (iv) setting of revised Cost Committees in the Ministries etc. 
However, despite these measures the time and cost overrun are too huge to be ignored 
and still point to poor monitoring and appraisal of projects by the concerned Ministries. 

 
 
3 
 
The Committee strongly recommend that the latest approved date of commissioning 
and cost of projects should be adhered to at least now and under no circumstances 
these should be allowed to necessitate further revision.  
 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation have stated as under:- 
“Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation is mandated to monitor 
Ongoing Central Sector Infrastructure Projects costing ₹ 150 crore and above on 
time and cost overrun, based on the information reported by stakeholders on the 
Online Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS) portal.  All stakeholders 
(Infrastructure Line Ministries/ Departments) are apprised of their project 
execution and slippages on the basis of analytics of the available data, on a 
regular basis for helping them in managing the project execution at their end. 
Further, the role of this Ministry is advisory in nature. It may also be noted that 
the time and cost overrun of various projects depend largely upon the nature of 
the project, complexity, systemic and some unforeseen issues across different 
infrastructure sectors. However, MoSPI has requested the concerned 
Ministries/Departments for action on the recommendations of Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Finance.” 
 
1.7 The Committee note that the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation monitors the ongoing Central Sector Infrastructure Projects 
costing Rs.150 crore and above on time and cost overrun and that all 
stakeholders are apprised of their project execution and slippages based on 
analysis of available data. The Committee agree that the time and cost overrun of 
various projects depend largely upon the nature of the project, complexity, 
systemic and some unforeseen issues across different infrastructure sectors. 
MoSPI has requested the concerned Ministries / Departments for action on the 
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee note that the role of the 
Ministry is advisory in nature and is a limiting factor keeping in view the huge 
overrun value of Rs. 5,35,384.25 crore. The Committee feel that MoSPI should be 

 
 
4 
 
given more powers rather than being a mere data analyser so that it can 
contribute more effectively in monitoring of the important infrastructure projects 
and also monetary savings.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
Shortage of Manpower 
1.8 Statistics is a specialized field which is vital for socio-economic planning and 
decision making and thus in effective nation building requires skilled manpower. The 
Committee are concerned about the shortage of manpower which is persisting for a 
prolonged period of time. Year on year, the vacancies in Field Operations Division 
(FODs) are rising. During 2023, it was 614, 698 in 2024 and 908 in 2025 (as on 1st 
January).   The shortage of manpower in Field Operation Division (FOD) in respect of 
collection & scrutiny of the data affects the quality of the data. According to the Ministry, 
the same is being addressed through engaging contractual manpower and training 
them. The Committee is of the view that this is a stopgap arrangement and does not 
fully address the issue.  The Committee, therefore recommend the Ministry to deal with 
the issue of severe manpower shortage on priority basis and take concrete steps 
towards recruitment of regular field based staff in a time bound manner.  
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation have stated as under:- 
" The recruitment process for the Junior Statistical Officer (JSO) for the year 2024 
was initiated in January 2024, and at that time, 725 vacancies for JSOs (which 
constitutes 30.18% of the total posts of JSOs) were communicated to the Staff 
Selection Commission (SSC) for filling through CGLE-2024. Currently, SSC has 
provided a list of 725 candidates who have been recommended for appointment 
to the post of JSO. SSC announced the final results of the CGLE-2024 on March 
12, 2025. After receipt of 678 dossiers from SSC and completion of pre-
appointment formalities, appointment letters were issued to 663 candidates 
through ‘Rojgar Mela’ held in various regions on 26.04.2025. Also, 245 vacancies 
of post of JSOs have been reported to SSC for recruitment for this year (2025).   

 
 
5 
 
Contractual employees possessing a minimum of a graduate-level education are 
hired through outsourcing agencies and they undergo comprehensive training 
before being deployed for survey works. 
Further, it is to mention that the proposal of 2nd Cadre Review of Subordinate 
Statistical Service (SSS) is has been submitted to Dept. of Expenditure, wherein 
additional strength of 1,767 Junior Statistical Officers (JSOs) and 827 Senior 
Statistical Officers (SSOs) have been requested.” 
1.10 The Committee note the proposal of 2nd Cadre Review of Subordinate 
Statistical Service (SSS) has been submitted to Dept. of Expenditure, wherein 
additional strength of 1,767 Junior Statistical Officers (JSOs) and 827 Senior 
Statistical Officers (SSOs) have been requested by the Ministry. The Committee 
note that for the year 2024, out of the 725 candidates who were recommended for 
appointment to the post of Junior Statistical Officer, appointment letters were 
issued to 663 candidates as on 26.04.2025. For recruitment this year (2025), 245 
vacancies of the post of JSOs have been reported to Staff Selection Commission 
(SSC). Further, the Committee trust that filling up the vacant positions of JSOs 
and SSOs by policy of Cadre Review will enable in addressing the problem of 
shortage of manpower. The target of the Ministry should be to fill at least 50% of 
the existing vacancies across all cadres within this year. It is also expected that 
the rest of the vacancies be filled up in a time bound manner thereafter. 
 
 
  

 
 
6 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
Reforming National Statistical System 
 
 The Committee note that the results from Surveys of National Sample Survey 
(NSS) are being diversely used for resource allocation, inclusive development, 
identifying gaps and challenges posed in policy making. The State wise coverage under 
the National Food Security Act was decided with the help of National Sample Survey 
Results. It also facilitated in identifying the challenge of skilling in India and were used 
for estimating workforce to be trained. It also contributed to measure consumption gaps 
in rural and urban household consumption expenditure and release of indicators for 
macro-economic and social policy making for employment, health, education etc. The 
Committee in its sitting have been informed that in the Budget 2024, the Working 
Women Hostel and the establishment of creche to Increase Female Labour 
Participation were announced based on PLFS data, which revealed that child and 
personal commitments at home are the main reasons for low female labour 
participation. The Committee are satisfied to note that enhanced use of alternative data 
like GST and administrative data has also been introduced in compilation and 
corroboration of GDP estimates. New surveys, such as Annual Survey of 
Unincorporated Sector and PLFS data with increased frequencies have also been 
incorporated. The Committee expect the Ministry to remain committed to introducing 
further reforms in the National Statistical System to boost its efficacy and make the 
estimates more robust. 
Reply of the Government 
National Sample Survey has consistently adapted itself to the growing data 
requirements of the nation mainly through embedding modern technological 
advancements. Through its mathematically valid scientific survey designs, 100% digital 
data collection, robust online scrutiny and data cleaning, NSS is now capable of 

 
 
7 
 
conducting a number of surveys simultaneously across the nation and publish the 
results with zero delay. Currently, NSS has designed/ is conducting a diverse range of 
surveys like Annual Survey of Industries, Periodic Labour Force Survey, Annual Survey 
of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises, Annual Survey on Service Sector Enterprises, 
Household Consumption Expenditure Survey, Time Use Survey, NSS 80thRound, 
forward looking survey on private corporate sector capex investment intentions, and 
Price Surveys. Details regarding Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises 
(ASUSE) and Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) are given below: 
1. Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) 
Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) 2021-22 was conducted 
during April, 2021 to March, 2022 and ASUSE 2022-23 was conducted during October 
2022 to September 2023. The key results of the ASUSE 2021-22 and ASUSE 2022-23 
were released in the form of a Factsheet on 14th June 2024.The detailed reports and 
unit level data for these two surveys were released on 5th July 2024. 
ASUSE 2023-24 was conducted during October 2023 to September 2024. The key 
results of the ASUSE 2023-24 were released in the form of a Factsheet on 24th 
December 2024, within three months from the completion of the field work. The detailed 
report and unit level data for this survey were released on 29th January 2025 within four 
months from the date of survey completion. 
The field work for ASUSE 2025 started in January 2025 and will continue till December 
2025. 
2. Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) 
The National Statistics Office (NSO), MoSPI is committed to enhance the survey 
methodology and increase the frequency of the various surveys it conducts to make 
reliable data available on a timely basis for the policy makers and the data users at 
large. As an instance of these continuous endeavour of MoSPI the changes brought 
about in the survey methodology and dissemination plan of PLFS from 2025 can be 
highlighted. 

 
 
8 
 
Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) conducted by the National Statistics Office 
(NSO), MoSPI has been providing quarterly estimates of key labour force indicators viz., 
Labour Force Participation Rate (LFPR), Worker Population Ratio (WPR), 
Unemployment Rate (UR) in the Current Weekly Status (CWS) for the urban areas 
along with annualestimates of all important parameters of employment and 
unemployment in both usual status (ps+ss) and current weekly status (CWS) covering 
both rural and urban areas. 
Considering the importance of the availability of labour force data at more frequent time 
intervals at the overall country level and recognizing the need for producing employment 
unemployment indicators at sub-state level, the sample design of PLFS has been 
revamped from January 2025. The revamped sample design along with the related 
changes in the survey execution essentially will result in the following updations in the 
PLFS dissemination 
a. Availability of monthly estimates of key labour market indicators at the country level: 
The revamped PLFS sample design will enable generation of the monthly estimates of 
key labour market indicators viz. Labour Force Participation Rate (LFPR), Worker 
Population Ratio (WPR) and Unemployment Rate (UR) the all-India level following the 
Current Weekly Status (CWS) approach. The monthly estimates will help in timely policy 
interventions. 
b. Extending quarterly estimates to rural areas: 
With the updations in the PLFS sample design quarterly estimates of employment 
unemployment indicators will be available for both rural and urban areas and hence for 
the entire country. 
c. Provision of generation of district-level estimates of labour market indicators: 
In the updated PLFS sample design from 2025 provision has been made for generation 
of annual district   level estimates for most of the districts of the country. 
d. Moving to the approach of calendar year reporting 
Presently the annual results of PLFS are brought out based on the survey period 
starting from the month July of a specific year to the month June of the following year 

 
 
9 
 
(e.g. July 2023 June 2024). From the year 2025 the annual PLFS results will be brought 
out based on the calendar year i.e. survey period of January - December of a specific 
year (e.g. January 2025 December 2025). This change in disseminating the PLFS 
annual results and unit level data will facilitate in comparison of India's labour market 
statistics with other countries. 
In addition to above, the information content covered in PLFS is continuously expanded 
to address the specific requisitions received from other ministries like Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE), Department of School Education etc. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021-  
Parl. Cell dated 14-05-2025] 
        
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Budgetary Allocations 
 The Committee note that the shortfall in fund utilization by Rs. 170.06 crore in 
2023-24 against the BE of Rs. 600.00 crore (28.34% downfall) and Rs. 197.94 crore in 
2024-25 against the Budget allocation of Rs. 543.87 (36.39% downfall) under Capacity 
Development (CD) Scheme was mainly due to non–completion of National Integrated 
Information Project (NIIP) on account of litigation and hiring of less outsourced staff, 
revision in timelines for launch of second Time Use Survey (TUS), non-release of 
payment to CSC SPV as they could not achieve the milestone linked to payments etc. 
In addition, some of the procurement proposals for hiring of technical manpower could 
not materialise in time and thus the requirement under the heads was reduced at RE 
stage accordingly. However, the expenditure during 2024-25 as on 10.02.2025 was ₹ 
384.72 crore, which is 70.74% and the final expenditure is likely to increase by the end 
of the financial year. The Committee trust that there is no shortfall in expenditure and 
the schemes under implementation are not adversely impacted due to under-utilisation. 
The Committee were informed that Budgetary allocations of CD (Main) Scheme is 
mainly planned for payment of remuneration, TA/DA, service charges etc. The 
Committee also observe that Budget allocations for Capital Expenditure have been low 
as compared to Revenue Expenditure. The Committee suggest that expenses should 

 
 
10 
 
be planned evenly for Cap Expenditure vis-à-vis Revenue Expenditure for taking up 
various activities for statistical strengthening in the States/UTs also for timely 
conduction of surveys and capacity building programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
The Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and actual expenditure in 
Capacity Development Scheme of Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MoSPI) during Financial Years 2023-24 and 2024-25 are as under: 
 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Name of the scheme 2023-24 2024-25 
BE RE Actual 
expenditure 
BE RE Actual 
expenditure 
Capacity Development 
(CD) Scheme 
600.00 450.00 429.94 543.87472.03 516.27 
  
As may be seen from the above table, MoSPI has incurred an expenditure of 
95.54% over RE 2023-24 and 71.66% over BE 2023-24 of CD Scheme. Further, in FY 
2024-25, an expenditure of 109.37% over RE 2024-25 and 94.93% over BE 2024-25 of 
CD Scheme has been incurred. Therefore, as against FY 2023-24, utilization of the 
funds in FY 2024-25 has improved.  
The CD Scheme comprises three parts viz. CD (Main) Scheme, and two sub 
schemes viz. Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS) and Economic Census 
(EC).The major activities under the CD (Main) Scheme, inter-alia, include augmenting 
resources for bringing out important statistical products, such as Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) estimates, Consumer Price Indices (CPI), Index of Industrial Production 
(IIP), Statistical classifications, etc., various socio-economic surveys, capacity building 
in official statistics, leveraging Information Technology for Improvement in Data Eco-
system, etc. Under EC Sub-Scheme, listing of all non-agricultural establishments is 
undertaken periodically, which provides key information about the establishments and 
employment therein and forms the basis or frame for undertaking socio-economic 

 
 
11 
 
surveys. Under SSS sub-scheme, Grant-in-Aid (GIA) is provided to States/UTs for 
undertaking various activities for statistical strengthening in the States/UTs. 
Thus, the major portion of the budget allocated under various heads of CD 
Scheme are of revenue in nature. Further, the funds allocated under Capital Section are 
utilized mainly for equipping the offices with necessary IT and office equipment, 
furniture, etc. and for procurement of land/ built up space and construction and 
renovation of office building. Also, some of the funds under Capital Section, are 
provisioned for modernization of office building of the Ministry and upgradation of 
National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) of MoSPI, in a phased manner, 
according to the needs of the training and to provide state of the art facility by 
renovating/upgrading the already existing infrastructure. However, it is pertinent to 
mention that the major renovation work of the academy is covered under “Minor Civil & 
Electric Works” which is a part of Revenue Expenditure.  
The funds for expenditure under the Capital Section are considered as per the 
demand arising from time to time. 
Furthermore, MoSPI has prepared a detailed Quarterly Expenditure Plan for FY 
2025-26 and monitoring is being done on regular basis through weekly Senior Officers 
Meeting taken by Secretary (S&PI) to ensure adherence of the plan. 
In view of the above, it is submitted that while the inherent nature of the Scheme 
necessitates revenue-centric budgeting, the recommendation of the Committee has 
been duly noted to explore ways to appropriately enhance Capital Expenditure planning, 
where feasible, to address the concerns raised. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 14-05-2025] 
 
  

 
 
12 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
MPLAD Scheme 
 The Members of Parliament Local Area Development (MPLAD) Scheme is an 
ongoing Central Sector Scheme implemented by the MPLADS Division under 
Programme Implementation Wing of the MoSPI with the main objective to enable the 
Hon'ble Members of Parliament to recommend creation of durable community assets of 
national priorities in the interest of common public. Under the scheme, each MP is 
authorized with Rs 5.00 crore annually. With the objective of making the scheme more 
flexible, efficient and effective and to bring it in line with the changing development 
needs of the community, a revised set of Guidelines have been released which came 
into effect from 1st April, 2023. An e-SAKSHI portal has been developed by the Ministry 
in collaboration with State Bank of India and TCS to implement revised fund flow 
procedure under MPLADS in line with the directions of the Ministry of Finance to 
streamline the processes and enhance transparency of the system. The Committee 
note that on the design akin to e-SAKSHI portal, a mobile APP namely e-SAKSHI 
mobile application (APP) has been developed by the Ministry in order to (i) offer 
accessibility and convenience to the Hon’ble MPs to propose, track and oversee the 
projects in real-time (ii) enhance decision-making processes (iii) enable swift responses 
to emerging needs or issues (iv) provide the Hon’ble MPs with instant updates on the 
status and progress of their proposed projects and (v) streamline communication 
between MPs and relevant authorities. However, the Committee feel that there is still 
scope for improvement. There have been instances of significant delay in project 
sanction as well as discrepancies in constituency maps and their names in digital portal. 
The Committee also observe that this scheme of noble cause is heavily burdened under 
the GST and the current amount of funds that have been earmarked for this scheme 
seem to be insufficient to fulfill the desired objective. Therefore, considering the 
constant hike in inflation and average impact of GST on MPLAD Fund, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to prepare a proposal to take up the matter with Ministry of 
Finance for waiving off GST from MPLADS to enhance the effectiveness of the scheme. 

 
 
13 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken various measures to address the issues related to project 
sanction delays and discrepancies in digital mapping on the e-SAKSHI portal. To 
reduce project sanction delays, the Ministry is monitoring and regularly providing data to 
all States/UTs regularly with respect to: 
i. Works pending sanction for over 45 days from the date of recommendation by 
Hon’ble MPs 
ii. Works sanctioned but not completed over 1 year and  
iii. Works in which no payment has been made even after 3 months of sanction  
The above information is shared with States through letters from Secretary, MoSPI 
to respective Chief Secretaries requesting to resolve the above issues and facilitate 
action. Further, the portal is integrated with the Local Government Directory (LGD) for 
real-time constituency mapping. However, certain challenges related to the mapping of 
administrative units have been identified. The Ministry is in regular communication with 
the LGD to resolve these issues and improve coordination for accurate data updates. 
As far as the burden of GST on MPLADS funds is concerned, utilisation of fund for 
receiving supply of goods and services under the scheme is taxable as per the 
applicable GST rates. The GST rates and exemptions are prescribed based on the 
recommendations of the GST Council, which is a statutory body comprising of members 
from both the Union and State/UT Governments. At present there is no proposal under 
consideration for granting any exemption of GST on utilisation of MPLAD Fund. 
Regarding insufficiency in the annual allocation of ₹5 crore per MP, it is submitted 
that at present, the approval for the scheme is till 2025-26. The Ministry would take 
action for extension of scheme beyond 31 March 2026, following due process of third-
party evaluation, consultation with stakeholders and keeping in view the requests 
received. 
In respect of need for further improvements in the e-SAKSHI portal and mobile app, 
the Ministry has continuously worked towards strengthening the features and usability of 

 
 
14 
 
the e-SAKSHI portal and mobile application. Based on feedback received from 
stakeholders, a number of enhancements have been rolled out, and further 
improvements are planned. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 14-05-2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
Indian Statistical Institute 
 
 Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) is an autonomous institution and is devoted to 
research, teaching in Statistics and its applications in related subjects, natural sciences 
and social sciences. Its substantial contribution to the quality and theoretical work is 
acknowledged globally. The Committee are constrained to note that the actual 
expenditure incurred in respect of ISI during 2022-23 and 2023-24 was Rs. 299.37 crore 
an Rs. 312.80 crore which is lesser than the BE of the respective years viz. Rs. 321.70 
crore and Rs.322.29 crore. However, in BE 2024-25 an enhanced allocation of 
Rs.375.59 crore has been made and the actuals as on 31.12.2024 is Rs.247.45 crore. 
In the face of persistent under-utilization of funds by ISI, Kolkata in the last two financial 
years, the Committee are concerned about the performance of the institution. The 
Committee expect the ISI to fully utilize the allocated funds for the year 2024-25. The 
Committee note that the ISI has a total budgetary grant of Rs.349.39 crores (B.E) for 
the fiscal 2025-26. The Committee hope that with this budgetary provision, ISI would be 
able to undertake earnestly the task pertaining to development of new centres and 
strengthening of their existing centres. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to 
provide necessary resources to enable the Institute to fulfill its mandate alongwith 
ongoing projects including academic programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
While acknowledging the observations made by the Committee regarding the 
utilization of allocated funds by the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), it is submitted 
that certain unexpected factors had contributed to the underutilization of funds in the 
past. The Ministry has taken necessary measures to enhance financial planning and 

 
 
15 
 
execution in ISI. The budget allocated for 2024-25 has been utilised in full by ISI. The 
budgetary provision for 2025-26 will be effectively utilized for the development of new 
centers, strengthening existing facilities, and expanding academic and research 
initiatives of ISI. Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) is closely 
monitoring the progress to ensure that ISI fulfills its mandate efficiently. Every effort is 
being made to enable ISI to achieve its objectives while maintaining transparency and 
accountability in financial and operational matters. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 14 -05-2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
Minimize Time overrun and cost escalation 
 
 The Infrastructure Projects Monitoring Division (IPMD) of MoSPI undertakes the 
monitoring of projects above ₹ 150 crore. One of the significant contributions of the 
IPMD has been implementing systemic improvements periodically to expedite the 
project implementation. MoSPI publishes a monthly/ quarterly report on ongoing 
projects worth Rs. 150 crore & above, encapsulating a range of key parameters such as 
Original/Revised/ Anticipated Cost & Date of commissioning, cumulative Expenditure, 
Physical Progress etc. based on information reported by Implementing 
Agencies/Ministry/ Department on the MoSPI’s OCMS (online Computerized Monitoring 
System) web application. MoSPI also sends the periodic communications to apprise the 
administrative Ministries/ Departments of the projects having time and cost overrun, and 
the data gaps in reporting. These are helpful to the stakeholders in managing the 
project execution at their end. 
The Committee note that as of 31st January 2025, there were 1719 projects that 
have incurred time and cost overrun under MoSPI’s monitoring (as per reporting on the 
OCMS portal by the Line Ministries/ Project Implementing Agencies). Out of which, 
there were a total of 461 projects having cost overrun with respect to the original cost, 
amounting to overrun value of Rs. 5,35,384.25 Crore. Further, a total 771 projects were 
having time overrun with respect to the Original Date of Commissioning, with an 
average delay of around 34 months which is approximately ten per cent of the budget 

 
 
16 
 
itself. The Committee note that the Government has taken major steps like (i) Periodic 
reviews under PRAGATI (ii) rigorous project appraisal (iii) Online Computerized 
Monitoring System (OCMS) (iv) setting of revised Cost Committees in the Ministries etc. 
However, despite these measures the time and cost overrun are too huge to be ignored 
and still point to poor monitoring and appraisal of projects by the concerned Ministries. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the latest approved date of commissioning 
and cost of projects should be adhered to at least now and under no circumstances 
these should be allowed to necessitate further revision. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation is mandated to monitor 
Ongoing Central Sector Infrastructure Projects costing ₹ 150 crore and above on time 
and cost overrun, based on the information reported by stakeholders on the Online 
Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS) portal.  All stakeholders (Infrastructure Line 
Ministries/ Departments) are apprised of their project execution and slippages on the 
basis of analytics of the available data, on a regular basis for helping them in managing 
the project execution at their end. Further, the role of this Ministry is advisory in nature. 
It may also be noted that the time and cost overrun of various projects depend largely 
upon the nature of the project, complexity, systemic and some unforeseen issues 
across different infrastructure sectors. However, MoSPI has requestedthe concerned 
Ministries/Departments for action on the recommendations of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Finance. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 14-05-2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Shortage of Manpower 
 
Statistics is a specialized field which is vital for socio-economic planning and 
decision making and thus in effective nation building requires skilled manpower. The 

 
 
17 
 
Committee are concerned about the shortage of manpower which is persisting for a 
prolonged period of time. Year on year, the vacancies in Field Operations Division 
(FODs) are rising. During 2023, it was 614, 698 in 2024 and 908 in 2025 (as on 1st 
January). The shortage of manpower in Field Operation Division (FOD) in respect of 
collection & scrutiny of the data affects the quality of the data. According to the Ministry, 
the same is being addressed through engaging contractual manpower and training 
them. The Committee is of the view that this is a stopgap arrangement and does not 
fully address the issue. The Committee, therefore recommend the Ministry to deal with 
the issue of severe manpower shortage on priority basis and take concrete steps 
towards recruitment of regular field based staff in a time bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recruitment process for the Junior Statistical Officer (JSO) for the year 2024 
was initiated in January 2024, and at that time, 725 vacancies for JSOs (which 
constitutes 30.18% of the total posts of JSOs) were communicated to the Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC) for filling through CGLE-2024. Currently, SSC has provided a list of 
725 candidates who have been recommended for appointment to the post of JSO. SSC 
announced the final results of the CGLE-2024 on March 12, 2025. After receipt of 678 
dossiers from SSC and completion of pre-appointment formalities, appointment letters 
were issued to 663 candidates through ‘Rojgar Mela’ held in various regions on 
26.04.2025. Also, 245 vacancies of post of JSOs have been reported to SSC for 
recruitment for this year (2025).   
Contractual employees possessing a minimum of a graduate-level education are 
hired through outsourcing agencies and they undergo comprehensive training before 
being deployed for survey works. 
Further, it is to mention that the proposal of 2nd Cadre Review of Subordinate 
Statistical Service (SSS) is has been submitted to Dept. of Expenditure, wherein 
additional strength of 1,767 Junior Statistical Officers (JSOs) and 827 Senior Statistical 
Officers (SSOs) have been requested. 
 

 
 
18 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 14 -05-2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7) 
 
Seventh and Eighth Economic Census 
 
 The Committee understand that the Economic Census is a valuable source of 
disaggregated information on various operational and structural variables of all 
establishments of the country as it provides valuable insights into geographical 
spread/clusters of economic activities, ownership pattern, persons engaged, etc. of all 
economic establishments. The information collected through census are useful for 
socio-economic developmental planning at state and district levels. The practice 
provides an updated sampling frame for follow-up enterprise surveys undertaken for 
detailed and comprehensive analysis of all establishments across the nation.  The 
Committee were apprised that Seventh Economic Census was not finalized due to 
quality concerns. The Committee note that the total outlay of the seventh Economic 
Census was Rs. 913 crores out which Rs.691.04 crores have been utilized. The 
Committee feel that even after spending such a huge sum the purpose of the whole 
exercise was defeated. This is a sad state of affairs. The Committee note that as on 
date, approval for conduct of 8th Economic Census has not been obtained from Ministry 
and MOSPI has been requested to present the proposal for consideration of EFC after 
February, 2026. The Committee observe that the last Economic Census i.e the 6th was 
conducted in the year 2013, now with the non-finalization of the 7th Economic Census 
and push back of the date of 8th Economic Census the gap between two consecutive 
Economic Census will grow to more than twelve years. This is a large void of data.  The 
Committee therefore urge the Ministry to salvage some useful data collected during the 
fieldwork done for the 7th Economic Census and to at least come out with some interim 
data for this period to partly justify the expenditure incurred on the survey. The 
Committee further desire that the Ministry should begin all the preparatory work for the 

 
 
19 
 
conduct of the field work of 8th Economic Census in a smooth, reliable and time bound 
manner.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The feasibility of publishing the results of 7th EC was discussed in the meeting of 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) held on 13.07.2023 under chairpersonship of Cabinet 
Secretary. During the meeting it was highlighted that the fieldwork of 7th EC was 
conducted during COVID-19 when most of the business establishments were closed. 
Consequently, the data collected may not provide a true account of the entrepreneurial 
activity in the country. State Governments have, therefore, reported several issues 
related to data, including under-coverage/over coverage, misclassification of economic 
activity, duplication, and unusual variations compared to previous EC data. In response 
to these issues, CSC undertook a correction exercise. However, it had not been 
possible to satisfactorily address the data related issues. In the light of aforesaid state of 
affairs, it was recommended by CoS that it may not be feasible to publish the results of 
7thEC. The Ministry will examine the feasibility of salvaging the data of 7th Economic 
Census in consultation with States/UTs. 
The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has undertaken 
the following preparatory activities for conduct of 8th EC in collaboration with States / 
UTs: 
i. Consultations with Ministries and States on data requirements and various aspects 
of conduct of 8th Economic Census have been held.  
ii. ⁠To ensure smooth conduct of EC operations, a 3-tier supervisory structure 
comprising of Steering Committee under Secretary (MoSPI, State Level 
Coordination Committees (SLCC) under Chief Secretaries of the States and 
District Level Coordination Committees (DLCC) under District Collectors has been 
adopted.  
iii. 23 States / UTs have constituted the SLCCs and DLCCs. 
iv. 2 meetings of the Steering Committee have been held.  

 
 
20 
 
v. Expert Committee under renowned expert Dr. G.C. Manna has been constituted 
for finalisation of questionnaire and other technical requirements of 8th EC and 4 
meetings held. Draft Questionnaire has been prepared. 
vi. ⁠Implementation framework for 8th EC has been finalized and shared with States. 
⁠ Manpower requirements assessed for States / UTs. model RFP for engagement 
of contractual field staff through an agency has been given to the States / UTs as a 
facilitative measure. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. 
Cell dated 14-05-2025] 
 
  

 
 
21 
 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
22 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
  

 
 
23 
 
CHAPTER- V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                 BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB 
29 July,2025                                                                                                Chairperson,                                                           
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Finance 
  

 
 
24 
 
Annexure  
 Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
PART I 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 

 
 
25 
 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services, Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and 
Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 

 
 
26 
 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
4. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken Reports 
and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
  

 
 
27 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS     
(2025-26) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
07  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government (vide 
Recommendations at SI. Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6 and 
7) 
07 100.00% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies 
NIL -- 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
NIL -- 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
 
 