 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Planning] 
  
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 17 

ii 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Planning] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 July, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31 July, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
6 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
14 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
15 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
16 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025 17 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
20 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Vandana Committee Officer 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Seventeenth Report on action taken by the Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Planning.  
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
06 December, 2024. The Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were 
received from the Ministry of Planning on 04 March, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July 
2025.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Planning 
which was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 December, 2024.  
 
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 7 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
analyzed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7              
(Total 07)  
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
         (Total NIL)                          
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(Total NIL)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
 (Total - NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations. 
    
 

2 
 
  Recommendation Serial No. 2   
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) 
1.5 The Committee note that the budget allocation during FY 2024-25 towards the 
flagship scheme of Atal Innovation Mission are pegged at Rs.155 crore with no 
enhancement over the allocations of previous financial year 2023-24. The Committee 
further note that there had been an underutilization of the allocated budget in FY 2023-24, 
where the Actuals were Rs.96.82 crore only against the BE of 155 crore which is only 
62.46% of the allocated budget in percentage term. The Ministry of Planning has stated 
that the underutilization has resulted on account of ongoing recast exercise of AIM 
Programme intending to give AIM a new focus and hence no fresh liability was created till 
the completion of the recast process. Nonetheless, the impact of recast process has 
evidently cascaded upon the progress of other initiatives under AIM, like network 
expansion of Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs). They have informed that the current ATLs 
network of 10,000 labs is only able to cater to the requirements of less than 5% of 
Secondary and Senior Secondary Schools. In this regard, Ministry of Planning has 
apprised that proposal for expansion of ATL network is presently under consideration of 
Ministry of Education and awaiting the completion of recast of the AIM programme. The 
recasting exercise has affected the progress of the 0070rojects in the year 2022-23 as 
well. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Planning to expedite recasting 
of AIM to give way for the clearance and start of other initiatives and programmes under 
the umbrella scheme of AIM which are facing delays on this account. 
1.6 In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as follows:- 
“The Committee’s observations have been acted upon. The Cabinet, vide its 
meeting held on 25th November 2024, has approved the continuation of AIM till 
31st March 2028. This approval includes the implementation of new programs 
and the transition of the Atal Tinkering Lab (ATL) program to the Ministry of 
Education (MoE). The temporary underutilization of funds during FY 2023-24 
was due to this transition phase of AIM. With the Cabinet approval, AIM is 
expediting the implementation of initiatives approved for the next phase.” 
1.7 The Committee note with satisfaction that the Cabinet, has approved the 
continuation of Atal Innovation Mission Programme till 31st March, 2028, with 
certain new initiatives to be implemented in the next phase of the AIMs Programme. 
The Committee also note that modus operandi  for implementation of the AIM has 

3 
 
also been shifted and the Atal Tinkering Lab (ATL) programme has been transitioned 
from NITI Aayog to the Ministry of Education (MoE). And now the ATLs network 
would be laid by the Ministry of Education in collaboration with NITI Aayog. The 
Committee expects that now with the requisite Cabinet approval in-place, the AIM 
programme will pick up the much needed momentum and put a check on 
underutilisations of the budgetary grants in the fiscal years to follow and temporary 
underutilization of funds caused due to transition phase of AIM would be a thing of 
past.  
  Recommendation Serial No. 3    
Atal Tinkering Labs Network 
1.8 The Committee note that the Government has successfully established a huge 
network of 10,000 Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) across Indian States\UTs. The Committee 
would first like to commend the Ministry of Planning for the accomplishment of the 
ambitious target. A varied number of ATLs have been established in these States/UTs 
ranging from 2 in Union Territory of Ladakh straight to 1033 in State of Maharashtra. The 
number and network distribution of these ATLs does not appear to correspond with the 
area of the States\UTs. Surprisingly, in the sprawling state of Rajasthan only 511 ATLs 
have been established and states having considerably smaller territorial boundaries like 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu have an impressive network of ATLs at their 
disposal. North Eastern States are also having comparatively scanty coverage of ATLs. 
The Committee further observe that the proposal for the expansion of ATLs network is 
currently under contemplation of the Ministry of Education. The Committee recommend 
that in the second phase of ATLs such disproportions must be taken care of and ATL 
network must cover all States/UTs evenly. The Committee also want that the Ministry of 
Planning must not only confine itself to the limited target of establishing ATLs, rather it 
must proactively go all in to remove constraints and create necessary infrastructure to 
facilitate the access of ATLs to all. 
1.9 In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as follows:- 
“Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) appreciates the observations made regarding the 
distribution of Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) across Indian States/UTs. The variation 
in the number of ATLs established state-wise stems from several factors, 
including the number of schools applying for ATLs, regional demand for 
innovation infrastructure, and varying levels of readiness among schools across 
the state/UT to support the implementation of ATLs. 

4 
 
The Cabinet, vide its meeting held on 25th November 2024, has approved 
the continuation of AIM till 31st March 2028. This approval includes the 
implementation of new programs and the transition of the ATL program to the 
Ministry of Education (MoE) under the ATL 2.0 framework, which focuses on ATL 
saturation and continuous innovation. As part of this approval: 
1. The Ministry of Education (MoE) will lead the saturation of ATLs across 
the country, ensuring equitable distribution of ATLs across all States/UTs. AIM is 
in discussion with MoE for integrating ATLs within the school education system, 
to remove constraints and create necessary infrastructure to facilitate the access 
of ATLs to all. 
2. To keep ATLs aligned with the technological advancements and evolving 
education ecosystem, AIM will lead the innovation aspect of the ATL program. 
The focus will be on conducting pilots which will be transitioned to MoE for further 
scale up.  
3. AIM will focus on establishing 2,500 new ATLs in Frontier Regions, 
including the North-East, Jammu & Kashmir, and Ladakh, to ensure better 
accessibility for students in these areas. AIM will develop a tailored template best 
suited for the region. These ATLs will eventually be transferred to MoE.” 
1.10   The Committee note that the implementation of ATL 2.0 has been transitioned 
to the Ministry of Education (MoE) from NITI Aayog. The MoE will undertake the 
‘saturation’ of ATLs as per the current template and the AIM will assist in the 
evolution of the existing template. The Committee also take note of the fact that as 
the distribution of ATL network is governed by multiple factors like number of 
schools applying for ATLs, regional demand for innovation infrastructure etc., the 
MoE will be better suited for ensuring the saturation and equitable distribution of 
ATLs across all States/UTs post transition. The Committee are pleased to know that 
AIM will now be able to focus on other aspects of the programme like developing a 
region specific tailored template for establishing 2,500 new ATLs in Frontier 
Regions of the country, including the North-East, Jammu & Kashmir, and Ladakh 
and alongside will conduct pilots for leading the innovation aspect for aligning ATLs 
with the technological advancements and evolving education ecosystem. In this 
regard, the Committee further note that in the Union Budget (2025-26) the Hon’ble 
Finance Minister has announced the establishment of 50,000 Atal Tinkering Labs 
(ATLs) across the country over the next five years. The Committee are hopeful and 

5 
 
of the opinion that the transition of establishment of ATLs to MoE will prove 
instrumental in achieving these milestone targets with greater efficiency and in a 
time bound manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
Analysis of Budget 
The Committee note that the total budget allocation of the Ministry of Planning for 
the year 2024-25 is Rs.837.26 crore. This comprises of an outlay of Rs. 205.26 crore for 
expenditure other than Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector Schemes and Rs. 632.00 
crore for central Sector schemes/projects expenditure. There is only a nominal increase of 
1.56% in the BE 2024-25 over BE 2023-24, which was pegged at Rs. 824.39 crore. The 
Committee note that actual expenditure for fiscal 2023-24 was to the tune of Rs.290.81 
crore which stood at only 35.27% of the BE. The underutilization of the allocated grants 
has been attributed to the factors like slower pace of fund utilization under Aspirational 
Districts Programme/ Aspirational Blocks Programme at district level, recasting of Atal 
Innovation Mission and certain restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance on creating 
fresh committed liabilities. The Committee are of the firm view that not all of the intervening 
responsible factors were unforeseeable and careful financial planning could contain the 
underutilization of allocated grants.  The recasting of AIM was not a sudden development 
and could be kept in consideration well ahead while allocating funds for the scheme. 
Optimum resources utilization is the crucial ingredient of prudent financial planning and 
parking of funds in one Head may devoid other priorities of the required funds. In opinion 
of the Committee at RE stage Ministry must be in position to assess and estimate with 
greater accuracy the probable requirements of funds depending upon the pace of fund 
utilization and demands for budget support therefore must be closest to the actual 
projected requirements at RE stage. The Committee desire and recommend Ministry to be 
more fiscally prudent in future in allocating as well as utilising the available monetary 
resources.  
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance and 
concerned spending authorities have been advised to seek budget allocation for their 
respective schemes/projects on the basis of actual requirement and surrender the 
unutilized funds well in advance or at RE stage so that funds may be utilized in other 
priorities by the Government. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl.(Part) dated 28.02.2025] 
 

7 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) 
The Committee note that the budget allocation during FY 2024-25 towards the 
flagship scheme of Atal Innovation Mission are pegged at Rs.155 crore with no 
enhancement over the allocations of previous financial year 2023-24. The Committee 
further note that there had been an underutilization of the allocated budget in FY 2023-24, 
where the Actuals were Rs.96.82 crore only against the BE of 155 crore which is only 
62.46% of the allocated budget in percentage term. The Ministry of Planning has stated 
that the underutilization has resulted on account of ongoing recast exercise of AIM 
Programme intending to give AIM a new focus and hence no fresh liability was created till 
the completion of the recast process. Nonetheless, the impact of recast process has 
evidently cascaded upon the progress of other initiatives under AIM, like network 
expansion of Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs). They have informed that the current ATLs 
network of 10,000 labs is only able to cater to the requirements of less than 5% of 
Secondary and Senior Secondary Schools. In this regard, Ministry of Planning has 
apprised that proposal for expansion of ATL network is presently under consideration of 
Ministry of Education and awaiting the completion of recast of the AIM programme.  The 
recasting exercise has affected the progress of the projects in the year 2022-23 as well.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend Ministry of Planning to expedite recasting of AIM 
to give way for the clearance and start of other initiatives and programmes under the 
umbrella scheme of AIM which are facing delays on this account.  
Reply of the Government 
The Committee’s observations have been acted upon. The Cabinet, vide its meeting 
held on 25th November 2024, has approved the continuation of AIM till 31st March 2028. 
This approval includes the implementation of new programs and the transition of the Atal 
Tinkering Lab (ATL) program to the Ministry of Education (MoE). The temporary 
underutilization of funds during FY 2023-24 was due to this transition phase of AIM. With 
the Cabinet approval, AIM is expediting the implementation of initiatives approved for the 
next phase. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl.(Part) dated 28.02.2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No.1.7 of Chapter I) 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
Atal Tinkering Labs Network 
The Committee note that the Government has successfully established a huge 
network of 10,000 Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) across Indian States\UTs.  The Committee 
would first like to commend the Ministry of Planning for the accomplishment of the 
ambitious target.  A varied number of ATLs have been established in these States/UTs 
ranging from 2 in Union Territory of Ladakh straight to 1033 in State of Maharashtra.  The 
number and network distribution of these ATLs does not appear to correspond with the 
area of the States\UTs. Surprisingly, in the sprawling state of Rajasthan only 511 ATLs 
have been established and states having considerably smaller territorial boundaries like 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu have an impressive network of ATLs at their 
disposal. North Eastern States are also having comparatively scanty coverage of ATLs.  
The Committee further observe that the proposal for the expansion of ATLs network is 
currently under contemplation of Ministry of Education. The Committee recommend that in 
the second phase of ATLs such disproportions must be taken care of and ATL network 
must cover all States /UTs evenly. The Committee also want that the Ministry of Planning 
must not only confine itself to the limited target of establishing ATLs, rather it must 
proactively go all in to remove constraints and create necessary infrastructure to facilitate 
the access of ATLs to all.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) appreciates the observations made regarding the 
distribution of Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) across Indian States/UTs. The variation in the 
number of ATLs established state-wise stems from several factors, including the number 
of schools applying for ATLs, regional demand for innovation infrastructure, and varying 
levels of readiness among schools across the state/UT to support the implementation of 
ATLs. 
The Cabinet, vide its meeting held on 25th November 2024, has approved the continuation 
of AIM till 31st March 2028. This approval includes the implementation of new programs 
and the transition of the ATL program to the Ministry of Education (MoE) under the ATL 
2.0 framework, which focuses on ATL saturation and continuous innovation. As part of this 
approval: 
1. The Ministry of Education (MoE) will lead the saturation of ATLs across the country, 
ensuring equitable distribution of ATLs across all States/UTs. AIM is in discussion 

9 
 
with MoE for integrating ATLs within the school education system, to remove 
constraints and create necessary infrastructure to facilitate the access of ATLs to 
all. 
2. To keep ATLs aligned with the technological advancements and evolving education 
ecosystem, AIM will lead the innovation aspect of the ATL program. The focus will 
be on conducting pilots which will be transitioned to MoE for further scale up.  
3. AIM will focus on establishing 2,500 new ATLs in Frontier Regions, including the 
North-East, Jammu & Kashmir, and Ladakh, to ensure better accessibility for 
students in these areas. AIM will develop a tailored template best suited for the 
region. These ATLs will eventually be transferred to MoE. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl. (Part) dated 28.02.2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP)/Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) 
The Committee note that the success of ADP/ABP in its entirety depends upon the 
correctness of the data relied upon to assess and rank Districts and Blocks on basis of key 
performance parameters. It is only through rigorous analysis of data collected in respective 
stages from varied sources that well performing Districts and blocks are incentivized and 
additional funds are allocated for other projects. The Committee note with satisfaction that 
NITI Aayog is presently using three stage verification strategy for collecting and ensuring 
the correctness of data under ADP. In case of ABP, data is being sourced directly from 
databases maintained by Ministries concerned. The Committee are however of the opinion 
that Ministry should keep evolving their tools and techniques to further improvise their data 
collection techniques and must also employ methods like regular/random data quality 
checks to ensure the completeness and accuracy to establish data standards.  The 
Committee would also recommend that regular Workshops and Seminars for the field 
Officers in local administrative units, working close to ground realities must be organized 
to inculcate and share best practices in data management. The local administrative units 
must also be trained to work in coordination with other Government departments/agencies 
to take advantage of information and knowledge database maintained by them.  
 

10 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee’s recommendations are noted.  NITI Aayog will constantly engage 
with concerned ministries and districts to enhance data quality through regular meetings 
and workshops by using evolving tools and techniques. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl.(Part) dated 28.02.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
Sampoornta Abhiyaan 
The Committee note that Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP)/ Aspirational 
Blocks Programme (ABP) has presented a data-driven approach to socio economic 
development of relatively underdeveloped Districts/Blocks of the country on the basis of 
performance in the 49 key indicators.  Further, for rapid and effective development in 
India's most underdeveloped regions, the Government had launched a focused campaign 
‘Sampoornta Abhiyaan’ in July, 2024 to ensure saturation of 6 critical indicators across the 
themes of Health and Nutrition and Nutrition Education, Agriculture and Social 
Development/ Financial inclusion and Skill Development in 3 months period.  The 
Committee are satisfied to note that encouraging outcomes have been received out of this 
exercise as so far, 21 Aspirational Districts and 90 Aspirational Blocks have successfully 
saturated all 6 indicators in the short span of three months. The Committee therefore 
recommend that NITI Aayog must formulate and organize more such focused campaigns 
and drives in future to speed up saturation of all remaining Districts and Blocks in respect 
of the rest of the KPIs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee's recommendation is noted. In the first phase of Sampoornata 
Abhiyaan, six KPIs were identified for saturation. Similar focused campaigns like 
Sampoornata Abhiyaan will be organized under ADP and ABP. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl.(Part) dated 28.02.2025] 
 
  

11 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
State Support Mission (SSM) 
The Committee note that ‘State Support Mission’ was announced in the Union 
Budget for FY 2023-24 for implementation during 2022-23 to 2024-25. Under this Central 
Sector Scheme ‘State Institution for Transformation (SIT)” are established in the interested 
States/UTs to support them achieve their respective social-economic goals and develop 
their strategies and state vision @2047 in alignment with Indian Vision @2047 and other 
national priorities and to re-imagine the role of their existing Planning Departments. The 
Committee has been informed that in Financial Year 2023-24 Mission Implementation 
Committee (MIC) of SSM had approved proposal /Action Plan of 15 States /UTs for 
disbursal of funds. However, due to lack of funds in the Budget Head Grant-in-aid, General, 
only Rs.12.8 crore was disbursed to 8 States/UTs out of the available funds of Rs.14 crore. 
The Committee are concerned to note that significant initiatives like State Support Mission 
which aims at fostering structured and institutionalised engagement of NITI Aayog with 
States and UTs are getting stalled due to paucity of funds as the requisite grants were not 
released. The Committee are of view that a sound financial planning, timely allocation of 
available resources and diverting funds from non-essential activities to essential ones may 
obviate such scenario of projects/programmes stalling due to lack of funding. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that sufficient grants must not only be allocated but also 
released to prevent stalling of schemes/projects in future.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Noted. It is pertinent to mention here that in the FY 2024-25, a total of Rs 30.365 
crores was allocated to SSM under the Grant-in-Aid Head through which funds are 
disbursed to States/UTs/Institutions. Out of which all interested States/UTs/LKIs seeking 
funds under SSM have been provided with funds. As SSM is a demand driven scheme 
and in view of the increasing demand of funds, an additional amount of Rs 5 Crores has 
been sought as supplementary in order to meet the requirement. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl.(Part) dated 28.02.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
The Committee note that NITI Aayog is the nodal Institution for accomplishing 2030 
Agenda of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). To achieve this objective NITI Aayog 
has developed monitoring tools like SDG India Index for monitoring  the progress of States 
and Union Territories towards achieving the SDGs and  National Multidimensional Poverty 
Index (MPI) to evaluate the performance of States\UTs. The Committee further note that 
the National MPI utilizes the monitoring mechanism and methodologies of the 
internationally acknowledged MPI to meticulously assess the national and sub-national 
performance which offers a multi dimensional perspective on poverty. The Committee are 
happy to know that the alignment of National MPI with methodology used to compute 
global Multi-dimensional Poverty Index has offered a multi dimensional perspective on 
poverty and has helped reducing multidimensional poverty at National, State and District 
Level to a great length.  The Committee note that localization of SDGs is a potent tool to 
give necessary impetus to the attainment of 2030 Agenda. The fact has been corroborated 
by the observations included in NITI Aayog, National MPI Report titled ‘National 
Multidimensional Poverty Index-A Progress Review 2023’ which mentions that India is 
moving fast towards SDG targets 1.2 which aims to reduce at least by half the proportion 
of men, women and children of all ages who are living in poverty by 2030. 
 
In addition to this SDG coordination Centers have also been established in some 
states to ensure effective implementation of the SDGs. The Committee have been 
informed that in line with other initiatives NITI Aayog has also proposed the creation of 
Sustainable Development Goals Coordination and Acceleration Centres (SDGCAC) to 
support States/UTs in localizing SDGs. The Committee, recommend Ministry of Planning 
to expedite the creation of SDGCACs for achieving faster localization of SDGs as the 
deadline of 2030 is approaching fast. The Committee in their previous Report had also 
emphasized the importance of localization of SDGs for achieving set 2030 target at faster 
pace. 
 
Reply of the Government 
NITI Aayog is regularly guiding and providing necessary hand-holding support to 
the States/UTs for expediting establishment of Sustainable Development Goals 
Coordination and Acceleration Centres (SDGCACs) for implementation and localisation of 

13 
 
SDGs. So far SDG Cell/Unit/Centres are operational in 25 States/UTs. In the current year, 
3 states viz. Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Andhra Pradesh have upgraded their SDG 
Cells to SDGCCs. NITI Aayog issues advisories and continues to follow-up with the 
States/UTs to expedite establishment of SDGCACs. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2024-Parl.(Part) dated 28.02.2025] 
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

15 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

17 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
PART I 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 

18 
 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, Public Enterprises 
and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and Investment 
and Public Asset Management). 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation. 

19 
 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken 
Reports and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
 
  

20 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 4TH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) OF 
THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
   
Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of 
Recommendations 
07 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 
3,4, 5, 6 and 7) 
07 100% 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies  
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations 
in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  
Nil 0.00 
(v) Observations / Recommendations 
in respect of which final reply of 
the Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 