 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
   DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
                                                   2025-26 
 
  
 
                                                  ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
11 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
(EIGHTEENTH
MINISTRY OF 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
March
 
 
ii 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2025-26)  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 March, 202503.2023
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 March, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
 
03.2023 

iii 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I NITI Aayog- An Introduction 1 
Chapter - II Analysis of Demands for Grants (2025-26) 9 
Chapter-  III Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) 16 
Chapter-  IV Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) & Self-Employment and 
Talent Utilisation (SETU) 
21 
Chapter-  V Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) and Aspirational  
Blocks Programme (ABP)  
29 
Chapter-  VI State Support Mission (SSM) 36 
Chapter-  VII Research & Study 39 
PART-II 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  42 
                             ANNEXURES  49 
   
 APPENDICES  
Appendix – I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 18.02.2025 61 
Appendix – II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 18.03.2025 65 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Vandana Committee Officer 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
   I, the Chairperson, of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Planning.  
2. The Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Planning have been examined 
by the Committee under Rule Section 331E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha.   
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Planning 
on 18 February, 2025.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives 
of the Ministry of Planning for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material 
and information which the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the 
Demands for Grants (2025-26). 
4. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on            
18 March 2025.  
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold at the end of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
18 March, 2025 
27 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 

1 
 
PART - I 
CHAPTER I 
NITI  AAYOG- AN INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 NITI Aayog ie. the ‘National Institution for Transforming India’, as an apex 
public policy think tank of the Government of India, was formed via a resolution of 
the Union Cabinet on 1st January 2015.  NITI Aayog is mandated to provide 
institutional capacity to the Ministry of Planning. Prime Minister is the executive 
head of the Ministry of Planning. It is the nodal agency tasked with catalysing 
economic development, and fostering cooperative federalism through the 
involvement of State Governments in the economic policy-making process using 
a bottom- up approach.  
1.2 Apart from designing strategic and long-term policies and programmes for 
the Government of India, NITI Aayog also provides relevant strategic and 
technical advice to the Centre, States and Union Territories (UTs). NITI Aayog 
acts as the quintessential platform for the Government of India to bring States to 
act together in national interest and thereby foster cooperative federalism.  
Following are the key objectives and features  of NITI Aayog:- 
(a)  To evolve a shared vision of national development priorities, sectors 
and strategies with the active involvement of States. 
(b) To foster cooperative federalism through structured support initiatives 
and mechanisms with the States on a continuous basis, recognising that 
strong States make a strong nation.  
(c) To develop mechanisms to formulate credible plans at the village level 
and aggregate these progressively at higher levels of government. 
(d)To ensure, in areas that are specifically referred to it, that the interests 
of national security are incorporated in economic strategy and policy. 
 (e)To pay special attention to the sections of our society that may be at 
risk of not benefiting adequately from economic progress.  
(f) To design strategic and long-term policy and programme frameworks 
and initiatives, and monitor their progress and their efficacy. The lessons 
learned through monitoring and feedback will be used for making 
innovative improvements, including necessary mid-course corrections. 

2 
 
 (g) To provide advice and encourage partnerships between key 
stakeholders and national and international like-minded think tanks, as 
well as educational and policy research institutions. 
(h) To create a knowledge, innovation and entrepreneurial support system 
through a collaborative community of national and international experts, 
practitioners and other partners. 
 (i) To offer a platform for the resolution of inter-sectoral and inter-
departmental issues in order to accelerate the implementation of the 
development agenda. 
 (j)To maintain a state-of-the-art resource centre, be a repository of 
research on good governance and best practices in sustainable and 
equitable development as well as help their dissemination to stake-
holders. 
(k) To actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of programmes 
and initiatives, including the identification of the needed resources so as to 
strengthen the probability of success and scope of delivery.  
(l) To focus on technology upgradation and capacity building for 
implementation of programmes and initiatives. 
(m) To undertake other activities as may be necessary in order to further 
the execution of the national development agenda, and the objectives 
mentioned above. 
          
1.3 NITI Aayog is supported by an attached office, Development Monitoring 
and Evaluation Office (DMEO) and an autonomous body, National Institute of 
Labour Economics Research and Development (NILERD). NITI Aayog’s activities 
can be divided into four key areas: 
          1. Promoting knowledge and innovation  
          2. NITI for States (Cooperative and Competitive Federalism) 
          3. Driving transformational change  
          4. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)    
 
 1.4     The different programmes, subjects, attached offices, and autonomous 
bodies of NITI Aayog provide the requisite coordination and support framework 
needed to carry out the above mandate. Ministry of Planning through NITI Aayog 
runs the following Central Sector Schemes: 

3 
 
(a) Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) including Self Employment and Talent 
Utilization   (SETU). 
(b)  Ongoing Programmes and Schemes through Research and Study (R&S). 
(c)  Programme for Aspirational Districts(ADP)  
(d) State Support Mission (SSM). 
Governing Council of NITI Aayog  
1.5  The Governing Council of NITI Aayog, comprising of Chief Ministers of all 
the States and UTs with legislatures and LGs of other UTs, came into effect on 
16 February, 2015 vide a notification issued by the Cabinet Secretariat. The 
Governing Council was last reconstituted vide a notification dated 19 February 
2021 by the Cabinet Secretariat. The Governing Council is the premier body 
tasked with evolving a shared vision of national priorities and strategies, with the 
active involvement of States, in shaping the national development narrative. The 
Governing Council, which embodies the objectives of cooperative federalism, 
presents a platform to discuss inter-sectoral, inter-departmental and federal 
issues to accelerate the implementation of the national development agenda. So 
far, nine meetings of the Governing Council have been held under the 
Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Prime Minister with CMs/LGs of the States/UTs and 
other members of the Governing Council. So far, nine meetings of the Governing 
Council have been held under the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Prime Minister 
with CMs/LGs of the States/UTs and other members of the Governing Council.  
           
Visioning Exercise for States 
1.6 To achieve Viksit Bharat@47, Government has decided to formulate a 25-
year Vision Plan for making India a developed nation by the year 2047, i.e., 
“Viksit Bharat@2047”. The Vision Plan is being prepared by the ten Sectoral 
Group of Secretaries (SGoS) constituted by the Government of India in January 
2022, and the same is being coordinated by NITI Aayog 
During the 9th Governing Council Meeting held on 27 July, 2024, the 
Hon’ble PM stressed that Viksit Bharat can be realised through Viksit States and 
that the aspiration of Viksit Bharat should reach the grassroots level. NITI Aayog 
has been actively supporting the States with the preparation of State specific 
vision documents for 2047.  The visioning exercise has been launched in the 

4 
 
States of Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Bihar and Madhya 
Pradesh.              
              
1.7  NITI Aayog completed its first decade in  January, 2025, therefore, the 
Committee wanted to know about its various sectoral achievements, the Ministry 
of Planning in its written replies furnished following information:- 
“ The key achievements of NITI Aayog over a decade of its functioning are 
as follows- 
 
(i) Aspirational Districts and Blocks Programme 
The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) was launched in 2018 to bring 
transformative changes in 112 under-developed districts of India by focusing 
on 49 key indicators across five critical sectors: Health and Nutrition, 
Education, Agriculture and Water Resources, Financial Inclusion and Skill 
Development, and Basic Infrastructure. The program has emerged as a 
template for good governance and sharing of innovative best practices. 
Expanding on the ADP's framework, the Aspirational Blocks Programme 
(ABP) was launched in January 2023, targeting 500 underdeveloped blocks 
nationwide.  
Under the programme, Sampoornata Abhiyaan was also launched on 4th 
July 2024, to saturate 6 indicators each under Aspirational District 
Programme and Aspirational Blocks Programme in all 112 districts and 500 
blocks respectively from July-September 2024. Over a period of 3 months, 
21 Aspirational Districts and 90 Aspirational Blocks have saturated all 6 
indicators. 
(ii) State Support Mission  
The State Support Mission is an overarching umbrella initiative of NITI 
Aayog to reimagine its ongoing engagement with States and Union 
Territories in a more structured and institutionalised manner. Under this 
mission, NITI Aayog supports the States/UTs in setting up state institutions 
for Transformation (SIT) and capacity building. As on date 28 SITs have 
been notified under SSM. NITI also facilitates on boarding sectoral domain 
knowledge sources like IIMS/IITs/Central & State Universities as Lead 
Knowledge Institutions (LKIs) to support the SITs.  
(iii) Sustainable Development Goals 
NITI Aayog is the nodal agency for coordinating matters pertaining to 
achievement of SDGs in India both at national and sub-national levels.  
Since 2018, the SDG India Index has been comprehensively documenting 
and ranking the progress made at the sub-national level toward achieving 
the SDGs. It has become the principal tool for measuring national and 
subnational progress on SDG with 4 issues released so far. NITI Aayog has 
also brought out National Multidimensional Poverty Index of which two 
issues have been launched.  NITI Aayog has also been facilitating 
presentation of Voluntary National Reviews on SDGs in the United Nations.  
 
(iv) Promoting Competition amongst States/ UTs 

5 
 
NITI Aayog has launched a series of indices to rank States/UTs in different 
areas such as health, education, water, energy and climate, SDGs, export 
preparedness, innovation, Multidimensional Poverty Index, etc., based on 
quantitative objective criteria. These have encouraged States (and even 
districts in the Aspirational Districts Programme) to improve their 
performance 
 
(v) Cities as Growth Hubs Initiative 
To pioneer a transformative shift in urban development, NITI Aayog has 
taken up the ‘Cities as Growth Hubs (G-Hub) Initiative’ prioritizing economic 
master planning as cornerstone for accelerated economic growth. NITI 
Aayog's Growth Hub Initiative, launched in 2023, aims to transform potential 
cities into mega-growth hubs. Economic Plans of Surat Economic Region 
and Mumbai Metropolitan Region have been released by the respective 
state governments in September 2024, and remaining are under progress. 
 
(vi) Electric Mobility 
National Mission on Transformative Mobility and Battery Storage is chaired 
by NITI Aayog to build an ecosystem for proliferation of electric vehicles in 
India. NITI Aayog has also been contributing in the entire ecosystem of 
electric mobility viz. demand creation, manufacturing, charging 
infrastructure, standards and specification, regulatory provisions, etc.  
 
(vii) Global Value Chain 
Recognising the critical need to boost manufacturing for economic growth 
and job creation in India, NITI Aayog has conceptualised an initiative to 
analyse the challenges impeding India’s presence in Global Value Chains 
(GVC) and to develop strategies to power up its GVC presence. The 
initiative focuses on priority sectors where India has growth potential such 
as electronics, automotive and chemicals. 
 
(viii) Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) 
One of NITI Aayog’s most impactful flagship initiatives is the Atal Innovation 
Mission, known as AIM. Established in 2016, AIM aims to cultivate a culture 
of innovation and entrepreneurship across India. Through a holistic 
approach, it promotes a problem-solving mind-set from school level to the 
private sector, creating a thriving ecosystem for innovation and 
entrepreneurship. Post the Union Cabinet approval of its continuation with 
enhanced scope, AIM 2.0 takes a qualitative shift towards Viksit Bharat to 
strengthen India’s innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem. 
 
(ix) Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO)- 
Institutionalising Monitoring and Evaluation by embedding it to 
scheme structure: 
Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO), was set up in 
September 2015, to provide valuable policy insights including modification, 
up scaling, downsizing or closure of the schemes/programmes. Output 
Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) was conceptualised in 2017 for 

6 
 
self-reported monitoring of the progress of CS and CSS schemes and is laid 
in the Parliament alongwiththe Union Budget. 
Besides, DMEO, NITI Aayog takes up evaluation of Central Sector schemes 
as directed by Department of Expenditure (DoE) and on request by 
concerned Ministries.  Since its inception in September, 2015, DMEO has 
completed 155 evaluation studies. 
 
(x) Visioning Exercise for States @ 2047 
NITI Aayog has commenced an exercise of supporting State Governments 
to prepare their vision document as being done by Central Government 
towards Viksit Bharat @2047. This is expected to drive strategic 
transformation across every aspect of the citizen’s lives, economy and 
governance. The visioning exercise has been launched in Gujarat, Andhra 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh. The Vision 
Documents for a Viksit Gujarat @ 2047 and Swarna Andhra @ 2047 have 
already been launched. 
 
Besides,NITI Aayog has been ideating and incubating various programmes 
and supporting the Ministries to implement these schemes/programmes. 
Some of these important programmes are as under:- 
 
(i) Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
To enhance India’s manufacturing capabilities in critical sectors, the 
Production Linked Incentive was conceptualised in NITI and have been 
introduced in 14 key sectors with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 1.97 lakh crore. 
The scheme is now being implemented by different Ministries.  
 
(ii) Asset Monetisation Programme 
NITI Aayog was mandated with creation of the National Monetisation 
Pipeline (NMP). NITI Aayog formulated the asset pipeline of 12 central line 
ministries to serve as a medium-term roadmap for Monetisation of Core 
Infrastructure Assets. The progress is monitored periodically by the core 
group of secretaries under the chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary. 
 
(iii) Lifestyle for Envirnoment (LiFE) 
NITI Aayog designed and curated the Mission LiFE as a mass movement to 
nudge people towards adopting sustainable lifestyles. MoEFCC is now 
implementing Mission LiFE. 
 
(iv) Circular Economy 
NITI Aayog identified 11 areas to facilitate transition from a linear to circular 
economy and finalised 10 sectoral Circular Economy action plans for 
implementation by stakeholder Ministries. This is now implemented by 
MoEFCC. 
 
(v) Mining Reforms 
A High Level Committee (HLC) was constituted by the Government under 
the Chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog in 2019 for enhancing 

7 
 
exploration and mineral production, reducing imports and achieving rapid 
growth in exports. Based on the recommendations of the HLC, amendments 
were carried out in the last three years of the MMDR Act, 2015 to facilitate 
ease of doing business.  Recommendations of the Report played an 
important role in subsequent reforms in the mining sector. 
 
(vi) Health Sector 
A number of initiatives have been taken by NITI Aayog in the health sector 
which have subsequently been adopted by Central Ministries and/ or State 
Governments. These include Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Aarogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY), POSHAN Abhiyaan, orphan drugs for rare 
diseases, reforms in National Organ Transplant Programme, Increase in 
post graduate seats, upgradation of district hospitals to medical colleges, 
telemedicine guidelines, eradication of sickle cell anemia, Tele-Mental 
Health Assistance and Networking Across States, etc.  Besides, NITI Aayog 
also played a major role in Covid-19 pandemic management through 
Empowered Groups 1, 5 and 7 headed by Member and CEO, NITI Aayog.  
NITI Aayog also contributed to legislations such as National Medical 
Commission Bill, Indian Nursing Council Act and National Dental 
commission Bill. 
 
(vii) Agriculture Sector 
NITI Aayog drafted a Model Agricultural Land Leasing Act, which was later 
adopted by several states to formalise tenant farming and provide land 
security to farmers. It launched the Agricultural Marketing & Farmer Friendly 
Reforms Index in 2016 to rank states based on marketing, land lease, and 
agroforestry reforms. NITI Aayog has been building strategy to promote 
natural farming, its recommendations on natural farming and organic 
agriculture have been integrated into policies like Bharatiya Prakritik Krishi 
Paddhati (BPKP) under Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY). 
 
Boosting India’s Participation In Global Value Chains 
 
NITI Aayog, during 2023-24, targeted manufacturing growth to boost India’s 
participation in Global Value Chains (GVCs) as It is estimated that roughly 
70 percent of global trade lies in GVCs and  India’s current level of 
participation in GVC-linked international trade is low and has massive 
potential for enhancement. GVC is international production sharing – 
wherein, the full range of activities to bring a product from conception to 
end-use and beyond is divided among multiple firms and workers across 
geographic spaces. However, a representative Global Value Chain: Value 
addition happens across countries for delivery of final product.” 
                                           
1.8    On being enquired about the performance review of NITI Aayog, the 
Ministry of Planning stated as given below:- 

8 
 
“NITI Aayog was set up in January 2015 as a premier think tank of 
Government of India. Over the last decade, a number of initiatives have 
been taken by NITI Aayog which are mentioned in para 1.7. Overall, it 
can be inferred that NITI has become an important Institution which has 
facilitated holistic socio economic development of the country both at 
the national and sub-national levels.  NITI Aayog has strengthened 
cooperative federalism through structured initiatives and State Support 
Mission besides promoting competition amongst States and sub-State 
level through performance measurement across indices and schemes 
like Aspirational Districts and Blocks Programme.  It has been working 
with the spirit of ‘Team India’ to facilitate achievement of SDGs, promote 
City Regions as Growth Hubs, develop State vision documents, 
encourage state level reforms and developing state capacities across 
different sectors. NITI Aayog has ideated key programmes to address 
pressing developmental issues and challenges of the country. The 
performance review of NITI Aayog is a continuous process and is 
undertaken at various levels within the Government. Feedback is also 
taken from State Governments, academia, civil societies, and other 
stakeholders from time to time.” 
 
                         
1.9   The subsequent chapters in Part-I deals  with the following topics:- 
a) Analysis of Demands for Grants (2025-26) 
b) Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) 
c) Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) & Self-Employment and Talent Utilisation 
(SETU) 
d) Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) and Aspirational Blocks   
Programme (ABP) 
e) State Support Mission (SSM) 
f) Research & Study 
 
    
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER II 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
2.1   The Ministry of Planning presented their detailed Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) to Lok Sabha under Demand No. 77. The total allocation of Ministry 
of Planning for the year 2025-26 was to the tune of Rs. 1006.06 crore. The 
Revenue section for BE 2025-26 is Rs. 972.35 crore and Rs.33.71 crore is the 
Capital share. There is an increase of 15.84% in the Revenue Section for the 
year 2025-26 over BE, 2024-25, whereas in Capital Section the increase is 
43.75%. There was a nominal increase of 1.56% in percentage terms in BE 
2024-25 over BE 2023-24. The Actuals 2024-25 (upto 31.12.2024) registered 
a sharp decline to the tune of Rs. 197.49 crore as against BE of Rs. 837.26 
crore.  
An allocation of Rs. 204.05 crore for  Non-Scheme Expenditures has been 
sought against previous year’s BE of Rs.205.26. Development Monitoring and 
Evaluation Office (DMEO) has been given an allocation of  Rs.23.021 crore as 
BE 2025-26 against an earlier allocation of Rs.19.76 crore.   No funds have 
been allocated to National Institute of Labour Economics Research and 
Development (NILERD)  as against BE(2024-25) 0f Rs. 11.30 crore. Economic 
Advisory Council to Prime Minister received an increased allocation of Rs. 
4.3595 crore as BE 2024-25 against BE 2023-24 of Rs.3.00 crore.  
2.2   Under Scheme section  an allocation of Rs. 802.01 crore  has been 
sought for Central  Sector Schemes as against  BE 2024-25 of Rs. 632 crore 
to run Central Sector Schemes during the financial year 2025-2026.  Upon 
receipt of approval for continuation of Atal Innovation Mission programme till 
2027-2028 with an outlay of ₹2750.00 crore, an amount of ₹400.00 crore has 
been sought as BE 2025-2026 against last year’s BE of Rs. 155.00 Crore, For 
State Support Mission an allocation of Rs. 45.00 crore for BE 2025-2026 has 
been sought against BE 2024-2025 of Rs. 40.00 crore. Further, only a token 
budgetary allocation of ₹ 0.01 crore has been sought in BE 2025-2026 against 
BE of Rs. 433.00 crore for 2024-2025, as the approval for continuation of the 
scheme Official Development Assistance from Japan International Cooperation 
Agency(JICA) for Sustainable Development Goals(SDGs)/Aspirational Districts 
Programme was under consideration at the time of raising the demands. For 
State Support Mission an allocation of Rs. 45.00 crore for BE 2025-2026 has 
been sought against BE 2024-2025 of ₹ 40.00 Crore. For State Support 

10 
 
Mission  an allocation of Rs.45.00 crore for BE 2025-2026 was sought against 
BE 2024-2025 of Rs. 40.00 Crore. With budget allocation of Rs. 4 crore, no 
enhancement  in BE 2025-2026 over BE 2024-2025 for Research and Study  
scheme has been  sought. Further, for Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) 
a BE of Rs.353.00 crore has been sought for the financial year 2025-2026. 
2.3 Details with regard to analysis of Demands for Grants in various heads 
during  last three years of Ministry of Planning can be seen at Annexure I. 
2.4    The allocation for Ministry of Planning during 2023-24 to 2025-26 is given 
below: 
(in Rs. crore) 
 Year BE RE Actuals 
   2023-24 824.39 514.19 290.82 
   2024-25 837.26 1001.02 197.49* 
   2025-26           1006.06 - - 
   * (Upto 31.12.24) 
2.5     When the Committee wanted to know about the justifications for decrease 
in Actuals to the tune of Rs. 290.82 crore as against the   RE of Rs. 514.19 for  
FY 2023-24 which were cut short to Rs. 514.19 crore from BE of Rs. 824.39 crore 
and Multifold increase of RE of Rs 1001.02 crore for FY 2024-25 as  against 
Actuals of Rs 290.82 crore for FY 2023-24, the Ministry of Planning in a written 
reply stated as under:- 
“RE 2023-24 was reduced to ₹ 514.19 crore from ₹824.39 crore because of 
slow expenditure with unspent balances lying in the CNA account under 
ODA from JICA for SDGs/ Aspirational District Programme(ADP) scheme. 
The total BE 2023-24 level provision of Rs.433.00 crore of ODA from JICA 
for SDGs/ Aspirational District Programme(ADP) Scheme was reduced to 
Rs.113.00 crore at RE 2023-24. There is a nominal increase of ₹ 12.87 
crore in BE 2024-25 over BE 2023-24. RE 2024-25 has been increased to ₹ 
1001.02 crore from BE 2024-25 of ₹ 837.26 crore to operate a new Scheme 
namely Aspirational Blocks Programme with a budget provision of ₹ 412 
crore from RE Stage of FY 2024-25. Enhancement in BE 2025-26 to ₹ 
1006.06 crore from previous year’s BE of ₹ 837.26 crore is due to allocation 
of ₹ 400 crore for Atal Innovation Mission(AIM) and ₹353 crore for   
Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP). Cabinet has approved the 
continuation of AIM Scheme with an outlay of ₹ 2750 crore for a period 
2023-24 to 2027-28. EFC has approved the Aspirational Blocks Programme 
(ABP) with an outlay of ₹765 crore for a period of two years 2024-25 and 
2025-26. Continued efforts are made to project BE/RE requirement in a 
realistic manner so that the funds could be utilized upto the maximum extent 
so as to achieve the anticipated targets/goals.”                                               
         

11 
 
2.6 Revenue and Capital Sections of the allocation of Ministry of Planning for 
the last three years are given below:   
                                                                                                         (in Rs. crore)                                                                                                                         
Year 
 
BE RE Actuals 
Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Ca
pita
l 
2023-24 805.73 18.66 496.76 17.43 284.83 5.9
9 
2024-25 818.30 18.96 978.39 22.63 - - 
2025-26 972.35 33.71 - - - - 
 
2.7 When asked about the reasons for underutilization of the RE for FY 2023-
24 to the tune of Rs. 284.83 crore in Revenue section and to Rs. 5.99 crore in 
Capital section as against the BE of Rs. 805.73 crore and Rs. 18.66 crore  under 
Revenue and  Capital section respectively, the Ministry of Planning in their written 
submission provided as under:- 
 
“The underutilization of funds from the allocated amount of ₹824.39 crore at 
BE-2023-24 was due to the availability of ₹ 680 crore as unspent balance in 
the Central Nodal Account (CNA) under ADP Scheme due to imposition of 
the limit of ₹ 1 Sanction by Ministry of Finance. Consequently, Ministry of 
Planning had issued 10 sanctions of ₹ 1 each which equals to the release of 
total amount of ₹ 194.31 crore from CNA during FY 2023-24. Apart from the 
above, the approval of Cabinet for continuation of AIM Scheme was 
pending; hence, Ministry of Finance had permitted Ministry of Planning to 
incur expenditure with certain restrictions and barred it from creating fresh 
committed liabilities, which was equally applicable for the Capital Section of 
the AIM. Hence, savings occurred during FY 2023-24.” 
                        
          
. 
2.8 When the Committee wanted to know about the presently operational  
Schemes/Programmes  of NITI Aayog and budget allocations thereto during the 
preceding three years, the Ministry of Planning  in their written replies submitted 
following details:- 
“Details of each of the Schemes/Programmes presently operational under NITI 
Aayog are as under and allocations thereto during 2022-23 to 2024-25:- 
 

12 
 
Name of 
Schemes 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
 BE RE Actual
s 
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals 
as on 
07.02.20
25 
AIM 155.31  343.21 169.43 155.00 155.00 96.84 155.00 109.35 21.98* 
SSM 0  0.50 0 40.00 40.00 21.58 40.00 43.70 29.49* 
ODA 0.01  500.00 496.81 433.00 111.00 0.00 433.00 208.55 2.15* 
ABP -  - - -- - - - 412.00 - 
Research 
and Study 
6.00 4.00 3.38 4.00 4.00 2.55 4.00 4.00 1.70* 
* Expenditure as on 07.02.2025. 
                        
 ACTIVITIES PROPOSED DURING THE YEAR 2025-26 
  
2.9    Various activities proposed to be undertaken in the Financial Year 2025-26 
in terms of the projected expenditure are as follows: 
  
(A)  Establishment Related Expenditure 
  (i)  Department of Planning 
Under this, the expenditure to be incurred to meet salary and allowances 
and other related expenses on travel and other administrative 
expenditures, as well as professional services expenditures in respect to 
the Office of the Minister of State for Planning, are being projected. 
(ii)  NITI Aayog 
Under this, the expenditure to be incurred to meet Salary and allowances 
and other related expenditures on Travel and Other Administrative 
Expenditures, as well as Professional Services related expenditures in 
respect of the Vice Chairman, Members, CEO and other Officials of the 
NITI Aayog and also the Expenditure to be met in respect of various 
activities being carried out by various verticals/ divisions of NITI Aayog, 
are being projected.  
 (iii)  Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister 
 Under this, the expenditure to be incurred to meet salary and 
allowances and other related expenses on travel and other administrative 
expenditures, as well as professional services expenditures for the 
chairman and other officials of the council, are covered.  
(iv)  Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office(DMEO) 
As the apex Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) office of the Government of 
India and an attached office of NITI Aayog, DMEO during 2025-26 would 
carry on its mandated and emerging activities in Monitoring and 
Evaluation to strengthen evidence-based policy making both at the 
Centre and States, in line with the larger objective of cooperative and 
competitive federalism. DMEO targets to complete the evaluation of  nine 

13 
 
evaluation packages and share the evaluation reports with respective 
administrative Ministries/Departments and the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. In 2025-26 DMEO also intends to 
complete other ongoing evaluation studies of select Central Sector (CS) 
schemes.  Additionally, this year DMEO is also attempting to conduct 
organisational evaluations. DMEO intends to strengthen the M&E 
ecosystem at the Centre and State levels through its partnerships, 
capacity-building activities, and ongoing engagement with stakeholders.  
 
Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF), Data Governance 
and Quality Index (DGQI), monitoring of Global Indices for Reforms and 
Growth (GIRG), infrastructure sector reviews with necessary steps 
towards their institutionalisation and adoption of state-of-the-art 
technology and methods would be the primary activities for DMEO on the 
Monitoring side. DMEO develops and maintains suitable dashboards for 
carrying out its monitoring tasks involving all the Ministries and 
Departments of the Central Government.            
 (v) National Institute of Labour Economics Research and 
Development   (NILERD) 
NILERD is an autonomous institute under NITI Aayog, which is supported 
through Budgetary grants in the form of Grants-in-Aid Salaries, Grants-in-
Aid General and Grants-in-Aid for Creation of Capital Assets. During 2025-
26, NILERD will undertake training activities for senior and middle-level 
officials of different countries under the ITEC scheme of the Ministry of 
External Affairs, training programmes for officials of different States/UTs 
and undertaking research and evaluation studies. NILERD has been 
appointed as Central Nodal Agency (CNA) by NITI Aayog for their central 
sector schemes viz, Atal Innovation Mission, Aspirational Districts 
Programme and State Support Mission. It also publishes a quarterly peer-
reviewed journal.     
         (B)      Scheme-related Expenditure 
(i)  Atal Innovation Mission (AIM), including Self Employment and 
Talent Utilization (SETU) 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM), NITI Aayog is the Government of India's 
flagship initiative to promote the culture of innovation and entrepreneurship 
in the county and was set up in 2016. Towards this end, AIM has taken a 
holistic approach and is ensuring the creation of a problem-solving, 
innovative mindset in schools and creating an ecosystem of 
entrepreneurship in universities, research institutions, and corporate and 
MSME sectors. AIM is focused on developing the innovation and 
entrepreneurship ecosystem via its various Programmes such as Atal 
Tinkering Labs, Atal Incubation Centres, Atal New India Challenges, 
Applied Research for Small Enterprises, Atal Community Innovation 
Centres and ecosystem development activities etc., all these coupled 
together provide the plan of action for AIM. 
(ii) Ongoing programs and Schemes  
Under this, the expenditure regarding Research & Study is being 
met. The Research & Study is a Central Sector Scheme, and the scheme 

14 
 
has a Budget Estimate (B.E.) of Rs. 4.00 cr for the year 2024-25. The 
scheme's objective is to stimulate research on issues of economic/social 
development and need assessment, which directly affect the formulation 
or implementation of government policies and schemes. The Scheme is 
primarily utilised to meet the expenditure involved in funding extramural 
research conducted by NITI Aayog by payment of a consultation fee. In 
addition, seminars/conferences/workshops, etc., organised by reputed 
organisations are supported under the Scheme.   
 
(iii) The Aspirational Districts Programme and Aspirational Blocks 
Programme 
The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP), launched in January 2018, is 
an initiative aimed at transforming 112 of India's relatively underdeveloped 
districts by focusing on 49 key indicators across five critical sectors: Health 
and Nutrition, Education, Agriculture and Water Resources, Financial 
Inclusion and Skill Development, and Basic Infrastructure. The programme 
employs a robust monitoring system, and districts are ranked monthly 
based on incremental progress to encourage a competitive environment 
among districts. In the year 2025- 26, the programme aims for saturation 
of relevant government schemes, ensuring that all citizens in these 
districts benefit from the targeted interventions.  
Expanding on the ADP's framework, the Aspirational Blocks Programme 
(ABP) was launched in January 2023, targeting 500 relatively 
underdeveloped blocks across the country. ABP aims to achieve 
comprehensive development by focusing on essential government 
services in Health & Nutrition, Education, Agriculture & Allied Services, 
Social Development and Basic Infrastructure.  
One of the main strategies for 2025-26 is to deploy a targeted approach 
through target saturation campaigns, which aim to saturate key indicators, 
ensuring comprehensive coverage and maximising the impact of 
interventions. This focused strategy not only boosts the delivery of 
essential services but also actively involves local communities in their 
development journey, paving the way for sustainable growth and better 
quality of life in these regions. 
 
 (iv)  State Support Mission   
State Support Mission (SSM), announced in the Union Budget of FY 2023-
24, is an initiative of NITI Aayog to furthering its on-going engagement with 
the states/UTs to achieve national priorities. Under the Mission, financial 
and technical support is provided to the interested States/UTs to establish 
State Institution for Transformation (SIT) or strengthen their existing 
Planning Departments/Boards so that these institutions can steer 
development strategies in the States/UTs to achieve their socio-economic 
goals. The Mission will also support States/UTs to strengthen their 
Monitoring & Evaluation ecosystem and leverage expertise of knowledge 
institutions, development partners, multi-lateral agencies, academia, etc. 
Following is the annual plan and the progress /achievements of the 
Mission: 
 
 

15 
 
State Institution for Transformation (SIT)  
As of date, 28 States/UTs have notified their SITs, and these SITs are at 
various stages of their operationalisation, which includes hiring technical 
resources, setting up an M&E and data analytics unit, etc. To ensure 
further adoption of scheme in the pending States/UTs, NITI Aayog team is 
regularly interacting with States through various forums.   
 
NITI-State Workshop Series  
NITI-State Workshop series was launched under SSM to bring States/UTs 
together to deliberate up on themes relevant to socio-economic 
developmentof the States/UTs and other emerging areas of national and 
global interest. In FY 2023-24, 20 workshops were conducted across 
states covering various subject matters and issues. In FY 2024-25, the 
initiative continued with a plan of around 45 workshops under ‘NITI-State 
Workshop Series’ on themes relevant to State Development and other 
areas of National and Global interest. Divisions of NITI Aayog continue to 
anchor & organize the workshops in collaboration with States/UTs and 
other respective stakeholders with the support of SSM. As on date, 13 
workshops have been successfully concluded under NITI-State Workshop 
Series. 
 
NITI for States Platform 
To facilitate cross-learning and evidence-based decision-making 
through the sharing of best practices, policies and data sets, a NITI for 
State (NFS) Knowledge Platform, comprising of a NITI for States Portal 
and an experience room called Viksit Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) has 
been launched by NITI Aayog in March 2024 under the Mission. A set of 
knowledge products have been put together on the NITI for States Portal 
for various socio-economic sectors, including Agriculture, Education, 
Energy, Health, Livelihoods and Skilling, Manufacturing, MSME, Tourism, 
Urban, Water resources & WASH across two cross-cutting themes-Gender 
and Climate. VBSR is a digitally immersive experience that enables rich 
visualisation and engagement with insights, information and knowledge to 
enable effective in-person decision-making.  
Similar, experience room is also being set up at LBSNAA with the 
grants under SSM. Various States have shown interest in adopting the 
framework of VBSR and to develop similar experience room in their states. 
Bihar has launched GenNext Lab located at Bihar Institute of Public 
Administration & Rural Development (BIPARD) on the similar line of NITI’s 
VBSR, boosting data-driven governance & planning. 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER III 
DEVELOPMENT MONITORING AND EVALUATION OFFICE (DMEO) 
 
3.1 Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) is the apex 
monitoring and evaluation office of the Government of India. DMEO’s mandate is 
to actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of programmes and 
initiatives to help innovative improvements, including necessary mid-course 
corrections and identification of the needed resources so as to strengthen the 
probability of success and scope of delivery. Its mandate also expands to 
technical advisory to States, under NITI Aayog’s mandate of cooperative 
federalism. DMEO is headed by the Director General (DG). To have complete 
functional autonomy, a separate budgetary allocation has been provided 
exclusively to DMEO. DMEO functions are categorised into: 
i) Monitoring,  
ii) Evaluation, and 
iii) Strategic Initiatives encompassing partnerships and capacity 
building in the field of Monitoring & Evaluation. 
3.2   DMEO undertook following major projects during 2024-25:  
 (i)  Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) 
 (ii)  Data Governance Quality Index (DGQI) 
 (iii) Monitoring of Global Indices for Reforms and Growth (GIRG) 
 (iv) Sector Review 
 (v) Evaluations 
  (vi)Capacity Building  
  (vii) Project with States                      
 
3.3  DMEO conducts independent evaluation studies of both Central Sector 
(CS) and Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS). DMEO, as part of its mandate  
evaluate Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) every five years prior to their 
appraisal in the next Finance Commission cycle. DMEO is currently evaluating 
72 CSS schemes through nine evaluation packages. To have complete 
functional autonomy, separate budgetary allocation has been provided 
exclusively to DMEO. The allocation to DMEO for the last three years are given 
below:                
 

17 
 
(In Rs Crore) 
  
3.4 When asked as to how DMEO ensures a thorough analysis of Central 
Schemes/Missions/Centrally Sponsored Schemes on ground and scope for 
further improvement, the Ministry in their written submission apprised as under:- 
“DMEO conducts evaluations of Central Sector Schemes (CS) and 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) implemented in the field, by 
conducting field surveys of all the schemes. During this process, DMEO 
also engages with stakeholders including beneficiaries, field level 
government functionaries and people’s representatives. The findings of 
the field survey are collated and analysed to report on the working of the 
schemes on the ground. 
The reports are submitted to the respective Central 
Ministries/Departments. They note the study findings and take 
appropriate action on the recommendations of the reports. 
DMEO ensures continuous capacity building of its personnel through 
engagement with acclaimed National and International organisations, 
Institutions of eminence working in Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
ecosystem to improve the quality of evaluation studies.” 
            
          
3.5 In addition to the above DMEO’s constant endeavour to improve the 
capacity of officials working at different levels of government, a series of 
knowledge-sharing and capacity-building sessions were also conducted with 
State (viz., Uttarakhand) and Institutions (like NILERD etc.). A total of 9 capacity 
development programmes have been conducted for various States and UTs 
during FY 2024-25.                 
 
3.6 The Hon’ble Prime Minister annually conducts Review meetings  to 
monitor the performance of sectors. DMEO has been facilitating the Sector 
Reviews for the Prime Minister’s Office since 2017 in coordination with concerned 
M/Ds and NITI divisions. The Sectors covered under the reviews include 10 
infrastructure sectors viz. Transport (Roads, Civil Aviation, Railways and Ports), 
Year 
  
BE RE Actuals 
Revenue Capital Total Revenue Capital Revenue Capital 
2023-24 16.69 .31 17 - - 15.36 .52 
2024-25 19.39 .37 19.76 - - 14.29 .18 
2025-26 22.61 .41 23.02 - - - - 

18 
 
Energy (Power, Coal, Petroleum & Natural Gas and New & Renewable Energy) 
and Others (Telecommunications, Mining).          
 3.7 In this regard the Committee wanted to knows about the impact of 
evaluation studies and recommendations/suggestions of DMEO on overall 
Schemes and Policy formulation, the Ministry of Planning in their written 
submission provided the following:- 
 
“DMEO, since its inception (Year 2015), has completed 155 evaluation 
studies of the Central Sector (CS) schemes and Centrally Sponsored 
schemes (CSS).  The evaluation of Centrally Sponsored schemes 
(CSS) is conducted every five years by DMEO before they come for 
fresh appraisal in the next Finance Commission cycle, DMEO is 
presently evaluating 72 Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) of the 
Government of India. 
The scheme evaluation reports are important inputs in the policy making 
process. While seeking evaluation of schemes in the EFC/SFC, 
Ministries /Departments take into account the reports of the evaluation 
studies and action is taken by them on recommendations of the 
evaluation report before the EFC/SFC.” 
 
3.8 When further queried about the ways DMEO ensures implementation of its 
suggestions/recommendations and further course of action in case these are not 
incorporated by Ministry/Department without any sound justifications, the Ministry 
of Planning in their written replies furnished following information:- 
 
“The final evaluation reports, along with the 
recommendations/suggestions, are shared with the respective 
administrative/line Ministries/Departments, and also with the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.  
However, the implementation of these recommendations/suggestions is 
the domain of the respective line/administrative Ministries/Departments. 
DMEO has no role in the same. Nevertheless, these 
recommendations/suggestions as given by DMEO, NITI Aayog and the 
action taken/proposed to be taken are reflected in the EFC/SFC notes 
prepared by the Ministries/Departments when these schemes come up 
for renewal. It is possible that sometimes certain important 
suggestions/recommendations are left out without proper justification. In 
such cases, DMEO reiterates its stand through comments on such 
EFC/SFC notes for the consideration of the Ministry/Department.”  
 
                
Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) 
 
3.9 The Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) exercise was 
entrusted to DMEO in mid-2017 and has since become an annual exercise. The 
purpose is to institutionalise outcome monitoring to shift the focus of line 

19 
 
ministries of the Government of India from tracking physical and financial 
progress to tracking the results of work done. This document is laid out in 
Parliament alongside the Union Budget every year as an Outcome Budget for all 
schemes with an annual outlay of Rs. 500 crore  or more. The respective 
Ministry/Department in the Parliament lays the framework for rest schemes along 
with their Detailed Demand for Grants (DDGs). These key outputs and outcomes 
for respective schemes, along with their key indicators, are identified and 
finalized under the approval of the respective Secretary of the 
Ministry/Department. Each Ministry/Department sets targets for each of those 
indicators for the upcoming year, and the same are shared with DMEO. The 
same exercise has just been completed for FY(2025-26). Monitoring and 
Evaluation of schemes under the Central Government is an ongoing process. the 
Development Monitoring & Evaluation Office (DMEO) actively monitors and 
evaluates schemes/programmes. Since (2019-20), DMEO, NITI Aayog has been 
undertaking a rigorous process annually to improve the Output-Outcome 
Monitoring Framework to strengthen outcome-based monitoring of Central 
Sector(CS) and Centrally Sponsored Schemes(CSS) of the Government of India. 
                   
 
Transforming Data Governance In India (DGQI)  
3.10 To transform data governance, DMEO in the year 2020 developed a ‘Data 
Governance Quality Index (DGQI)’  to assess the data preparedness levels and 
use of IT-based systems for scheme monitoring across Ministries/Departments 
on various parameters. DGQI creates a culture of cooperation and learning to 
share best practices, innovative approaches, and solutions to common 
challenges. The first phase of DGQI exercise was conducted in 2020 in self-
assessment mode with 65 Ministeries/Departments, covering approximately 250 
CS/CSS. Subsequently, DGQI 2.0 was launched in 2021 covering as a regular 
exercise for monitoring and directing reforms in the direction. The DGQI exercise 
focuses on 3 pillars bifurcate into six themes namely data generation, data 
quality, technology integration, analysis, dissemination, security, and encourages 
sharing of best practices. Till date 7 Rounds of the exercise have been 
concluded, and the final reports 7th round of DGQI 2.0 exercise are under review. 
          
 

20 
 
 
 
 
Global Indices for Reforms and Growth (GIRG)  
3.11 The primary objectives of the GIRG initiative are to drive India’s 
performance across important social, economic, and development parameters 
for improving global perception of India and its global ranking, to drive reforms, 
and monitor the progress. For driving this exercise, DMEO, NITI Aayog has been 
designated as the knowledge partner and coordinator to engage with different 
stakeholders. The GIRG initiative of the Government of India aims at leveraging 
the monitoring of 27 Global Indices (GIs) for driving growth and reforms in the 
country. The 27 GIs selected for monitoring under GIRG are published by 18 
unique global agencies (publishing agencies) which include Multilateral 
Organizations, International NGOs, Private Organizations, and Universities 
spread across four broad themes namely economy, development, governance, 
and industry. These 27 Indices have been allocated to 18 nodal Ministries in 
addition to the MoSPI, MEA, and MIB.                                                
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER IV 
ATAL INNOVATION MISSION (AIM) & SELF-EMPLOYMENT AND TALENT 
UTILISATION (SETU) 
4.1 Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) is the Government of India’s flagship 
initiative to create and promote a culture of innovation and entrepreneurship 
across the length and breadth of our country. Its objective is to create 
ecosystems across schools, higher education, corporates, industries, state 
governments, central ministries, and internationally for supporting innovators and 
entrepreneurs who speak India’s 22 official languages. 
AIM 1.0 aimed at setting up state-of-the-art Atal Tinkering Labs in schools 
creating problem solving and innovative mindsets, world-class Atal Incubation 
Centres in Universities, Institutions and Industry fostering world-class start-ups, 
launching Atal New India Challenges stimulating creation of innovative products 
and services with national socio-economic impact through the start-up, MSME 
industry, setting up Atal Community Innovation Centres in unserved/underserved 
regions of the country and establishing a national voluntary ‘Mentors of Change’ 
network. 
4.2    The Union cabinet on 25 November, 2024 approved the continuation of 
AIM under the aegis of NITI Aayog with an enhanced scope of work and an 
allocated budget of Rs.2,750 crore for the period till 31 March, 2028. AIM 2.0 
marks a qualitative shift in the mission’s approach. Whereas AIM 1.0 involved 
implementing programmes that built new innovation infrastructure to strengthen 
India’s then nascent ecosystem, AIM 2.0 involves piloting new initiatives 
designed to fill gaps in the ecosystem and scaling successes through central and 
state governments, industry, academia and community.    
          
 
4.3    On being asked as to in what terms AIM 2 will be different and an improved 
version of AIM 1.0., the Ministry of Planning informed as under:- 
“AIM 2.0 is a step towards Viksit Bharat that aims to expand, 
strengthen, and deepen India’s already vibrant innovation and 
entrepreneurship ecosystem. 
  
While AIM 1.0 involved implementing programs like ATL and AIC that 
built new innovation infrastructure to strengthen India’s then nascent 
ecosystem, AIM 2.0 involves piloting new initiatives designed to fill 
gaps in the innovation ecosystem, templatizing the best practices and 

22 
 
scaling the successes through central and state governments, 
industry, academia and the community.  
 
AIM 2.0 is designed to strengthen India’s innovation and 
entrepreneurship ecosystem in three ways:  
 
(a) by increasing ‘input’ (i.e., nurturing more innovators and 
entrepreneurs) through the Language Inclusive Program for Innovation 
(LIPI) and the Frontier Program. 
(b) by improving the success rate or  ‘throughput’ (i.e., supporting more 
startups succeed) through the Depptech Reactor, State Innovation 
Mission, International Innovation Collaboration and the Human Capital 
Development Program. 
(c) by improving the quality of  ‘output’ (i.e., producing better jobs, 
products and services) through the Industrial Accelerator Program and 
the Atal Sectoral Innovation Launchpad.” 
 
4.4 As AIM 1.0 involved implementing programmes that built new innovation 
infrastructure to strengthen India’s then nascent ecosystem, AIM 2.0 involves 
piloting new initiatives designed to fill gaps in the ecosystem and scaling 
successes through central and state governments, industry, academia and 
community, The Committee sought to know about these gaps and new 
initiatives/Programmes  devised to fill up these gaps, the Ministry of Planning 
furnished following information:- 
“The gaps identified in the current innovation and entrepreneurship 
ecosystem of India and programs conceptualized under AIM 2.0 to address 
them are given in the following table:– 
 
Sl. No. Gap Identified Program 
Conceptualized 
Broad 
Intervention 
1  India’s start-up 
ecosystem does not 
provide incubation 
services for the 80% 
citizens (innovators) 
and 60% businesses 
(investors) who don’t 
speak English 
 Language Inclusive 
Program for 
Innovation (LIPI) 
Establish 30 
Vernacular Innovation 
Centres in existing 
incubators across ~ 
20 states to provide 
access to design 
thinking, business 
model creation, 
investment, and 
government schemes 
in India’s 22 
scheduled languages. 

23 
 
Sl. No. Gap Identified Program 
Conceptualized 
Broad 
Intervention 
2 Current government 
schemes for 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
(ATL, AIC etc.) do not 
address the specific 
needs of the frontier 
regions like J&K, NE, 
ADP, ABP 
 Frontier Program 
 
 
Establish customized 
Atal Tinkering Labs 
(2,500), and 
Incubation and Start-
up support templates 
to fit the frontier 
region ecosystems 
3 India's innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
ecosystem lack 
trained human 
resources to run 
institutions 
(incubation centres, 
tinkering labs etc.)  
Human Capital 
Development Program 
(HCD) 
Create a curriculum 
and delivery system 
for training 5500 
ecosystem 
professionals 
(incubation 
managers, teachers, 
trainers) to build, 
operate, and maintain 
India’s growing 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
ecosystem 
4 There is currently no 
system / template for 
commercializing deep 
tech start-ups that 
need longer time (~10 
years) and more 
investment (~10x 
average investment) 
to get to market 
Deep-tech Reactor 
Program 
Create a research 
sandbox to 
experimentally test 
investment and policy 
theses for 
streamlining deep 
tech pathways 
5 The innovation 
ecosystem in various 
parts of the country 
lack uniformity across 
states/UTs including 
which department 
anchors the start-up 
ecosystem 
State Innovation 
Mission (SIM) 
Advise States/UTs on 
building a five-year 
strategy for a uniform, 
strong ecosystem 
with education, skill, 
industry, and areas of 
strength 
6 There is a lack of 
structured pathway 
for internationalization 
of Indian start-ups 
and for taking India's 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
International 
Innovation 
Collaboration (IIC) 
 - 5 deep bi-lateral 
engagements 
between India and 
advanced countries 
(like India-Australia 
RISE) 
 - Spread the India 

24 
 
Sl. No. Gap Identified Program 
Conceptualized 
Broad 
Intervention 
ecosystem global Innovation Model to 
the countries of global 
south (AIM-WIPO 
agreement) 
 - Support Startup20 
Engagement Group 
of G20 
7 Low industry 
engagement and 
investment in scaling 
up of start-ups 
Industrial Accelerators 10 Industry 
Accelerators in critical 
sectors with 10% 
government 
investment and 90% 
industry investment 
providing scale-up 
platforms in the 
industry premise for 
advanced start-ups  
8  Low integration of / 
procurement from 
start-ups in industry 
sectors and by the 
government 
Atal Sectoral 
Innovation Launchpad 
(ASIL) 
10 ecosystem 
platforms in 10 
central ministries to 
enable ministries to 
foster a structured 
approach to integrate 
innovation into the 
industry sector within 
governmental 
frameworks  
“ 
 
 
Atal Tinkering Labs( ATLs) 
4.5   Atal Tinkering Lab (ATL) is a state-of-the-art space established in a school 
with a goal of fostering curiosity and innovation in young minds between grades 
6th to 12th across the country through 21st century tools and technologies such 
as the Internet of Things, 3D printing, rapid prototyping tools, robotics, 
miniaturised electronics, do-it-yourself kits and many more. The aim is to 
stimulate an innovative problem-solving mind-set among children in the ATL and 
nearby communities. Till date, AIM has established 10,000 ATLs in schools in 
700+ districts across all States / UTs of India.                                      
4.6 The Hon’ble Finance Minister in Union Budget 2025-26 has announced 
the establishment of 50,000 Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) in government schools 

25 
 
across the country over the next five years to promote scientific thinking, 
creativity, and hands-on learning among students, the Committee asked about 
the implementation plan for the envisaged target, the Ministry of Planning 
informed the following:- 
 
“ The Hon’ble Finance Minister in Union Budget 2025-26 has 
announced the establishment of 50,000 Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) in 
government schools across the country over the next five years. These 
labs will encourage students to explore STEM disciplines, develop 
problem-solving skills, and contribute to India's innovation landscape. 
The establishment of 50,000 ATLs will create a robust innovation 
ecosystem in schools, aligning with the goals of the National Education 
Policy (NEP) 2020. 
Implementation Plan  
As per the approved AIM 2.0 scheme plan, ATL program may now be 
transferred to the Ministry of Education (MoE) for further scale up. For 
this transition to succeed, it is proposed to set up a Program 
Management Unit (PMU) in MoE and the ATL Unit in NITI Aayog will be 
transferred to MoE.  
AIM will continue to play an active role in the evolution of the ATL 
paradigm, albeit in a different capacity. While the MoE will undertake the 
‘saturation’ of ATLs as per the current template, the AIM will assist in 
the evolution of the existing template. The AIM MHLC chaired by the 
Hon’ble Minister of Education will provide the oversight to guide the 
work of ATL 2.0. 
The timelines of establishing 50,000 ATLs over the next 5 years (FY 
2025 to FY 2030) will be decided by the Ministry of Education (MoE).” 
                                                                           
 
Atal Incubation Centre(AIC) 
 
4.7 Atal Incubation Centres (AICs) are business incubators established by AIM 
at universities, institutions and corporates to promote innovation and 
entrepreneurship among young innovators of the country. These AICs aim to 
foster world-class innovation and support dynamic entrepreneurs, who want to 
build scalable and sustainable enterprises. Grant up to `10 crores is given to the 
Green Field Incubators as AICs and Brown Field Incubators over a 5-year period. 
AIM has successfully operationalised 72+ AICs across India. These AICs enable 
startups by providing technical facilities, resource-based support, mentorship, 
funding support, partnerships and networking, 
           
                                          

26 
 
4.8  The state-wise details of the total number of Atal Incubation Centers 
established till date and startups incubated along with jobs created thereunder, 
as informed by the Ministry of Planning is mentioned below:- 
  
“AIM has established 72 Atal Incubation Centres. 3,556 start-ups have 
been incubated in the 72 incubators and the estimated total number of 
jobs created by these start-ups is 41,965. 
The state wise details of the AICs along with the number of start-ups 
incubated and estimated jobs created (as per the information received on 
AIC dashboard) is tabulated as below:- 
 
Sl No State No. of 
AICs 
No. of Start-
ups 
Jobs 
created 
1 Andhra Pradesh 2 59 158 
2 Assam 3 79 255 
3 Bihar 1 44 394 
4 Chhattisgarh 1 108 464 
5 Delhi 7 460 3531 
6 Goa 1 43 207 
7 Gujarat 6 189 395 
8 Haryana 1 19 55 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 2 18 18 
10 Karnataka 11 376 3060 
11 Kerala 2 174 1274 
12 Madhya Pradesh 3 144 702 
13 Maharashtra 8 406 3941 
14 Odisha 2 60 285 
15 Pondicherry 1 34 79 
16 Punjab 1 76 737 
17 Rajasthan 4 223 1570 
18 Sikkim 1 54 193 
19 Tamil Nadu 6 333 1747 
20 Telangana 5 271 20553 
21 Uttar Pradesh 4 386 2347 
  72 3556 41965 
                            
 
Atal Community Innovation Centre (ACICs) 
 
4.9 Atal Community Innovation Centers (ACIC) are envisaged to serve the 
unserved/underserved areas of the country concerning the start-up and 
innovation ecosystem. ACIC saw it to be crucial to reach the innovators at the 
bottom of the pyramid and give them equitable opportunities, especially by 
reducing the lab-to-land distance and creating a space for pre-incubation of 
ideas/solutions. Atal Community Innovation Centers (ACICs) have been 
launched to encourage a spirit of entrepreneurship in the underserved/unserved 

27 
 
regions of India by providing enabling infrastructure and facilitating environment 
for innovation. Till now, 14 ACICs have been operationalized across 9 States 
and 36 more centres have been selected.. AIM intends to establish over 50 
ACICs across country.                 
                                                                             
Atal New India Challenge (ANIC) 
4.10 Atal New India Challenge (ANIC) is a flagship programme of AIM. The 
programme aims to seek, select, support and nurture technology-based 
innovations that solve sectoral challenges of national importance and societal 
relevance. The primary goals of the ANIC programme are to incentivise 
innovations in areas critical to India’s development and growth – education, 
health, water and sanitation, agriculture, food processing, housing, energy, 
mobility, space application, etc. ANIC aims to support innovator’s scale over the 
risks associated with access to resources for testing, piloting and market 
creation. Till date 141 startups/MSMEs have been cumulatively 
supported/selected.                   
 
4.11 On being enquired about the expected timeline for achieving the shortfalls 
in physical targets in respect of Atal Incubation Centres (AIC), Atal New India 
Challenge (ANIC) and Atal Community Innovation Centres (ACICs) Programme 
under Atal Innovation Mission, the ministry of Planning apprised as under:- 
 
“AIM has completed the selection of new AICs, ACICs and ANIC start-ups. 
The selected institutions and start-ups are currently undergoing due-
diligence process. AIM is expected to complete the establishment of AICs, 
ACICs and funding new ANIC start-ups by 2025-26.” 
   
  
AIM Ecosystem Development Programme (AEDP) 
4.12 AIM Ecosystem Development Programme (AEDP) is the horizontal cutting 
across all strategic AIM programmes strengthening the innovation and 
entrepreneurship ecosystem by building networks of relevant stakeholders to 
provide additional value to AIM beneficiaries beyond the framework of structured 
programmes. AEDP has forged over 60 domestic & 16 International partnerships 
across various corporations, and foundations engaging with industry leaders and 

28 
 
faculty that support AIM beneficiaries through infrastructure and technology, 
market and investor access,creation of modules and adoption of ATLs. 
 
4.13    The Output and Outcome targets of AIM including SETU for the year 
2025-26 can be seen at Annexure II. 
4.14 The allocation to AIM including SETU for the last three years are given 
below: 
(in crore) 
Year 
 
BE RE Actuals  
Revenue Capital Total Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Total 
2023-24 144.30 10.70 155.00 144.30 10.70 96.71 0.13 96.84 
2024-25 144.30 10.70 155.00 94.82 14.53 21.91* 0.07* 21.98* 
2025-26 380.00 20.00 400.00 - - - - - 
*  Expenditure as on 07.02.2025. 
4.15  As it is evident that during the fiscal year 2024-25, out of the allocated fund 
of BE of Rs. 155 crores, only Rs. 21.98 crore has been utilized, when the 
Committee queried about the reasons for  underutilization of the allocated 
Budget, the Ministry of Planning in their written replies stated as under:-  
 
“The BE for 2024-25 included projected expenditures under new and 
continuing programs set to be approved under AIM 2.0. The Cabinet 
approved the continuation of AIM with an expanded scope of work on 25th 
November 2024. The temporary underutilization of funds during FY 2024-
25 was due to this transition phase of AIM. With the Cabinet approval, AIM 
is expediting the implementation of initiatives approved.”       
          
4.16 On being asked about the justification for increase of 163.34% (Revenue) 
and 86.92% (Capital) in BE 2025-26 over BE 2024-25 in budget proposals for 
Atal Innovation Mission Programme, the Ministry of Planning in their written 
submissions provided the following:- 
“The Continuation of Atal Innovation Mission was approved by the Union 
Cabinet in November 2024 with an expanded scope of work and a budget 
of Rs 2,750 crores. AIM will be launching 8 new programs under AIM 2.0 
along with supporting / completing the ongoing 4 programs. Hence, an 
increased outlay is projected and accordingly the Revenue and Capital 
sections in the BE 2025-26 is Rs. 380 crore and Rs 20 crore respectively. “ 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
     CHAPTER V 
ASPIRATIONAL DISTRICTS PROGRAMME(ADPs)/ASPIRATIONAL BLOCKS 
PROGRAMME(ABP) 
 
Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) 
 
 5.1  The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) is an initiative aimed at 
transforming 112 relatively underdeveloped districts of India by focusing on 49 
key indicators across five critical sectors: Health and Nutrition, Education, 
Agriculture and Water Resources, Financial Inclusion and Skill Development, 
and Basic Infrastructure. The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP), was 
launched in 2018 and marked its seven years of implementation in January 
2024, as a testament to a pragmatic and data-driven approach to socio 
economic development in relatively underdeveloped regions of India. The impact 
of the ADP extends beyond individual districts. It offers a blueprint for scaling up 
initiatives across the nation, showcasing a model that can be replicated in 
diverse socio-economic contexts. By providing practical solutions to challenges 
faced by different regions, the programme contributes to the broader goal of 
inclusive and sustainable development in India.    
                                         
Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) 
5.2 Launched in January, 2023, the Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) is a 
transformative initiative following the success of the ADP. Covering 500 blocks 
across 27 states and 4 Union Territories, ABP aims to elevate governance and 
citizens’ quality of life by converging existing schemes, defining outcomes, and 
continuously monitoring progress. In each identified block, the ABP strategically 
focuses on key socio-economic indicators across major sectors such as Health 
and Nutrition, Education, Agriculture and Allied Sectors, Basic Infrastructure, and 
Social Development. The objective is to ensure a tailored approach to 
development, allowing for context-based strategies that address the specific 
needs of each region, bringing decision-making closer to the grassroots. The 
programme tracks progress across 40 indicators, with data directly sourced from 
central ministry databases to ensure accuracy and reduce the data entry burden 
on field functionaries. Since, the baseline March, 2023, quarterly rankings have 
been released, utilising delta rankings to effectively measure improvements in 
these indicators over time. 
 

30 
 
 
5.3 To consolidate and promote traditional products from 500 Aspirational 
Blocks under a unified identity the brand “Aakanksha” was launched in March, 
2024,. This “Vocal for Local” initiative underscores the economic potential of 
traditional products while fostering regional craftsmanship and entrepreneurship. 
By providing a national platform through “Aakanksha,” it strengthens local 
economies and promotes livelihood of the citizens. 
5.4  In a concerted effort to drive rapid and effective development in India's 
most underdeveloped regions, “Sampoornata Abhiyan” was launched to prioritise 
the saturation of few indicators in a time bound manner. This three-month 
initiative (July to September, 2024), aimed to achieve saturation in six critical Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) related to health & nutrition, education, agriculture, 
social development, and basic infrastructure.    
5.5  The ‘Champions of Change (CoC)’ is a real-time data collection and 
monitoring dashboard. The Champions of Change (CoC) dashboard opened for 
public viewing on 1 April, 2018. The dashboard has been named so to emphasise 
the critical role played by the district collectors/magistrates and their teams in the 
progress of districts. ADP hinges on inducing competition among 112 districts 
through regular ranking, which is dynamic and reflects the incremental (delta) 
improvement made every month. Districts are encouraged to improve their data 
collection and maintenance mechanisms to enter up-to-date data on the 
dashboard. The Champions of Change portal (CoC 2.0) has been upgraded to 
further empower the District Administrations towards data-driven governance and 
evidence-based policy making. CoC 2.0 hosts many new features such as Citizen 
Reports, Citizen Feedback, Advanced Analytics, Project Management, Geo 
Spatial Maps and other AI/ML Solutions 
          
5.6    The Output and Outcome targets of Official Development Assistance (ODA) 
from Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs)/Aspirational Districts Programme for the year 2025-
26 can be seen at Annexure III. 
 
5.7 Under Official Development Assistance (ODA) from Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)/ 
Aspirational Districts Government of India provides fund to Aspirational Districts 

31 
 
on challenge method.  The allocation under the scheme for the last three years 
are given below:- 
(in crore) 
Year 
 
BE RE Actuals  
Revenue Capital Total Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Total 
2023-24 433.00 0.00 433.00 111.00 0.00 0.00** 0.00** 0.00** 
2024-25 433.00 0.00 433.00 208.55 0.00 2.15* 0.00* 2.15* 
2025-26 0.01 0.00 0.01 - - - - - 
* Expenditure as on 07.02.2025. 
**  Ministry of Planning had issued 10 sanctions of ₹ 1 each which equals 
to the release of total amount of ₹ 194.31 Crore from CNA during FY 
2023-24.  
 
5.8 Scrutiny of the allocated grants revealed that during FY 2023-24 the BE of 
Rs 433 crore remained unutilized thereby resulting in 100% savings under the 
scheme Official Development Assistance (ODA) From Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) for SDGs/ Aspirational District Programme(ADP) and 
similarly in FY 2024-25 against BE of Rs 433 crore only Rs. 2.08 crore has been 
the overall utilization in the first three Quarters. When asked for the clarifications, 
the Ministry of Planning submitted following details:- 
 
“Under the EAP-SDG Phase II under ODA from JICA, a total allocation of 
Rs. 933 Crore was approved for the Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) 
for the financial years 2022-24. This allocation was broken down into Rs. 
500 Crore for FY 2022-23 and Rs. 433 Crore for FY 2023-24. According to 
the Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance, in their OM No. 
F.No. 1(18) PFMS/FCD/2021 dated March 9, 2022, the Central Nodal 
Agency (CNA) Model-2 was introduced for the Aspirational Districts 
Programme (ADP) starting December 2022. As per the revised guidelines 
by MoF, certain validations in PFMS were mandated for making new 
sanctions in FY 2023-24. These validations include: 
(i)  The bank account balance of the CNA must be less than 6.25% of 
the allocated budget for that CNA. 
(ii)  The sanction amount must be less than 25% of the allocated 
budget for that CNA. 
A total amount of Rs. 496.81 Crore was sanctioned in FY 2022-23 and a 
refund amount of Rs. 287 Cr from districts was issued before CNA 
implementation, resulted in CNA balance of Rs. 783 Cr as in March 2023. 
The districts are given a period of up to 2 years to complete the projects 
sanctioned as per EAP-SDG guidelines, resulting in a high CNA balance. 
Given this balance, the generation of new sanctions is not allowed as per 

32 
 
the validation checks in PFMS. However, due to the submission of utilisation 
certificates, the current CNA balance has come down to Rs. 306 Cr. 
Consequently, only a token release of Rs. 8 against the financial sanction 
of Rs. 178.23 Crore was issued during FY 2023-24, and token release of Rs 
9 against financial sanction of Rs. 52.58 Cr from grant-in-aid and Rs. 2.08 
Cr expenditure was made from other budget head such as Professional 
Services & Office expenses resulting in budget savings for financial year 
2023-24 & 2024-25.”  
          
                                                 
 
5.9 A Token Budgetary allocation of Rs. 0.01 crore has been sought as BE 
2025-26 under Official Development Assistance (ODA) From Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) Scheme for Sustainable Development Goals/ 
Aspirational Districts Programme as the continuation approval of the scheme is 
under consideration. When asked about the expected timeline for getting  
approval, the  Ministry of Planning submitted following response:- 
 
“The EFC in its meeting dated 10th January 2025, approved Phase III of 
ADP. The file related to the EFC has been sent to the Ministry of Finance 
for the Finance Minister’s approval. Post approval, budgetary allocation 
will be updated. “ 
                                 
 
 
5.10 As regards to Aspirational Blocks Programme(ABP), during FY 2024-25 ,an 
outlay of Rs. 152.26 crore as RE  remained unutilized as allocation of funds was 
received only on 9.01.2025. With only half of the fourth quarter remaining, 
Committee raised its concern as to how NITI Aayog proposes to utilize the 
allocated grant and how much spill over  is expected, the Ministry of Planning 
submitted following reply:- 
 
“In this regard, awards worth Rs 120 Cr have been announced against the 
ranks released for 6 quarters (from June 2023 to September 2024). For 
proposals received from the districts against the awards for the quarter 
ending June 2023, financial sanction to the tune of Rs 10.75 Cr have been 
issued. In the remaining part of the financial year 2024-25, the proposed 
utilisation for 152.26 Cr is as under-  
a. Window I (under challenge method) – 60 Cr 
b. Target Saturation- 60 Cr 
c. Akanksha Haat- 16.5 Cr 
d. Special Initiatives – 15.76 Cr      ” 
 
5.11  As regards the proposed utilization plan for Rs. 353 cr allocated for 
FY2025-26,  the Ministry of Planning further submitted:- 

33 
 
“The proposed utilisation for 353 Cr  for Aspirational Blocks Programme 
during 2025-26 is given below:- 
 
 
S No Description Outlay for FY 2025-26 
(Rs.Cr.) 
1 Window I (Quarterly Awards for 4 
quarters) 80 
2 Window I (Target Saturation of 40 KPIs) 160 
3 Window II (Critical or Innovative 
projects) 38 
4 Window III (Capacity building, 
Administrative Expenses, & Other 
Budget heads) 
75 
Total 353 
 
          ” 
 
 
Sustainable Development Goals  
 
5.12 The Sustainable Development Goals lay out a comprehensive agenda for 
global development by 2030. In India, NITI Aayog is the nodal agency for the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, it is therefore responsible for 
coordinating and supervising SDG efforts at the national and sub-national levels. 
To this end, NITI Aayog has developed monitoring tools such as the SDG India 
Index and Dashboard, NER District SDG Index and National Multidimensional 
Poverty Index (MPI) to evaluate the performance and rank States/ districts, thus 
promoting competitive federalism.  
SDG India Index 2023-24 measures and tracks national progress of all 
States and UTs on 113 indicators aligned to the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation’s (MoSPI) National Indicator Framework (NIF). The 
SDG India Index computes goal-wise scores on the 16 SDGs for each State and 
UT. Overall State and UT scores or Composite Scores are generated from goal-
wise scores to measure the aggregate performance of the sub-national unit 
based on its performance across the 16 SDGs. These scores range between 0–
100, and if a State/UT achieves a score of 100, it signifies it has achieved the 
targets. The higher the score of a State/UT, the greater the distance covered to 
the target  
Localisation of the SDGs is the key to reach furthest behind first, and 
therefore a crucial mandate of the division. These efforts have strengthened the 

34 
 
statistical systems and developed a monitoring framework covering all the 17 
Goals and more than 100 indicators across the country. With this refined and 
comprehensive edition, NITI Aayog aims to cement India’s place as a trailblazer 
in SDG achievement.  
          
5.13 When asked to submit a status note on the progress of Sustainable 
Development Goals, the Ministry of Planning submitted following details:- 
“NITI Aayog is the nodal institution for achieving SDGs in the country, 
leading the 2030 Agenda with the spirit of cooperative and competitive 
federalism. It evaluates the performance of States/UTs through the SDG 
India Index, promotes SDG localisation, and encourages a competitive 
spirit among States and UTs. The SDG India Index Report, released by 
NITI Aayog, evaluates the performance of all States and UTs, 
benchmarking them based on their overall achievements across various 
goals. The fourth edition of SDG India Index was released in 2023. The 
report highlights India's progress towards the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), showcasing significant improvement in the overall score 
from 66 in 2020-21 to 71 in 2023-24.  
 
The Index underscores the varying levels of progress and challenges 
among States and Union Territories in achieving the SDGs. While some 
States and UTs have achieved significant progress in certain SDG goals, 
others are still working to bridge critical developmental gaps in other areas. 
The report enables States and UTs to recognize challenges and 
implement necessary measures to drive SDG progress. By highlighting 
these disparities, the index supports targeted interventions and fosters 
both competition and collaboration to expedite SDG achievement 
nationwide. 
 
NITI Aayog also provides support to States/UTs in aligning SDG targets 
with relevant schemes and departments, developing State/UT specific 
SDG vision documents, expanding the indicator framework to district and 
block levels, setting up of SDG Coordination and Acceleration Centres 
(SDGCACs) to promote localisation and integrating the State/UT budgets 
with the SDGs.  
 
NITI Aayog is closely working with States and Union Territories to support 
and accelerate the development of SDG Vision Documents and State 
Indicator Frameworks. It encourages them to adopt localized measures to 
accelerate progress towards achieving the SDGs. The only remaining UT 
of Ladakh has now successfully developed its State Indicator Framework. 
Certain States and Union Territories have also developed indicators for 
district and block levels. As of now, all States are now on the verge of 
successfully finalizing their SDG Vision Documents and Frameworks, 
marking a significant step towards achieving SDGs across India. Some 
states have aligned their budgets with the SDGs, while others have 
recently initiated the process. For instance, Haryana has integrated SDG 
mapping with its budget, ensuring that financial allocations are aligned with 
sustainable development priorities for more effective planning and 

35 
 
implementation. Odisha is moving toward aligning the state budget with 
the SDGs. 
While promoting SDG localization among States/UTs, challenges such as 
lack of coordination, mapping of schemes with SDG targets, limited data 
availability, and misaligned financial allocation with sustainable 
development priorities emerge, hindering effective implementation and 
progress. The divergence among States and UTs in achieving SDGs 
necessitates a tailored approach, as each region requires different 
strategies. In this endeavour, NITI Aayog is driving SDG localization 
through a structured and strategic approach while supporting States and 
UTs in establishing SDGCAC. The SDGCACs will play a crucial role in 
supporting and facilitating the implementation of SDGs at the ground level, 
thereby making significant contributions to effective localization efforts. It 
will serve as a fulcrum for synergized development, ensuring coordinated 
efforts while addressing state-specific priorities.” 
           
 
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER VI 
STATE SUPPORT MISSION (SSM) 
 
6.1 State Support Mission(SSM) is an umbrella initiative of NITI Aayog, 
announced in the Union Budget of FY 2023-24, aimed at fostering structured and 
institutionalized engagement of NITI Aayog with States and UTs. The mission 
facilitate States/UTs to develop a roadmap to achieve their socio-economic goals 
and facilitate their development strategies in alignment with national priorities, 
putting special focus on the core strength areas of the respective States/UTs. 
Under this mission, NITI Aayog support interested states to establish State 
Institution for Transformation (SIT) to act as a multi-disciplinary resource to steer 
the development strategies in the States/UTs. The States/UTs can either 
establish a separate institution as SITs or reimagine the role of their existing 
institutions, such as planning departments and boards  
State Institution for Transformation (SITs)  
 
6.2 The States/UTs have established State Institution for Transformation( SIT) 
to reimagine the role of their existing institutions, such as Planning Departments 
and Boards, with the support of NITI Aayog. SIT being the most important 
component of SSM constitutes a multi-disciplinary Programme Implementation 
Unit (PIU), an embedded team consisting of sectoral experts including a Team 
Leader as required by the States/UTs, to facilitate establishment of SIT under the 
Mission. Till date a total 28 SITs have been formed under SSM that are actively 
working to identify state specific growth drivers and growth enablers to boost their 
socio-economic growth, thereby facilitating state and sector-specific 
implementation and development strategies. 
NITI for States Platform (NFS) & Viksit Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) 
 
6.3 NITI Aayog has set up twin platforms NITI for States (NFS) and Viksit 
Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) on 7th March, 2024. NITI for States (NFS) is 
meant to support government officials across States, Districts and Blocks to 
make evidence-based policy and administrative decisions. A set of knowledge 
products have been put together on the platform for various socio-economic 
sectors across two cross-cutting themes- Gender and Climate. The platform 
brings together a vast repository of governance best practices, policy resources 
and data insights across all States/UTs.  

37 
 
Viksit Bharat Strategy Room was set up at NITI Aayog for a digitally 
immersive experience that enables rich visualisation and engagement with 
insights, information and knowledge to enable effective in-person decision-
making. It is an interactive space where users will be able to visualise data, 
trends, best practices and policies in an immersive manner allowing them to 
make a holistic assessment of any problem statement. Various States are 
showing interest in adopting the framework of VBSR and to develop similar 
experience room in their states. Bihar has launched GenNext Lab located at 
Bihar Institute of Public Administration & Rural Development (BIPARD) on the on 
similar line of NITI’s VBSR, boosting data-driven governance & Planning. 
NITI-State Workshop Series  
6.4 NITI Aayog had launched ‘NITI-State Workshop Series’ in FY 2023-24 for 
fostering cooperative and competitive federalism. The workshops focus on 
themes relevant to socio economic development of the States/UTs and other 
emerging areas of national and global interest. It provides a unified platform for 
collaboration and knowledge sharing on key development issues concerning 
States/UTs by sharing policy insights and good governance practices, etc. across 
States/UTs.  
Lead Knowledge Institutions (LKI)  
6.5 To bring expertise and sectoral domain knowledge, cross-sectoral 
partnerships are being fostered to support the SITs. States/UTs are encouraged 
to designate a Lead Knowledge Institution (LKI) by on boarding institutions such 
as IIMs/ IITs/ Central and State Universities/ any research-based organisation of 
excellence in the State/UT/region. The States/ UTs are in process of engaging 
LKI and to date, 2 LKIs have been officially on-boarded viz- Chandragupt 
Institute of Management (LKI of Bihar) and IIM Calcutta (LKI of Tripura).. 
                                                                                              
6.6 State Support Mission  was announced in the Union Budget of FY 2023-
24. The mission was to be implemented  during 2022-23 to 2024-25, however the 
scheme has been extended for one more year and provisions have been made 
for the FY 2025-26 as well.  The allocation to SSM for the last three years are 
given below:- 
  

38 
 
 (in crore) 
Year 
 
BE RE Actuals  
Revenue Capital Total Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Total 
2023-24 39.70 0.30 40.00 39.99 0.01 21.58 0.00 21.58 
2024-25 39.99 0.01 40.00 43.69 0.01 29.49* 0.00* 29.49* 
2025-26 44.99 0.01 45.00 - - - - - 
 
* Expenditure as on 07.02.2025..  
6.7 On analysing the allocations, the Committee specifically asked if the 
allocated budget of Rs. 45 crore is sufficient to achieve the projected targets for 
FY 2025-26, the Ministry of Planning stated as under:- 
  
“SSM is a demand driven scheme and States/UTs have shown keen 
interest in participating in various activities under SSM. It is expected that 
the budget requirement during FY 2025-26 may increase which will be met 
from R.E. and batches of Supplementary Grants.”  
          
   
6.8 When enquired about the State Institutions for Transformation (SITs) 
established during the fiscal year 2024-25 as against the projected physical 
targets, the Ministry of Planning in their written replies submitted the following 
details:- 
 
“State Support Mission (SSM) was launched by NITI Aayog in FY 2023-24 
to further advance its ongoing engagement with States and UTs under its 
mandate of energizing co-operative federalism. One of the key objectives 
of the SSM is to facilitate the States and UTs to set up State Institution for 
Transformation (SIT) which will act as the nodal agency to steer 
development strategies in the States to achieve their socio-economic 
goals. So far, 28 SITs have been formed, out of which, 10 SITs have been 
established during FY 2024-25 against the projected target of 7 SITs.  
  Thus, the Mission has successfully achieved the target through 
continuous engagements with the State/UTs. As the scheme is extended 
for one more year, the remaining States/UTs are also showing interest and 
NITI Aayog is extending the support to the States in formulating their 
action plans as per the Guidelines of SSM.” 
 
          
  

39 
 
CHAPTER VII 
RESEARCH AND STUDY 
7.1 The Research & Study is a Central Sector Scheme. The scheme's 
objective is to stimulate research on issues of economic/social development and 
need assessment, which directly affect the formulation or implementation of 
government policies and schemes. The Scheme is primarily utilised to meet the 
expenditure involved in funding extramural research conducted by NITI Aayog 
by payment of a consultation fee. In addition, seminars/conferences/workshops, 
etc., organised by reputed organisations are supported under the Scheme. 
Besides, various organisations are also extended non-financial support under 
this scheme by permitting them to use NITI Aayog Logo for the events such as 
seminars/conferences/workshops/summits/symposium/ exhibitions/etc. 
 
7.2 To strengthen NITI’s research ecosystem in line with NITI’s mandate to 
position itself as a knowledge and innovation hub, a new division, Research & 
Networking (R&N) has been notified on 17 September, 2024. The ‘Research 
Scheme of NITI Aayog (RSNA)’ scheme has also been revised and notified. 
During the year 2024-25 proposals for funding 10 new research studies have 
been approved and 10 on-going ones were completed during the year. The 
allocations under this Scheme during  last three fiscal years are as under:- 
(in crore) 
 
Year 
 
BE RE Actuals  
Revenue Capital Total Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Total 
2023-24 4.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 0.00 2.55 0.00 2.55 
2024-25 4.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 0.00 1.70* 0.00 1.70* 
2025-26 4.00 0.00 4.00 - - - - - 
* Expenditure as on 07.02.2025. 
                                                                                                   
7.3 Slower pace of utilization of the funds during FY 2024-25  is evident from 
the tabulated allocation details mentioned above, as only 38.04% of the allocated 
funds have been utilized in three quarters. When Committee queried about the  
corrective measures taken to even out the fund utilization in future, the Ministry of 
Planning informed as under:- 
“A quarterly calendar for disbursement of funds under the Scheme is not 
feasible, since payment is dependent on several factors, viz. approval of 

40 
 
new studies, milestones achieved under on-going studies and proposals 
received for grants-in-aid for conducting seminars and workshops.  
 
The budgetary allocation is sought at the beginning of the fiscal year 
based on the anticipated expenditure for on-going activities and expected 
research proposals. Since most of these activities are dependent on 
external entities and completion of the research report the pattern of 
disbursement cannot be completely controlled by NITI Aayog. 
 
At the time of sanction of new research studies specific milestones are 
agreed between NITI Aayog and the entity undertaking the research work 
for disbursement of payment. However, due to its very nature at times 
there is a time-overrun due to unforeseen factors. However, the effort 
remains towards full utilization of the allocated budget during the fiscal 
year. 
It is submitted that, for 2024-25, as of 13.02.2025, Rs 2.09 cr has been 
utilized and it is expected that the balance amount may be fully utilized by 
31.03.2025.”  
                                                           
7.4   Asked about the reasons for stagnant allocations for Research and Study 
scheme despite there being emphasis and  important announcements regarding 
budget allocations in Union Budget 2025-26 to implement private sector driven 
Research, Development and Innovation initiative, the Ministry of     planning 
apprised as under:-. 
“ 
FY 2023-24   FY 2024-25   
Physical 
Target 
Achievement Remarks Physical 
Target 
Achievement 
(as on 13-02-
2025) 
Remarks 
a. 20 
Research 
Study 
Proposals 
b. 5 
Seminar 
workshop 
proposals 
a. 13 New 
Studies 
Approved  
b. 1 Seminar 
Workshop 
Proposal 
Approved 
Low 
utilisation 
is on 
account of 
lesser 
number of 
new 
studies 
awarded 
and delay 
in 
completion 
of ongoing 
studies 
a. 20 
Research 
Study 
Proposals 
b. 5 
Seminar 
workshop 
proposals 
a. 10 New 
Studies 
Approved  
b. 2 Seminar 
Workshop 
Proposal 
Approved 
It is 
anticipated 
that the 
budgeted 
amount in 
this fiscal 
year will 
be utilised 
as 
concerted 
efforts 
being 
made to 
improve 
the 

41 
 
performan
-ce of this 
Scheme 
by 
promoting 
research 
activities. 
           
 “ 
 
To give further push to research activities, NITI Aayog has  set up a new 
Division, viz. Research & Networking Division has been set up in NITI 
Aayog. R&N Division is tasked to promote research activities and enable 
NITI Aayog to build a network of relevant stakeholders in this space. The 
Scheme Guidelines of 2021 were revised and the revised Guidelines were 
notified in 2024 to streamline the process for commissioning research 
studies. With these initiatives, it is anticipated that during the FY 2025-26 a 
higher budgetary allocation will be utilized under this scheme.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

42 
 
 
                                                                  PART - II 
                OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Analysis of Budget 
1.   The Committee note, the Ministry of Planning has sought Rs. 1006.06 
crore as Budget Estimates 2025-26 as compared to BE of Rs. 837.26 crore 
for the fiscal year 2024-25, which is an increase of 16.77%. The Actuals for 
the FY 2022-23 were to the tune of Rs. 849.10 crore against a BE of Rs. 
321.42 crore. Likewise the Actuals for the FY 2023-24 were pegged at Rs. 
290.82 crore only, against a BE of Rs. 824.39 crore. The scrutiny further 
reveals that the Actuals for the following fiscal i.e., 2024-25 are to the tune 
of Rs. 197.49 crore in the first three quarters which is 23.58% of the BE. 
After overall scrutiny of estimates, allocations and utilization of the budget 
grants during financial years under reference, there emerges a trend of 
amateur planning where the Ministry of Planning has not been able to apply 
adequate foresight in planning and projecting their probable expenditures 
with due accuracy. Undenying the presence of intervening factors like 
introduction of new programmes/scheme, pending project/scheme 
approvals, administrative compulsions and new guidelines etc., the 
Committee strongly feel that there is a dire need of a more realistic 
assessment of the envisaged targets and expenditures thereon. This is 
primarily so considering that our’s is a developing nation with limited fiscal 
resources and unlimited demands on those resources. 
 The Committee in their previous reports have also emphatically advocated 
the need for prudent financial management and better targeting of available 
financial resources. The Ministry should make utmost efforts to avoid spill-
overs and parking of  large funds in the temporarily infructuous Heads/Sub-
Heads, essentially that it remains the prerogative of the Union 
Ministries/Departments to raise demands for supplementary grants as 
many times as the need arises. The Committee therefore recommend 
Ministry of Planning to be more fiscally prudent in allocating and utilizing 
the available resources in future and to be more precise and accurate in 
assessment of their projected expenditure and targets. 
 
 

43 
 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM)  
2.    The Committee note that the Budget outlays for the Atal Innovation 
Mission (AIM) for the FY 2025-26 are to the tune of Rs. 400 crore as against 
the BE of Rs. 155 crore during FY 2024-25. The enhanced allocations have 
been sought to meet the projected expenditure under revamped Atal 
Mission Programme 2.0 wherein alongwith the already running programmes 
of AIM 1.0, the Ministry of Planning seeks to meet expenditures to be 
incurred on 8 new initiatives under AIM 2.0. The Committee also note that 
the savings under the Scheme during FY 2023-24 and 2024-25 occurred  on 
account of recast of the AIM Programme.  
 The Committee appreciate the focused approach adopted by the 
Ministry of Planning to fill in the identified gaps under AIM 1.0  programme 
by devising 8 new initiatives. The Committee is looking forward to witness 
the promising outcomes. The Committee, however, note that the 
recasting/approval process of AIM 2.0 continued for almost two years, 
which somehow jeopardized and halted the pace of ongoing initiatives 
under AIM like Atal Incubation Centre(AIC) Atal Community Innovation 
Centre(ACIC) and Atal New India Challenges(ANIC) and thereby resulted in 
the under achievement of the projected targets under these programmes. 
The Committee feel that there is a need to expedite and reform the Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for getting  approvals for continuation of a 
scheme, as the intervening breaks occurring due to pending approvals, 
puts a spanner in the wheel and mars the overall progress. The Committee 
desire the Ministry of Planning to think in this direction and come up with 
some feasible solutions in their capacity of the premier think tank of 
government, shouldering responsibility of paving the way forward. 
The Committee note with satisfaction that 8 new initiatives have been 
conceptualized by Ministry of Planning/NITI Aayog to fill in various gaps  
identified in the AIM 1.0 programme. These includes initiatives like 
Language Inclusive Program of Innovation(LIPI) which seeks to combat and 
break the language barrier, which is one of the core challenge areas, 
‘Frontier Program’ to create tailored interventions for developing 
innovations and entrepreneurship ecosystem in the frontier regions of the 
country (Hilly and NE-Indian Regions), Atal Acceleration Centres for Scale-
up of Start-ups(AACESS-Industry Accelerator) for building platform for 

44 
 
supporting revenue-stage start-ups and Atal Sectoral Innovation 
Launchpad(ASIL) to create institutions in central government ministries to 
independently run sectoral innovation programs through establishing 
acceleration centres in corporate, PSUs and Industries. The Committee 
hope these initiatives would further strengthen the foundation of innovative 
and entrepreneurship ecosystem  in the country laid by AIM 1.0 and take it 
a notch higher. The Committee feel that these Schemes/Initiatives and any 
development  Programme could be made further successful by associating 
Members of Parliament, representing a particular constituency, so as to 
have ground level inputs on the progress of the scheme. The Committee 
recommend Ministry of Planning to achieve projected physical and financial 
targets for FY(2025-26) with laser focused conviction for achieving various 
intended objectives under these programmes. 
 
Atal Incubation Centre (AIC) & Atal Community Innovation Centre (ACIC) 
3. The Committee note that Atal Incubation Centre(AIC) is an important 
initiative of AIM 1.0 Programme which aims to foster world-class incubation 
and support entrepreneurs in building scalable as well as sustainable 
enterprises.  As on date, out of the total target of 101 AICs, 72 AICs have 
been established across 21 States with an estimated number of 41,965 jobs 
created therefrom. During FY 2024-25, out of the remaining 29 newly 
selected AICs, the disbursement of first tranche of grants is expected to be 
released to 12 AICs. The Committee desire work of establishing remaining 
29 AICs to be expedited. The Committee are of the view that number of AICs 
to be established must be increased and must target States having higher 
percentage of unemployment. These AICs present an opportunity for 
aspiring entrepreneurs having workable dynamic ideas but lack the 
resources to generate multiple job and employment opportunities for 
others. More such Centres must be opened in the North-eastern States 
where there are fewer traditional job opportunities. Likewise under Atal 
Community Innovation Centres (ACIC), startup and innovation are being 
supported in unserved or underserved areas of the country by enabling the 
reach of the innovators at the bottom of the demographic pyramid. To 
create the enabling infrastructure, so far 14 ACICs are presently operational 
in 9 States and 36 more are lined up for operationalisation. The Committee 

45 
 
recommend the Ministry to operationalise the remaining 36 new ACICs at 
the earliest. It is often seen that many such government programmes go 
unnoticed due to lack of requisite publicity and therefore, unable to harness 
the desired outcomes. The Committee therefore urge the Ministry of 
Planning to give sufficient publicity to AICs and ACICs and other such 
programmes to spread awareness among people to popularise such 
programmes.  
 
Atal Tinkering Lab(ATL) 
4.  The Committee note that in the Union Budget (2025-26), it has been 
announced for the establishment of 50,000 Atal Tinkering Labs in 
government schools across the country over the next five years. As per 
approved implementation plan, the ATL programme is to be transferred to 
the Ministry of Education (MoE). It has been informed that a Programme 
Management Unit (PMU) is proposed to be set up by Ministry of Education 
in coordination with ATL unit of NITI Aayog for which timeline for 
establishing 50,000 ATLs is to be decided by the Ministry of Education. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Planning in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Education to strive and ensure that the envisaged target of 
50,000 ATLs is achieved within set time frame of 2030. 
In this regard, the Committee would also like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation contained in 4th Report (18th Lok Sabha) regarding the 
uniform coverage of ATLs in all the States wherein the Committee had 
categorically recommended that the number of ATLs to be established in 
any particular State must be commensurate with the population size and 
requirement of that region to extend equitable access to all targeted 
beneficiaries. As the Ministry of Planning  will be working in tandem with 
the Ministry of Education, the Committee expects this collaboration to 
create the supporting infrastructure as well in States/UTs needed for 
establishing ATLs across country. 
Aspirational Districts Programme(ADP) 
5.  The Committee find that under Official Development Assistance(ODA) 
from Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for Sustainable 
Development Goals/ Aspirational Blocks Scheme, the Ministry of Planning 
has not been able to utilize the earmarked grants, continuously for the FY 

46 
 
2023-24 & 2024-25 respectively. There has been only token  releases of Rs. 
8 and Rs. 17 as against the financial sanctions of Rs. 178.23 crore and Rs. 
230.81 crore for the fiscal years under reference, as the Districts have failed 
to utilize these grants in the required time span, given for completion of 
targets. Furthermore, for the current FY 2025-26 as well, only a token 
provision of Rs. 0.01crore has been made, suggesting bleak prospects of 
change in status quo in near future, though the phase III of ADP got 
approved on 10.1.2025. 
 In this connection, the Committee have been informed that the 
revised guidelines dated  9th March, 2022 of Ministry of Finance put certain 
restrictions on making new fund sanctions in FY 2023-24 which resulted in 
the release of token amounts only. The Committee are, however, of the view 
that these guidelines not in any manner, hinder the progress of the ongoing 
projects and that they merely seek to prevent the parking of excessive 
funds in ‘Central Nodal Agency’ Account in case of non/underutilisations of 
the previously allocated grants. The Committee appreciates that the 
Ministry of Planning already understands and knows the corrective 
measures needed to be taken to contain the damage and is already working 
on monitoring the utilization of funds to ensure optimum utilization and 
timely completion of projects. The Committee recommend that the Ministry 
must further firm up their in place monitoring mechanism and should make 
all efforts to ensure that projects are completed within the scheduled 
timeframe to avoid any cost/time overruns and budgetary allocations are 
put to the optimum and efficient utilization.  
 
Aspirational Blocks Programmes(ABP) 
6. The Committee note that Aspirational Blocks Programme was approved 
in July 2024 and allocated a budget outlay of Rs. 152.26 crore at Revised 
Estimates (2024-25) stage, which remained unutilized, as the fund was 
received only in the last quarter of the fiscal year 2024-25. As per the 
utilization proposal, the Ministry would be disbursing the entire grant of Rs. 
152.2 cr under ABP to prevent savings on this account. Similarly, for the FY 
(2025-26) the allocated budget of Rs. 353 crore will be disbursed in three 
tranches and approval of projects are being taken in the Empowered 
Committee Meetings. The Committee recommend the Ministry to adhere to 

47 
 
their stipulated implementation plan for the remaining period of the current 
fiscal  2024-25 as well for the following FY 2025-26. 
 
 
Research & Study (R&S) 
7. The Committee are concerned to note that despite there being a 
specialized Central Sector Scheme ‘Research & Study’ formulated to give  
requisite stimulus to research in various socio-economic sectors, the 
Ministry of Planning is continuously falling short in achieving their physical 
as well as financial targets. As against a target of 20 Research studies, for 
each of the FY 2023-24 and 2024-25, only 14 and 13 Research Studies 
respectively had been awarded. Further, there is shortfall in finalizing the 
seminar/workshop proposals as well. The Committee sense a clear lack of 
due diligence on the part of the Ministry of Planning in achieving their set 
targets. The stagnated allocations and slow pace of fund utilization during 
last three fiscal years from 2023-24 to 2024-2025, which ultimately resulted 
in underutilization of allocated budget, grows the concern further. The 
Ministry of Planning has not been able to utilize even the meager amount of 
Rs. 4.00 crore during these years on such an important scheme. 
Nonetheless, the Committee are hopeful and expect that the new division 
“Research & Networking” and amended Research Scheme of NITI 
Aayog(RSNA) guidelines would come to the aid of the Ministry and it would 
thereby be able to successfully achieve the projected targets for FY 2025-
26. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Planning 
must ensure the achievement of complete projected physical targets and 
make concerted efforts to fully utilize the allocated budget. The Committee 
also desire that to compensate the previous loss of targets, more Research 
studies should be awarded in the coming years and accordingly budget 
allocations should also be enhanced for the scheme. 
 
State Support Mission(SSM) 
8. The Committee note that SSM as an umbrella initiative is an important 
vehicle of NITI Aayog to promote and foster competitive and cooperative 
federalism amongst States/UTs by establishing State Institution of 
Transformation (SITs), in the interested States. It has been informed that till 

48 
 
date 28 SITs have been notified under SSM, which are now working in 
States for boosting  their socio-economic growth and implement sector and 
State specific development strategies. The Committee further note that SSM 
was announced in the FY 2023-24 to be implemented during 2022-23 to 
2024-25. The Scheme, however, has been extended for another year and an 
allocation of Rs. 45 crore has been made for the financial year 2025-26. The 
Committee note with satisfaction that by establishing 10 SITs during FY 
2024-25, the Ministry of Planning has not only achieved but have 
comfortably exceeded their envisaged target of establishing 7 SITs during 
the fiscal year under reference. The Committee are of the considered view 
that for establishing SITs in remaining States/UTs, NITI Aayog must not wait 
for the expression of interest or intent by the States/UTs, instead must 
actively pursue in garnering the interest of remaining States/UTs for 
establishing SITs, to give the requisite push to the socio-economic growth 
of the country as a whole. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Planning must actively pursue these target of establishing SITs 
in remaining States/UTs in the extended term of the scheme itself. In this 
regard, the Committee further note that to support SITs, cross-sectoral 
partnerships ‘Lead Knowledge Institutions (LKIs)’ are designated by 
States/UTs to bring expertise and domain knowledge. As of now only State 
of Bihar and Kolkata have officially on-boarded Chandragupt Institute of 
Management (LKI Bihar) and IIM Kolkata (LKI Tripura). The Committee 
recommends the Ministry of Planning to encourage other remaining 
States/UTs as well to designate LKI partners where SITs have already been 
established. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
18 March, 2025 
27 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
  

49 
 
Annexure I 
Demand No.77 - Ministry of Planning 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS i.e. PERCENTAGE INCREASE/DECREASE IN VARIOUS HEADS DURING THE LAST THREE YEARS 
             (Rs. In thousands) 
Sl. 
No
. 
Major 
Head 
Name of the Schemes BE         
2022-23 
 Actuals  
2022-23 
BE    
 2023-24 
 Actuals  
2023-24 
%Increase/ 
Decrease of 
BE 2023-24 
over BE 2022-
23  
BE         
2024-25 
Actuals  
2024-25 
(upto 
31.12.24) 
%Increase/ 
Decrease of BE 
2024-25 over 
BE 2023-24  
BE         
2025-26 
% Increase/ 
Decrease of BE 
2025-26 over BE 
2024-25 
    I. Establishment Expenditure                   
1 3451 Department of Planning (Revenue) 15500 14759 15900 15799 (+)3.23% 20376 14506 (+)28.15% 21863 (+)7.30% 
2 5475 Department of Planning (Capital) -- -- 100 --   100 -- --  100 -- 
3 3451 NITI Aayog (Headquarters)[Revenue] 1172900 1378512 1515000 
 
1317868 (+)35.42% 1592204 1055605 (+)5.10% 1492702 (-) 6.25% 
4 5475 NITI Aayog (Headquarters)[Capital] -- -- 73400 53341   78700 37123 (+)7.22%  132800 (+)68.74% 
5 3451 Renovation and Alteration (Revenue)(#) 75000 67912 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  
6 3451 Information Technology (Revenue)(#) 25000 31132 -- -- -- -- -- --- -- --  
7 5475 Information Technology (Capital)(#) 7500 2980 -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  
8 3451 Economic Advisory Council to the Prime 
Minister(Revenue) 
30000 29781 30000 34070 -- 43595 21769 (+)45.31% 40775 (-)6.47% 
9 3451 Departmental Canteen 6500 5432 6500 5632 -- 6950 5961 (+)6.92% 9050 (+)30.22% 
10 3475/ 
3451 
Development Monitoring and Evaluation 
Office(Revenue) (@) 
170000 151377 166900 153640 (-)0.06% 193975 142973 (+)16.22% 226110 (+)16.57% 
11 5475 Development Monitoring and Evaluation 
Office(Capital) 
-- -- 3100 5223 --  3700 1850 (+) 19.35%  4100 (+)10.81% 
    Total- Establishment Expenditure 1502400 1681885 1810900 1585573 (+)20.53% 1939600 1279787 (+)7.11% 1927500 (-)0.62% 
    II. Other Central Expenditure                   
1 3475 Grants-in-aid to National Institute of Labour 
Economics Research and Development (Revenue) 
98600 113000 113000 113000 (+)14.60% 113000 98100 -- 113000 -- 
    Total- Other Central Expenditure 98600 113000 113000 113000 (+)14.60% 113000 98100 -- 113000 -- 
    III. Central Sector Schemes                   
1 3475 Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) including Self 
Employment and Talent Utilisation (SETU) (Revenue) 
1453100 1694291 1443000 967065 (-)0.70% 1443000 269078 -- 3800000 (+) 163.34% 
  5475 Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) including Self 
Employment and Talent Utilisation (SETU) (Capital) 
(*) 
100000 -- 107000 1291 (+)7.00%   107000 745 -- 200000 (+) 86.92% 
  3475 State Support Mission (SSM) (%) [Revenue] -- -- 397000 215762 --   399900 291177 (+)0.73%  449900 (+)12.50% 
  5475 State Support Mission (SSM) (%) [Capital] -- -- 3000 --   -- 100 -- (-) 96.67%  100 -- 
4 3475 Research and Study 60000 33798 40000 25461 (-)33.33% 40000 15216 -- 40000 -- 
  
3475 Official Development Assistance (ODA) from Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)((&) 
100 4968116 4330000 --   (+)4329900.00% 4330000 20832 -- 100 (-) 99.99% 
 3475 Aspirational Blocks Programmes (ABP) -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 3530000 -- 

50 
 
    Total: Central Sector Schemes 1613200 6696205 6320000 1209579 (+)291.77% 6320000 597048 -- 8020100 (+) 26.90% 
5   Grand Total-  3214200 8491090 8243900 2908152 (+)156.48% 8372600 1974935 (+)1.56% 10060600 (+)20.16% 
 
 
(@)  DMEO has been shifted under Major Head - 3451 from the financial year 2024-25 
(#) Two detailed heads namely 1. Renovation & Alteration 2. Information Technology (Revenue) has been shifted from Scheme to Establishment at RE stage during the FY 2020-21 
(*)  Token provision under both Sections of AIM has been kept based on the BE ceilings communicated by MoF.   Cabinet has approved for continuation of this Scheme with a Outlay of ₹ 2750 upto 2027-28.   However, formal 
communication from MoF is still awaited.  
  
             (Rs. In thousands) 
Sl. 
No
. 
Major 
Head 
Name of the Schemes BE         
2022-23 
 Actuals  
2022-23  
BE         2023-
24 
 Actuals  2023-24  %Increase/ 
Decrease of 
BE 2023-24 
over BE 2022-
23  
BE    
2024-25 
 Actuals  
2024-25 
%Increase/ 
Decrease of 
BE 2024-25 
over BE 2023-
24  
BE         
2025-26 
% Increase/ 
Decrease of 
BE 2025-26 
over BE 
2024-25 
  3451 Deduct Recoveries   (-) 246  (-) 3445             
  3475 Deduct Recoveries   (-) 19469  (-) 25789             
    Total actuals (After deducting recoveries):   8471375  (-) 29234             
             

51 
 
Annexure II 
Ministry of Planning                                                                                                                                            Demand No. 77 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) including Self Employment and Talent Utilization (SETU) (CS) – Indicators for OOMF    F.Y. 2025-26 
  
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY  
(Rs. in Cr) 
 
OUTPUTS 2025-26 
 
OUTCOME 2025-26 
2025-26 Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
 a. Language Inclusive Program of Innovation (LIPI) 
400 1. To build innovation 
and entrepreneurship 
ecosystems in India’s 
regional languages 
1.1 Number of LIPI 
centres created 
15 1. Systematically 
reduce entry barrier 
for innovators, 
entrepreneurs and 
investors who don’t 
speak English 
1.1Number of 
beneficiaries of 
knowledge sharing 
sessions conducted by 
LIPI Task Force 
10 
1.2 Number of vernacular 
innovators and 
investors supported by 
the LIPI Innovation 
Centres 
30 
b. Frontier Program 
1. To create tailored 
interventions for 
developing 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
ecosystem in frontier 
regions of India 
(Hilly and NE-Indian 
Regions) 
1.1 Number of ATLs 
established in frontier 
regions 
500 1. Catalyze the growth 
of a vibrant 
innovation 
ecosystem in 
frontier regions 
1.1 Number of students 
engaged in ATL 
innovation projects 
2500 
1.2 Number of research 
and landscape studies 
initiated 
1 1.2 Number of teachers 
trained as ATL in-
charge 
250 
1.3 Number of novel 
templates of tinkering 
labs and incubation 
 
2 

52 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY  
(Rs. in Cr) 
 
OUTPUTS 2025-26 
 
OUTCOME 2025-26 
2025-26 Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
centres developed for 
frontier regions 
c. Human Capital Development Program (HCD) 
1. To create a system for 
producing 
professionals 
specializing in 
building, operating 
and maintaining 
India's innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
ecosystem 
1.1 No of innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
courses developed 
1 
 
1. Establish a robust 
ecosystem for 
training and 
certifying 
professionals in the 
field of innovation 
and 
entrepreneurship 
1.1 Number of teachers 
certified in innovation 
and entrepreneurship 
courses 
100 
1.2 Number of startup 
incubator staff 
certified in innovation 
and entrepreneurship 
courses 
15 
d. State Innovation Mission (SIM) 
1. To build innovation 
and entrepreneurship 
ecosystem across 
various States/UTs 
1.1 Number of States/ 
UTs with structured 
engagement with SIM 
(under State Support 
Mission) 
2 1. Engage with the 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
ecosystem across 
various states to 
foster knowledge 
sharing, best 
practice exchange, 
and network 
building 
1.1 No of workshops/ 
sessions conducted in 
physical/virtual/hybrid 
mode 
3 
1.2 No of participants 
from ecosystem 
stakeholders 
(State/UTs and Central 
Govt., Incubators, 
Startups, Innovators, 
VC and funding 
ecosystem players) in 
the workshops/ 
sessions 
250 

53 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY  
(Rs. in Cr) 
 
OUTPUTS 2025-26 
 
OUTCOME 2025-26 
2025-26 Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
e. International Innovation Collaboration (IIC) 
1. To build innovation 
and entrepreneurship 
exchange platforms 
across national 
boundaries 
1.1 Number of 
International 
(bilateral/multilateral) 
innovation programs 
launched/executed 
2 1. Engage with the 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
ecosystem across 
various 
nations/multilateral 
agencies to foster 
knowledge sharing, 
best practice 
exchange, and 
network building. 
1.1 Number of startups 
supported through 
bilateral/multilateral 
innovation programs 
20 
1.2 Number of pilots 
conducted through 
bilateral/multilateral 
innovation programs 
10 
f. Atal Acceleration Centres for Scale-up of Startups (AACESS - Industry Accelerator) 
1. To build a platform for 
supporting revenue-
stage startups through 
establishing 
acceleration centres in 
corporate, PSUs and 
industries 
1.1 Number of industrial 
accelerators 
established 
5 1. Create startup-
industry linkages 
that accelerates the 
growth of 
technology-driven 
startups in key 
industrial sectors 
. 
1.1 Number of revenue 
stage startups 
accelerated 
50 
1.2 Number of industrial 
mentors on-boarded 
25 1.2 Growth recorded in 
revenue of the 
supported startups  
(x is the startup 
revenue at initial 
stage of acceleration) 
1.5x 
1.3 Number of 
partnerships 
facilitated for the 
startups with vendors, 
companies in relevant 
20 1.3 Number of 
products/services 
commercialized by the 
supported startups 
10 

54 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY  
(Rs. in Cr) 
 
OUTPUTS 2025-26 
 
OUTCOME 2025-26 
2025-26 Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
sectors, educational 
institutes, research 
labs, venture capital 
firms etc. 
g. Atal Sectoral Innovation Launchpad (ASIL) 
1. To create institutions 
in central government 
ministries to 
independently run 
sectoral innovation 
programs and 
integrate innovation 
into the sector 
1.1 Number of sectoral 
innovation 
launchpads created in 
central government 
ministries and 
departments 
2 1. Establish 
institutional 
mechanism within 
central 
government 
ministries, 
accelerating the 
adoption of 
innovative 
solutions and 
driving sector-
specific growth 
and development. 
1.1 Number of innovation 
programs run through 
sectoral innovation  
launchpads 
6 
1.2 Number of startups 
supported through 
sectoral innovation  
launchpads 
30 
1.3 Number of startups 
pilots conducted 
through sectoral 
innovation launchpads 
10 
h. Atal Tinkering Lab (ATL) 
1. To build a platform 
for innovation and 
entrepreneurship in 
schools 
1.1 Number of school 
staff/teachers 
engaged in ATLs (in 
total schools) 
5000 1. Promote a culture 
of and ecosystem 
for 
entrepreneurship & 
innovation at 
school level 
1.1 Number of students 
engaged in ATL 
innovation projects 
50000 
1.2. Number of ATL 
innovation 
challenges/events 
initiated 
5 1.2 Number of ATL 
student 
prototypes/innovations 
created 
5000 

55 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY  
(Rs. in Cr) 
 
OUTPUTS 2025-26 
 
OUTCOME 2025-26 
2025-26 Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
1.3 Number of students 
recognized through 
SIP/SEP/partnership 
recognition programs 
1000 
i. Atal Incubation Centre (AIC) 
1. To build platforms for 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship in 
academic 
institutions/R&D and 
other institutions 
1.1 Number of AICs 
established 
20 1. Create institutional 
mechanism for 
supporting startups 
in sectors of 
national importance 
1.1 Number of start-ups 
incubated (physical and 
virtual) 
500 
1.2 Number of 
incubator/startup 
excellence sessions 
facilitated by AICs 
500 1.2 No. of jobs 
(direct/indirect) 
created by startups 
incubated in AICs 
3000 
1.3 Number of value 
adding partnerships 
established by AICs 
100 1.3 Leveraged external 
funding for startups 
through AICs  
(x is amount of seed 
funding through AIM 
grants-in-aid) 
8x 
1.4 Number of mentors 
in AICs 
120 1.4 Number of 
Intellectual Properties 
(IP) filed by startups 
incubated in AICs 
50 
j. Atal Community Innovation Centers (ACIC) 
1. To encourage a spirit 
of entrepreneurship in 
the 
underserved/unserved 
1.1 No. of Atal 
Community 
Innovation Centers 
supported 
26 1. Create institutional 
mechanism for 
supporting 
grassroots 
1.1 Number of ACIC 
start-ups/social 
entrepreneurs 
supported (physical 
260 

56 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY  
(Rs. in Cr) 
 
OUTPUTS 2025-26 
 
OUTCOME 2025-26 
2025-26 Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
regions of India innovations 
through ACICs 
and virtual) 
1.2 Number of 
innovation 
knowledge sharing 
sessions conducted 
by ACIC 
100 1.2 Number of local 
community jobs 
created by ACICs 
400 
1.3 Number of 
community outreach 
events conducted 
50 1.3 Number of 
Community 
Innovators Fellows 
(CIFs) supported 
30 
k. Atal New India Challenges (ANIC) 
1. To seek, select, support 
and nurture 
technology-based 
innovations that solve 
sectoral challenges of 
national importance 
and societal relevance 
1.1 Number of ANIC 
startups supported 
50 1. Commercialize 
new products 
based on cutting 
edge technology 
relevant to the 
Indian context 
1.1 No of new ANIC 
startups 
commercialized 
20 
1.2 No of ANIC winners 
connected to 
government and 
private sector 
investors 
10 
l. AIM Ecosystem Development Program (AEDP) 
1. To develop and 
implement strategic 
initiatives and 
partnerships to 
identify and address 
gaps in India's 
innovation and 
1.1 No. of strategic 
programs 
ongoing/introduced 
across AIM ecosystem 
2 1. Facilitate 
networking and 
collaboration 
among key 
stakeholders in the 
innovation 
ecosystem, 
1.1 No. of innovators/ 
startups supported 
(participation) under 
identified strategic 
programs 
30 

57 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY  
(Rs. in Cr) 
 
OUTPUTS 2025-26 
 
OUTCOME 2025-26 
2025-26 Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
entrepreneurship 
ecosystem. 
including startups, 
investors, 
corporates, 
academia, and 
other enablers. 
2. Create platforms to 
showcase 
innovative 
solutions 
developed by 
students, startups, 
and entrepreneurs 
to a diverse 
audience of 
investors, 
corporates, 
MSMEs, and non-
profit 
organizations. 
2.1 Number of innovation 
solutions showcased 
at national 
/international forums 
across innovation 
ecosystem 
10 
1.2 Total partnerships 
JSoI signed (new & 
renewed) across AIM 
ecosystem 
5 3. Deliver strategic 
value to AIM and 
its beneficiaries 
through 
partnerships with 
key stakeholders 
in the innovation 
ecosystem. 
3.1 Number of 
beneficiaries 
(startups, students, 
innovators, 
incubators/AIM 
team) benefitted 
through capacity 
development, 
knowledge modules 
250 

58 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY  
(Rs. in Cr) 
 
OUTPUTS 2025-26 
 
OUTCOME 2025-26 
2025-26 Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
Output Indicators Targets 
2025-26 
developed, access to 
specialized 
infrastructure through 
the partners 
***** 

59 
 
Annexure III 
2. Official Development Assistance(ODA) from Japan International Cooperation Agency(JICA) for Sustainable Development Goals 
(EAP-SDGs)- 
Financial 
Outlay  
(In Crores) 
Outputs (2025-26) Outcomes (2025-26) 
2025-26 Output Indicator 
(s) 
Target     
2025-26 
Outcome Indicator 
(s) 
Target               2025-26 
Aspirational Districts Programme 
0.01 
 
Engagement with relatively 
underdeveloped Districts for 
their socioeconomic 
development 
No. of 
projects 
submitted 
by districts 
  
  
To finalise 
100 project 
proposals 
under ADP 
from 
districts. 
To sanction projects to 
districts/blocks addressing 
critical development gaps and 
thus accelerating the socio-
economic progress of districts 
and blocks. 
No. of 
projects 
sanctioned 
for districts 
and blocks 
To approve the projects (min 
100) submitted by districts, by 
the empowered committee of 
secretaries 
 
Aspirational Blocks Programme 
353 
 
Engagement with relatively 
underdeveloped  Blocks for 
their socioeconomic 
development 
  
No. of 
projects 
submitted 
by blocks  
To finalise 
75 project 
proposals 
under ABP 
from the 
blocks. 
To sanction projects to 
districts addressing critical 
development gaps and thus 
accelerating the socio-
economic progress of blocks. 
No. of 
projects 
sanctioned 
for blocks. 
To approve the projects (min 
75) submitted by Blocks, by the 
empowered committee of 
secretaries.  
***** 
 
 
 
  

60 
 
Annexure IV 
3. State Support Mission: 
 
Financial 
Outlay  
(In Crores) 
Outputs (2025-26) Outcomes (2025-26) 
2025-26 Output Indicator (s) Target 2025-26  Outcome Indicator (s) Target 2025-26 
45 Engagement with 
states 
Total amount of 
funds estimated to be 
released to States for 
M&E systems, 
Studies, workshops 
and other admin exp 
Rs.40.00 Crores Number of 
States supported 
under SSM to 
develop their 
strategies and 
State Vision 
@2047 in 
alignment with 
India Vision 
@2047 and 
other national 
development 
priorities. 
Number of State 
Institution for 
Transformation 
(SIT) formed in 
various 
States/UTs 
36 
No. of workshops/ 
trainings/ 
conferences 
conducted 
45   
Deployment of 
Human resources in 
States - SITs 
Target 
amenable* 
*Since they are state specific and Demand Driven  
 
***** 
 

61 
 
Appendix-1 
 
Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(2024-25). The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18thFebruary, 2025 from 
1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
5. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
6. Shri Kishori Lal  
7.  Thiru Arun Nehru  
8. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
9. Prof. Sougata Ray  
10. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
11. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
12. Shri Manish Tewari  
13. Shri BalashowryVallabhaneni  
14. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
16. Shri Sanjay Seth  
17. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
18. Smt. Darshana Singh  
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
20. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa   - Director 
2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) 
 
1. Shri B.V.R. Subrahmanyam, Chief Executive Officer 
2. Shri Deepak Narain, AS & FA 
3. Ms. Anna Roy, Programme Director (PD) (Research & Networking 
(R&N)) 
4. Ms. Nidhi Chhibber, DG (DMEO) / PD (Admin) 
5. Ms. Gitanjali Gupta, PD (States)/ MD (ADP/ ABP) 
6. Shri Rajib Kumar Sen, PD (SDGs) 
7. Dr. Neelam Patel, PD (Agriculture) 
8. Dr. Yogesh Suri, PD (Governing Council Secretariat (GCS)/ 
Parliament) 
9. Shri K.S. Rejimon, MD (State Support Mission (SSM))/ JS (Admin) 
10. Shri Ch. P. Sarathi Reddy, PD (PPP/ Island) (JS Level) 
11. Shri Ishtiyaque Ahmed, Sr. Consultant (JS Level) 
12. Dr. Anshu Bhardwaj, PD (Green Transition & Climate) GTC)) (JS 
Level) 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson, requested the Committee 
members to  observe two minutes silence on the sad demise of the eminent 
economist and former Chairman of the Economic Advisory Council of the Prime 
Minister, Dr. Bibek Debroy.  
Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairperson, welcomed the Witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the Witnesses, the 
CEO, NITI Aayog made a Power Point Presentation (PPT) before the 
Committee on the examination of Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the NITI 
Aayog, Ministry of Planning and issues connected therewith. 
3.  The Committee then deliberated upon the Demands for Grants (2025-26) 
of the Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) and the overall mandate and mission of 
NITI Aayog. The major issues discussed during the sitting were related to the 
Budget allocations to NITI Aayog, allocation and utilization of budget grants 
under Atal Innovation Mission and Aspirational Districts Programme, future 
pandemic preparedness and action plan to implement the PPER, definition of 

63 
 
multidimensional poverty and views of NITI Aayog thereon, merging of Sansad 
Adarsh Gram Yojana, and Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana to target more 
number of SCs and STs  in very poverty-stricken area for achieving 
‘Sampoornata’ in true sense, human resource deployed at NITI Aayog on 
permanent basis, feasibility of expanding the role of NITI Aayog for boosting 
economic growth, need of uniformity and coherence in budget allocations in the 
area of Artificial intelligence, mismatch between Capital and Revenue 
expenditures, need for increase in think tank activities and institutions in critical 
areas, roadmap for economic growth beyond 5 trillion economy, steps taken to 
check administering of contraindicative supplements in case of certain ailments, 
current status of Birbhum, Nadia and Dakshin Dinajpur  districts of West Bengal 
declared as Aspirational Districts, need of fundamental research in ‘Manpower 
Research Services’ and budget allocations thereto, need for adequate funding 
and grounding/implementation of the Schemes/Missions/Programmes, 
formulating modus operandi to have better implementation of the 
Policies/Schemes, strengthening of DISHA Committees, synchronization of the 
State’s schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes, need to facilitate the reach 
and  access of the last man standing to various research/experts 
reports/innovations and vice versa  to extend and harness its complete benefits, 
NITI Aayog’s  consultative role on the new draft Bills, external funding of 
projects, scope of including  erstwhile Planning Commission’s critical function of 
extensive working and consultation process with the State Governments for 
greater good of both.  
4.  In addition to above, the Committee also discussed the expertise and 
educational prowess of the consultants involved in preparing various reports of 
NITI Aayog, underutilisation of the allocated budget under various schemes of 
NITI Aayog,  requirement of tailor made Centrally Sponsored Schemes well 
suited to geographical and physical conditions of the particular State, State’s 
autonomy, discretion and control over spending their own fiscal resources on 
State vis-a vis Centrally Sponsored Schemes and implementation of Central 
Government policy, statutory power of NITI Aayog to monitor utilisation of 
allocated funds for CSS by State Governments, usurping of State subjects by 
Central Government, role of Members of Parliament in developmental 
processes/programmes, integration of cyber fraud portal with respective banks 

64 
 
to prevent further money transfers in cases of cyber frauds,  checks and 
balances established by NITI Aayog to maintain clean and healthy environment 
in wake of mushrooming industries,   efforts to create self sufficiency in coking 
coal to reduce dependency on import, pending approval of Medical Hub Project 
at Chandigarh. 
5.    The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members. The 
Chairperson then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Planning (NITI 
Aayog) to furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members which could 
not be readily responded to by them during the discussion, within a week’s time 
to the Secretariat. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

65 
 
Appendix-2 
Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(2024-25). The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18 March, 2025 from 1500 hrs 
to 1545 hrs in Committee Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan (SS), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
5.  Shri K. Gopinath 
6. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Kishori Lal 
8. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
9. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
10. Thiru Arun Nehru 
11. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
12. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
13. Prof. Sougata Ray 
14. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
15. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
16. Shri Manish Tewari 
17. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
18. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
19. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
20 Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
21. Shri Sanjay Seth 
22. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
23. Smt. Darshana Singh 
24. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa   - Director 
 2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 3. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 

66 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 
i. Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and 
Investment & Public Asset Management);  
ii. Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue); 
iii. Tenth Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs; 
iv. Eleventh Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of 
Planning; 
v. Twelfth Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation; and 
vi. Thirteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports 
with minor modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and 
present the Reports to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 