38
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STEEL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Thirty-third Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2008-2009) of the Ministry of Steel]
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 ( Saka)


THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STEEL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Thirty-third Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2008-2009) of the Ministry of Steel]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 12.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


CC&S No. 38
Price : Rs. 47.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Tweflth Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 6
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................ 29
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ................................... 30
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 31
ANNEXURES
I. Reasons for reduction of Annual Plan outlay in RE
2007-08 vis-a-vis the approved outlay for 2007-08 (BE) ... 34
II. Minutes of sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (2008-09) held on 5.12.2008 ............................... 38
III. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Thirty-third Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ............................ 40
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2008-09)
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu
4. Shri Hiten Barman
5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
12. Shri Tarachand Sahu
13. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
14. Smt. Karuna Shukla
*15. Shri Prabhunath Singh
16. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
17. Shri Sugrib Singh
18. Shri Bhishm Shanker alias Kushal Tiwari
19. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
20. Shri Anirudh Prasad a lias Sadhu Yadav
21. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
23. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
24. Shri Jesudas Seelam
*Resigned from the Membership of Lok Sabha on 11.11.2008.

(iv)
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
27. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
28. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
29. Shri B.J. Panda
30. Shri R.C. Singh alias Ram Chandra Singh
31. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T. Mathivanan — Senior Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-third
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2008-2009)” of the Ministry of
Steel.
2. The Thirty-third Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 16th April, 2008.
Replies of the Government to all the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Report were received on 29th September, 2008.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal & Steel considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 5th December 2008.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-third Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-III.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December, 2008 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals
with Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in their Thirty-third Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Steel
which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 16th April,
2008.
1.2 The Report contained 14 Recommendations/Observations.
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel in
respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Report. These have been categorised as follows:
(i) (Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1 (Para No. 1.7), 2 (Para No. 2.1)
3 (Para No. 3.9), 5 (Para No. 3.27), 6 (Para No. 3.28),
7 (Para No. 3.32), 9 (Para No. 4.14), 10 (Para No. 4.15),
11 (Para No. 4.24), 12 (Para No. 5.13) and 14 (Para No. 5.24).
Total-11 (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
NIL (Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
NIL (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 4 (Para No. 3.18), 8 (Para No. 3.38)
and 13 (Para No. 5.18)
Total-3 (Chapter V)
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies to the Recommendations/
Observations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V should be
furnished to them expeditiously.

2
1.4 The Committee also desire that utmost importance should be
given to the implementation of the Recommendations/Observations
accepted by the Ministry. In case, it is not possible for the Ministry
to implement any Recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any
reasons, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time
with reasons for non-implementation.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations/Observations made
in their Thirty-third Report.
Award of works to HSCL
Recommendation Sl.No. 7 (Para No. 3.32)
1.6 The Committee noted that in the Annual Plan 2008-09,
Budgetary Support had been provided in the form of interest subsidy
of Rs. 59.19 crore and Rs. 6.60 crore for waiver of guarantee fee to
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd. (HSCL) towards
implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS). The Committee
in their earlier Reports had recommended that the restructuring
proposal of HSCL should be approved at the earliest. The Committee,
however, found that the proposal of restructuring of HSCL including
settlement of arrears of the employees was yet to be approved. Any
further delay in this regard would further deterorate the balance sheet
of HSCL. The Committee, therefore, re-emphasised that the restructuring
proposal of HSCL should be approved without any further delay.
The Committee also desired the Ministry to instruct the steel PSUs
to award works directly to HSCL on priority basis.
1.7 The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply have stated
that the proposal for restructuring of HSCL has been approved by
Bureau for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) during
its meeting held on 13.5.2008. The proposal aims at improving the
financial and physical structure of the company. Action has been
initiated by the Ministry to seek the approval of the Cabinet by
circulating a draft cabinet note to concerned Ministries/Departments
of Govt.
As regards awards of work to HSCL by Steel PSUs on priority
basis, it is submitted that in case of capital project, Steel Authority of
India Ltd. (SAIL) awards work on competitive bidding and whenever
HSCL participates in SAIL tenders, HSCL is being awarded work on
the basis of their competitive bidding (L1). Reshtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.

3
(RINL) has also been extending preference/support to HSCL by
obtaining special approvals wherever necessary in tenders where HSCL
is participating.
1.8 The Committee appreciate that RINL has been extending
preference/support to HSCL in awarding works but are at a loss to
understand why SAIL has not taken similar steps and is awarding
work only on the basis of competitive bidding. The Committee would
like to be informed of the reasons in this regard and would like to
reiterate that SAIL should accord priority to HSCL in awarding of
works.
Development of Mines by SAIL
Recommendation Sl. No. 9 (Para No. 4.14)
1.9 The Committee noted that Annual Plan outlay of Steel Authority
of India Ltd. (SAIL) for the year 2008-09 had been increased to
Rs. 4674 crore from Rs. 2007 crore in 2007-08 for various on-going
expansion schemes. Ironically, in 2007-08 SAIL had made reduction in
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) to Rs. 2007 crore at
Revised Estimates stage from Budget Estimates of Rs. 2641 crore. While
the Revised Estimates had been reduced in 2007-08, the development
of new mines on the other hand at Chiria, Rowghat, Thakurani and
Taldih were getting delayed.
The Committee were of the view that Budget Estimates were
prepared keeping in view the likely expenditure to be incurred on
various on-going schemes/or new schemes. The effort, therefore, ought
to be to ensure full utilization of funds so that the implementation of
on-going schemes/projects was not affected and there was no escalation
in the cost. The Committee hoped that SAIL would make all out efforts
to utilize the earmarked funds and complete the schemes as well as
expansion programme without any time and cost overruns.
1.10. The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply have stated
that the Budget Estimates for Capital Expenditure of SAIL PLants for
2008-09 amounting to Rs. 4674 crore has already been approved by
Government of India. Based on actual progress of the schemes, this
outlay will be reviewed in October/November 2008. However, following
measures have been taken for effective utilization of earmarked funds
to avoid time and cost overruns in implementing the schemes:
“In order to ensure that the projects are completed on schedule,
the projects are monitored on day to day basis by the respective

4
Project Managers of the plats and the Project Heads. Further, the
project is monitored by the Plant Level Standing Committee
comprising of Head of Projects, Head of Works and Head of
Finance on a monthly basis. This Plant Level Standing Committee
submits its action plan to the Managing Director/Chief Executive
of the Plant for remedial actions, if any, to be taken to ensure that
the projects are completed in time. Managing Director/Chief
Executive of the Plant reviews the projects every month for timely
action to complete the projects on schedule.
Further a Board Sub-Committee, comprising of two independent
Directors, Director (Technical) and Managing Director of the Plant,
has been constituted to review the major projects (Rs. 100 Crore &
above) on a quarterly basis. The major projects are further reviewed
at the level of Secretary (Steel), Ministry of Steel, on a quarterly
basis.
As a step towards ensuring full utilization of earmarked funds
thereby expediting completion of projects as per schedule, SAIL
has simplified its purchase and contract procedures. The new
procedure aims at meeting the expectations of internal and external
customers, transparency requirements, improving the speed of
decision making, instilling confidence amongst the decision taking
authorities, etc. for timely implementation of ensuing projects.
For Rowghat, Chiria and Taldih mines, the proposal for
appointment of Consultant for development of mines including
beneficiation and pelletisation plant have been approved by SAIL
Board. The tenders have already been issued and the evaluation is
in advanced stage. As far as Thakurani mine is concerned, the
application for prospecting license has already been filed with the
Government of Orissa. However, the development of the mines
will depend upon statutory clearances from Government of India.”
1.11 It is not clear from the reply whether there is any delay in
getting license from the Government of Orissa for Thakurani mine.
If that is the case, it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Steel to
take up the matter with the State Government of Orissa at the highest
level and ensure speedy clearance. This is ncessary for
synchronization of the on-going expansion programme of SAIL with
the development of the mines to ensure  that there are no bottlenecks
regarding availability of inputs on commissioning of the new units.

5
Supply of Coal to Small Scale Steel Sector
Recommendation Sl. No. 12 (Para No. 5.15)
1.12 The Committee had, inter-alia, desired the Ministry to take
necessary steps for uninterrupted supply of superior quality of non-
coking coal to small scale industry.
1.13 The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply have stated,
inter-alia, that the matter regarding allocation of superior grade coal
linkages as well as allotment of coal blocks with superior quality
sponge iron grade non-coking coal and coking coal, have been taken
up with the Ministry of Coal at appropriate level of respective
Committees constituted for examination and recommending of coal
linkage and coal block. These are also subjected to other techno-
economic factors such as geographical location and availability of
logistics and transportation arrangement.
1.14 Having noted that providing necessary feedstock to small
scale steel sector is one of the objectives envisaged in National Steel
Policy, the Committee had recommended that necessary steps be
taken for uninterrupted supply of superior quality of non-coking
coal to small scale steel sector. The Ministry of Steel have not given
any specific response to this recommendation. The Committee hope
that the Ministry of Steel have taken note of the Committee’s
recommendation for necessary action.
The Committee would, however, suggest the Ministry to hold a
tripartite meeting where the representatives of the small scale steel
sector and the Ministry of Coal are also present to arrive at an
amicable solution to the problems of small scale steel sector.

6
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.17)
Considering the importance of Steel Industry in the development
of economy and for sustained growth of GDP , the Government ought
to create an environment for the Indian Steel Industry to expand its
production base adequately in response to the anticipated increase in
domestic and overseas demand. The Committee expect the Ministry to
take appropriate measures to achieve global competitiveness not only
in terms of cost, quality and product-mix but also in terms of global
benchmarks of efficiency and productivity , expeditious removal of
procedural bottlenecks, availability of critical raw material, infrastructure
and modern technology and some of the key areas which need
immediate and sustained attention. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken/proposed to be taken in this regard.
Action Taken
As regard monitoring and implementation of steel projects and
remove bottlenecks Prime Minister has approved constitution of an
Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(Steel) to monitor and coordinate issues concerning major steel
investments in the country. The other members are Secretaries of
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Department of
Shipping, Department of Road Transport & Highways, Ministry of
Mines, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Member (Traffic) of the
Railway Board and as well as Chief Secretaries of the concerned State
Government.
Further, Ministry of Steel is undertaking a study of the status of
infrastructure as well as augmentation requirements in terms of road
and rail networks, ports and the water sectors in various steel
producing States.
Public Sector steel plants namely SAIL and RINL have taken several
initiatives to achieve international norms of consumption and to attain
international standards on productivity, energy consumption and quality
of steel products. While existing steel plants are continuously

7
modernizing and adopting latest technological innovations, new plants
have been set up/are being set up with the state-of-art technologies.
Government is also encouraging induction of modern equipment and
process technologies through liberalized import regime. After the
completion of modernization/technology upgradation in the existing
steel plants and completion of the new steel plants, major Indian steel
producers are expected to be world class subject to availability of
world class raw material and other inputs.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.
dated 24th September, 2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee hope that the Ministry of Steel will implement the
Recommendations in a time-bound manner which the Committee made
in their Action Taken Report. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should furnish final replies to the Recommendation (No. 20) which
was categorised as of interim nature. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Action Taken
A Technical Committee headed by Chairman, JPC and comprising
of representatives of steel producers and key industry associations have
been constituted to provide overall guidance/direction to the study.
The Technical Committee has decided to outsource the study to a
professional agency , with expertise and record of completion of similar
projects in the past. In its last meeting, held on 17th July 2008, the
Technical Committee short-listed three agencies for conducting the
study. These agencies are being approached with the Terms of Reference
(ToR) for the study with the request to submit their respective proposals
involving both technical and commercial bids.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.
dated 24th September, 2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.9)
The Committee have been given to understand that Budgetary
Support (BS) is being provided by the Ministry to some of the
financially weak and loss making PSUs and Internal and Extra
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) are being raised by profit making PSUs
for implementing their schemes. As against the proposed annual plan
outlay of Rs. 9545.11 crore, the Planning Commission has approved an
outlay of Rs. 9543.00 crore.

8
It is, however, pertinent to note that whereas the Budget Estimate
(BE) for 2008-09 has increased to Rs. 9543.00 crore as compared to that
of Rs. 6203.70 crore in 2007-08, the Revised Estimate (RE) for 2007-08
was reduced to only Rs. 4325.81 crore. It is evident from this that
there is wide variation between BE and RE from which the Committee
are inclined to conclude that either the estimates on the part of the
Ministry are not realistic or they have utterly failed to utilize the
estimated funds subsequently. The Committee have time and again
emphasized the need for preparation of realistic estimates as far as
possible. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise
reasons due to which the RE in 2007-08 were sharply reduced and
would also like to be satisfied that the steep increase in the BE in
2008-09 would be fully utilized.
Action Taken
The reduction in the Plan outlay of the Ministry in RE 2007-08 vis-
a-vis the approved outlay for BE 2007-08 was mainly due to the
reduction in the outlays of SAIL, RINL, NMDC and KIOCL. The
reasons due to which these 4 PSUs reduced their respective Plan outlays
for 2007-08 are given in Annexure I .
As regards the steep increase of Rs. 3339.30 crore in the Plan
outlay for BE 2008-09 (Rs. 9543.00 crore) vis-a-vis that for 2007-08
(Rs. 6203.70 crore), this increase is almost entirely due to the increase
in the 2008-09 outlays of SAIL and RINL. While SAIL’s outlay has
been raised from Rs. 2641.00 crore in BE 2007-08 to Rs. 4674.00 crore in
BE 2008-09 (increase of Rs. 2033.00 crore), that of RINL has been raised
from Rs. 3056.70 crore to Rs. 4166.00 crore (increase of Rs. 1109.30 crore).
The increased outlay for SAIL in 2008-09 is due to the expansion
plans of the company initiated during 2007-08. As the implementation
of various schemes/projects relating to the expansion plans of SAIL is
likely to pick up steam from 2008-09 onwards, the capital expenditure
of the company during 2008-09 (and in subsequent years) would also
increase significantly. In fact, capital expenditure of SAIL during the
first two months of 2008-09 was Rs. 409.00 crore which is higher by
more than 100% compared to corresponding period of previous year
2007-08. If this expenditure trend is sustained, it is expected that SAIL
would be able to utilize the entire Plan outlay for 2008-09.
Similarly, RINL is also in the midst of implementing its flagship
scheme of 6.3 MTPA capacity expansion. Contract-wise micro detailing
of expected expenditure has been worked out for the expansion plan.
It is expected that with the contracts for major packages already

9
finalized/signed and site activities having commenced, the
implementation of expansion plans will gain momentum during 2008-
09 thereby resulting in higher capital expenditure during the year. It
may be noted that out of RINL’s total outlay of Rs. 4166.00 crore in
BE 2008-09, Rs. 3000.00 crore has been earmarked for the capacity
expansion scheme. Expenditure in respect of other schemes are also
expected to take place in the current year 2008-09 as major orders are
getting finalized. The company’s thrust is now on ordering of balance
specifications by Sept.-Oct., 2008. In respect of orders already placed,
RINL is following up with designers, suppliers, vendors and sub-
vendors for timely supplies. Similar action has been initiated for all
site activities. In view of the above, the company is optimistic about
being able to fully utilise its Plan outlay for 2008-09.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.
dated 24th September, 2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.27)
The Committee find that the Ministry had proposed Rs. 100.00
crore for the new scheme “Promotion of Research and Development
(R&D) in Iron and Steel Sector” for 11th Five Year Plan, but the
Planning Commission approved higher allocation of Rs.118.00 crore.
Out of Rs. 118.00 crore, a token provision of Rs. 1.00 crore was made
in 2007-08 and Rs. 18.50 crore allotted for 2008-09. The specific details
of the R&D Scheme is stated to be being finalised. The Committee
regret to observe that the Ministry have not yet finalised this scheme
even after the beginning of the second year of the 11th Plan which in
turn has resulted in lesser allocation therefor in 2007-08 and 2008-09.
The Committee desire the Ministry to finalise the scheme at the earliest
and seek additional funds therefor at RE stage.
The Committee also desire the Ministry to give priority for taking
up the project “Use of indigenous non-coking coal” under R&D scheme
for steel production so as to reduce dependence on the imported coking
coal.
Action Taken
Ministry of Steel has already prepared the Draft Scheme after
getting confirmed allocation of funds for the new R&D Scheme entitled
“Promotion of Research and Development (R&D) in Iron and Steel
Sector” for 11th Five Year Plan. The Draft Scheme has been sent to the
Planning Commission for their vetting as per laid down procedure. In
principle approval of Planning Commission has been received on
18.06.2008 and further follow-up action is being initiated.

10
On the issue of use of non-coking coal for steel production, it is
submitted that non-coking coal is already used in iron and steel making
in India, details of which are given below:
(i) Production of sponge iron in coal based sponge iron plants
where indigenous non-coking coal is used.
(ii) Production of hot metal/pig iron in Corex Plant where
mostly imported non-coking coal is used.
(iii) Pulverised coal injection/coal dust injection in blast furnace
(for partial replacement of metallurgical coke/coking coal)
for production of hot metal/pig iron.
(iv) Pr oduction of metallurgical coke (through stamp charge coke
oven batteries/heat recovery coke ovens by replacing 5-10%
coking coal) for us inblast furnaces for production of hot
metal/pig iron.
Further, the recommendations of the Standing Committee for taking
up the project “Use of Indigenous non-coking coal” under R&D scheme
for steel production was discussed in the 19th meeting of the
Empowered Committee (EC) held on 28.5.2008 under the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Steel). Having taken a note of the suggestions of the
Standing Committee, the EC has decided to call for R&D proposals in
specific thrust areas of national importance to be selected based on
the aforesaid recommendation and feedback from the Members of the
Empowered Committee. The Ministry is taking follow-up action in
this direction.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.
dated 24th September, 2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.28)
The Committee note that Indian steel makers have improved their
presence in the global steel market. However, their performance on
techno-economic parameters has not been satisfactory. The Ministry
have admitted that global benchmarks on important parameters are
not clearly defined as the performance and methodologies for
measurement of parameters vary amongst the companies. Whereas the
Government have fixed global benchmarks on three operational
parameters namely Blast Furnace (BF), Productivity (2.39 t/m3/d),
Carbon Rate in BF (450 kg/THM) and Specific Energy Consumption
(5.92 Gcal/Tcs), the performance of the units of Steel Authority of
India Ltd. (SAIL) and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) is relatively

11
lower on the above parameters mainly on account of technological
obsolescence and quality constraints in raw materials.
The Committee also note that while SAIL has entered into strategic
tie-ups with global companies for technological development, RINL
has not having any such strategic tie-ups with the global companies
but pursuing Research and Development (R&D) activities with the
domestic academic institutes.
The Committee are concerned to note that steel PSUs are still
operating with the low technological efficiencies and lackadaisical in
taking up R&D schemes to improve the said parameters. The
achievement of global benchmarks in the identified areas is of
paramount importance to have cutting edge in their competitiveness,
production of quality steel products at low cost and the necessity to
increase rural steel consumption. The Committee hope that suitable
remedial steps would be taken in this direction at the earliest.
Action Taken
RINL has resorted to a number of R&D efforts in collaboration
with reputed institutes like IMMT, Bhubaneshwar and IIT, Kanpur.
The projects under taken are bio-leaching of phosphorus from LD Slag,
use of SMS-GCP sludge briquettes in place of sized iron ore and
reduction of residual skull in tundish through water modeling. These
efforts are instrumental in lower energy consumption and cost savings
in production of steel and other bio-products.
The recommendations/observations of the Standing Committee
have been noted and the steel plants have been instructed to take
suitable follow-up action at their end. It is, however, submitted that
SAIL and RINL, the two public sector steel plants have taken several
initiatives to improve their productivity , reduce energy consumption,
to improve quality, to reduce cost i.e. to improve the overall techno-
economics of these plants. The specific strategies adopted towards these
objectives include improvement in raw material quality and processing
techniques, modernization of old/outdated production facilities to adopt
modern, energy efficient, environment friendly technologies and
operational practices. Details are given in the annexure.
It is expected that with the implementation of the new technologies
and process improvement measures in all the plants in the upcoming
modernization/expansion/rebuilding/capital repair programme, the
techno-economics of these plants would substantially improve by the
turn of the 11th five year plan. However, achievement of global

12
benchmark would still be subject to quality of indigenously available
raw materials and gaps in technology, if any.
R&D interventions in these steel plants, so far have been limited
to incremental improvements in the parameters mentioned above rather
than path breaking developments due to constraints and the policy
and philosophy of the companies. However, R&D will be closely
associated in all aspects of technological management viz. assessment,
acquisition, assimilation, adoption and exploitation of the full potential
of the new technologies being adopted or to be adopted in the steel
plants in the years to come.
Initiatives taken by SAIL and RINL for improvement of techno-
economics:
Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL)
I. Initiatives for improvement of techno-economics in Blast
Furnaces:
• Improvement in quality of Iron ore lump and fines to bring
down the gangue input (Silica and Alumina <4%) in blast
furnace by suitable beneficiation at different mines.
• Enhance use of prepared burden i.e. sinter and pellet to the
tune of 80% in the blast furnace.
• Introduction of auxiliary fuel injection i.e. coal tar, coal bed
methane/natural gas in all the blast furnaces (CDI: from 50
kg/thm to 150 kg; Coal Tar upto 30 kg/thm).
• Use of oxygen enrichment to enhance production (upto 6%).
• Modernization of stoves to achieve a higher hot blast
temperature (upto 1150°C).
• Strengthening of auxiliary/logistic facilities  i.e. turbo blower,
hot metal ladles/torpedo car, blast furnace refractory lining
and cooling system.
• Introduction of advance diagnostic tools i.e. various probe,
instrument, sensor and models etc.
These measures will be incorporated in all these steel plants during
upcoming modernization/rebuilding/capital repair in a phase manner.
II. Initiatives to decrease the Specific Energy consumption in SAIL
The present energy consumption level in Steel Authority of India
Limited (SAIL) is 6.94 Gcal/tcs. SAIL has planned to bring down

13
energy consumption by about 1 Gcal/tcs through improvement in
existing processes and adopting newer energy efficient technologies.
Major process improvement & technologies under implementation are
given below:
(A) Process improvement in existing plants/facilities
1. Enhancement of coal dust injection rates in all BFs
2. Reduction in coke ash
3. Beneficiation in iron ore to reduce alumina and silica
4. Optimization of bye-product fuel recovery, distribution and
its utilization
5. Enhancement of lining life of BOF vessels and ladles
6. Process optimization by use of mathematical model and
supervisory control in Blast Furnaces, Steel making and
Rolling mills.
7. More frequent in-house inter-plant energy audit to identify
potential areas of energy conservation in thermal and
electrical energy and implementation of the same.
8. Operation of optimum number of units through proper inter-
departmental co-ordination.
(B) Adoption of energy efficient technologies
1. Phasing out high energy consumption process like soaking
pits at DSP , BSP and BSL (100% concast route production)
2. Phasing out Twin hearth/Open hearth furnaces in BSP and
ISP (to BFO process)
3. Replacement of pusher type reheating furnaces by energy
efficient walking beam reheating furnaces at BSP , DSP and
ISP
4. Replacement of small capacity BFs in BSP , ISP and RSP
with bigger capacity BFs
5. Introduction of Top Recovery Tubines in BFs at BSP , RSP
and ISP
6. Introduction of waste heat recovery in the coolers of sinter
plants
7. Introduction of Thin slab casting in BSL

14
It is expected that above-mentioned process improvement and new
technologies will be implemented in SAIL plants by 2010-11, which
will help to bring down energy consumption level below 6.0 Gcal/tcs.
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL)
(i) Bio-leaching of Phosphorus from LD slag (with IMMT,
Bhubaneswar).
The project aims to remove phosphorus from LD slag
through bio-leaching to increase the recycling of LD slag
through sinter making. This would save cost by saving
Limestone and Dolomite.
(ii) Use of SMS-GCP sludge briquettes in place of sized iron
ore.
Briquette making from SMS-GCP sludge and subsequent
industrial trial was successful and commercial scale
production is about to commence. This would cut cost by
saving costly iron ore lump.
(iii) Reduction of residual skull in tundish through water
modeling (with IIT, Kanpur) to reduce the skull of
continuous casting tundish which will reduce cost and
specific energy consumption by increasing the yield.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.,
dated 24th September, 2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.32)
The Committee note that in the Annual Plan 2008-09, Budgetary
Support have been provided in the form of interest subsidy of
Rs. 59.19 crore and Rs. 6.60 crore for waiver of guarantee fee to
Hindustan Steel works Construction Ltd. (HSCL) towards
implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS). The Committee
in their earlier Reports had recommended that the restructuring
proposal of HSCL should be approved at the earliest. The Committee,
however, find that the proposal of restructuring of HSCL including
settlement of arrears of the employees is yet to be approved. Any
further delay in this regard would further deteriorate the balance-
sheet of HSCL. The Committee would, therefore, like to re-emphasise
that the restructuring proposal of HSCL should be approved without
any further delay.
The Committee also desire the Ministry to instruct the steel PSUs
to award works directly to HSCL on priority basis.

15
Action Taken
The proposal for restucturing of HSCL has been approved by
BRPSE during its meeting held on 13.5.2008. The proposal aims at
improving the financial and physical structure of the company. Action
has been initiated by the Ministry to seek the approval of the Cabinet
by circulating a draft cabinet note to concerned Ministries/Departments
of Govt.
As regards awards of work to HSCL by Steel PSUs on priority
basis, it is submitted that in case of capital project, SAIL awards work
on competitive bidding and whenever HSCL participates in SAIL
tenders, HSCL is being awarded work on the basis of their competitive
bidding (L1). RINL has also been extending preference/support to
HSCL by obtaining special approvals wherever necessary in tenders
where HSCL is participating.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.,
dated 24th September, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 4.14)
The Committee note that Annual Plan outlay of Steel Authority of
India Ltd. (SAIL) for the year 2008-09 has been increased to Rs. 4674
crore from Rs. 2007 crore in 2007-08 for various on-going expansion
schemes. Ironically, in 2007-08 SAIL has made reduction in Internal
and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) to Rs. 2007 crore at RE stage
from BE of Rs. 2641 crore. While the RE has been reduced in 2007-08,
the development of new mines on the other hand at Chiria, Rowghat,
Thakurani, Taldih are getting delayed.
The Committee are of the view that BE are prepared keeping in
view the likely expenditure to be incurred on various on-going
schemes/or new schemes. The effort therefore, ought to be ensure full
utilization of funds so that the implementation of on-going schemes/
projects is not affected and there is no escalation in the cost. The
Committee hope that SAIL would make all out efforts of utilize the
earmarked funds and complete the schemes as well as expansion
programme without any time and cost overruns.

16
Action taken
The Budget Estimates for Capital Expenditure of SAIL Plants for
2008-09 amounting to Rs. 4674 crore has already been approved by
Government of India. Based on actual progress of the schemes, this
outlay will be reviewed in Oct./Nov. 2008. However, following
measures have been taken for effective utilization of earmarked funds
to avoid time and cost overruns in implementing the schemes:
In order to ensure that the projects are completed on schedule the
projects are monitored on day to day basis by the respective
Project Managers of the Plants and the Project Heads. Further, the
project is monitored by the Plant Level Standing Committee comprising
of Head of Projects, Head of Works and Head of Finance on a monthly
basis. This Plant Level Standing Committee submits its action plan to
the Managing Director/Chief Executive of the Plant for remedial
actions, if any, to be taken to ensure that the projects are completed
in time. Managing Director/Chief Executive of the Plant reviews the
projects every month for timely action to complete the projects on
schedule.
Further a Board Sub-Committee, comprising of two independent
Directors, Director (Technical) and Managing Director of the Plant, has
been constituted to review the major projects (Rs. 100 Crore & above)
on a quarterly basis. The major projects are further reviewed at the
level of Secretary (Steel) Ministry of Steel, on a quarterly basis.
As a step towards ensuring full utilization of earmarked funds
thereby expediting completion of projects as per schedule, SAIL has
simplified its purchase and contract procedures. The new procedure
aims at meeting the expectations of internal and external customers,
transparency requirements, improving the speed of decision making,
instilling confidence amongst the decision taking authorities, etc. for
timely implementation of ensuing projects.
For Rowghat, Chiria and Taldih mines, the proposal for
appointment of Consultant for development of mines including
beneficiation and pelletisation plant have been approved by SAIL Board.
The tenders have already been issued and the evaluation is in advanced
stage. As far as Thakurani mine is concerned, the application for
prospecting license has already been filed with the Govt. of Orissa.
However, the development of the mines will depend upon statutory
clearances from Government of India.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.,
dated 24th September, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report)

17
Recommendation Sl.No. 10 (Para No. 4.15)
The Committee also note that SAIL has been producing special
quality products to meet the requirements of various segments
including infrastructure, agriculture and automobile sector and also
planned to produce some more special steel products in the post
modernization period. Considering the increasing demand for special
products both in the global and domestic market and a lot of scope
for further demand in the future also, the Committee are of the view
that steel PSUs should produce unique special steel products as it
would facilitate them to emerge as dominant steel producers in the
global steel market. The Committee desire that SAIL and other PSUs
should formulate a strategy to identify and produce unique special
products and implement the same in their on-going expansion/
modernisation programmes to sustain their growth and development.
Action Taken
The steel industry is poised for rapid growth in the next ten years,
from the present level of 54 MT of crude steel to 200MT by 2020.
SAIL has plans to augment its hot metal production from 14.6 MT
(2006-07) to about 26.2 MT by 2010-11 in the ongoing expansion plan.
The expansion plan focuses on the following fast growing segments:
Construction, Automobile, Transportation of petroleum products and
Cold reduction.
For the construction segment, BSP has plans to install 2 six strand
billet casters, 1 bar and rod mill and 1 universal beam mill. Similarly
at DSP , action has been initiated for putting up a new bar and rod
mill and 1 medium structural mill. Similarly, ISP is planning to
introduce 2 six strand billet caster, 1 bloom caster, 1 bar mill and
1 heavy section mill. The above facilities will enable SAIL to produce
a wide variety of special steel bars and wire rods such as cold heading
quality, forging quality, spring steel grades, free cutting grades, electrode
quality etc. In addition, parallel flange beam, equal angle, channels
squares etc will be manufactured in different qualities.
For the flat products segments with particular reference to auto,
line pipe and cold reducers, Bokaro Steel Plant has plans to introduce
state-of-art steel making facility with RH-OB, 2 compact strip casters
and 1 modern slab caster capable of producing interstitial free (IF),
Dual phase and TRIP steels. Down stream processing facility such as
a new CRM complex with hot dip galvanizing and hydrogen annealing
facility will enable production of a wide array of special cold rolled
and galvanized grades by SAIL. A new plate mill capable of rolling

18
4500 mm wide plates will enable SAIL to produce a wide variety of
micro alloyed steel grades for line pipe and construction segment. A
new CRNO mill at RSP will help SAIL to maintain its market
leadership in electrical steel segment and also provide opportunity to
produce higher grades of CRNO such as M-27/M-16 grades.
The modernization programme will enable SAIL to achieve a
leadership role in the development and marketing of new special steel
products in the country.
RINL is the leader in Integrated Steel Plants in production of
Special Steel grades in its production. In 2007-08, 62% of its production
was of special steels. Currently it has facilities for long products and
it will continue to be in the long products segment in this phase of
expansion, in view of increasing demand for long products. The
following is the envisaged product Mix with specific quality of special
steel products:
Wire rods: 5.5 to 20 mm in coils—medium and high carbon case
hardening, cold heading quality, electrode quality and spring steel,
bearing steel, free cutting steel etc.
Special bars: 16 mm to 40 mm—in coils and straight lengths—
Medium and high carbon, case hardening, cold heading quality,
electrode quality, spring steel, bearing steel, free cutting steel, etc.
Structurals: Light structurals including high strength quality (and
plain rounds and re-bars depending on the market demand)
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl. dated
24th September, 2008]
Recommendation Sl. No. 11 (Para No. 4.24)
The Committee have been given to understand that delay in
implementation of schemes viz. setting up of Ductile Iron Spun Plant
(DISP) and Permanent Railway Siding forced KIOCL to make reduction
in IEBR in 2007-08 and further delay in the implementation of the
said schemes would cause adverse impact on the performance of
KIOCL. The Committee feel that early functioning of Pellet Plant and
grant of mining lease are vital to improve the performance of KIOCL.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that KIOCL should make
all out efforts for implementation of planned schemes and utilize the
allocated funds in 2008-09. The Committee also recommend that KIOCL

19
should formulate a diversification plan to improve its business in the
light of closure of mines as per the directions of Hon’ble Supreme
Court. The Committee further desire the Ministry to facilitate KIOCL
for approval of contract mining in the mines of NMDC, SAIL and
OMDC till grant of mining leases to KIOCL.
Action Taken
1. Functioning of Pellet Plant
Once KIOCL switched its operation for usage of 100% Haematite
iron ore for pellet making and started operating the ball mills with
full capacity from February 2006, the problem of ultra fine generation
surfaced. Problems encountered in the Grinding Plant, Filtration Plant
and the Pellet Plant while processing of Haematite ore were addressed
with the available in house expertise and as well the advise from
M/S METCHEM.
Ministry of Steel had constituted on 27.10.2006 a three members
team to study the technical problems being faced by the Pellet Plant.
The Expert Team has submitted its report in December, 2006. The
report suggested following measures:
•T o identify a permanent and regular source of Haematite
ore.
•T o appoint an experienced process technologist.
•T o complete the Laboratory test of characteristics and process
cycle for permanent and regular source of raw material.
• Plant modification after completion of above.
Based on the expert’s advise certain modifications to the grinding
plant flow sheet were carried out which resulted in some marginal
improvement. KIOCL is putting all efforts to achieve the desired level
of capacity, quality and consistency in production.
On advice from M/S METCHEM, KIOCL decided to get the ore
from Donimalai iron ore deposit tested at a laboratory of international
repute. M/S COREM LABORATORIES, Canada, who have the required
expertise for carrying out the grinding, filtration and pelletisation tests,
were identified and work was awarded to M/S COREM for testing of
the iron ore samples from Donimalai deposit. M/S COREM completed
the Phase-I testing. In their report, M/S COREM concluded that pellets
can be made to meet commercial standards without de-sliming.
On conducting the optimization tests, the final report received from

20
M/S METCHEM indicates that good quality pellets can be produced
with the filter cake having Blaine in the range of 1950 and process
prameters as per the pot grate test conducted at COREM Laboratory.
On the behest of Ministry of Steel, Technical Conferences were also
organized by KIOCL on 2nd March, 2007 and 28 April, 2008.
In their report M/S COREM have recommended to install Pressure
filters to filter the slurry and to replace the cyclones with screens to
reduce water consumption. KIOCL is going ahead with the procurement
and installation of 3 Horizontal pressure filters in the first phase. They
have already introduced screens, wherever possible, in order to reduce
the water consumption. As a result of the steps taken by the Company
and the Ministry of Steel so far, the production of Pellets has been
improved to the extent of 19.27 lakh tonnes during 2007-08 against the
production of 6.30 lakh tonnes during 2006-07.
2. Grant of mining leases:
(a) Mining lease at Chikkanayakanahalli (Karnataka)
Govt. of Karnataka recommended a mining lease at
Chikkanayakanahalli Iron Ore deposit, consisting of an area of 116.55
Ha. on 6th March 2006. KIOCL application for Exploratory Drilling is
under process with MoEF, Govt. of India Approved Terms of Reference
for EIA/EMP study has been received from Ministry of Environment
& Forests (MoEF). EIA/EMP studies are being carried out for obtaining
Environmental clearance from MoEF. KIOCL has submitted Mine Plan
for approval to the Indian Bureau of Mines, Bangalore. De-reservation
proposal for diversion of forest land for mining purpose to the Forest
Department, Govt. of Karnataka. DRP is also under process with Forest
Department, Karnataka. Ministry of Mines, Govt. of India, has granted
the prior approval of Mining lease for a period of 30 years for the
above area as per section 5 (1) of the Mines & Mineral Development
and Regulation Act, 1957 vide their letter No. 5/18/2008-ML.IV , New
Delhi dated 12th June 2008 and Govt. of Karnataka also given consent
for the same on 01.08.2008.
(b) Mining lease at Ramanadurg (Karnataka)
The Company had applied for mining lease in Ramanadurg,
Karnataka. In principle, Govt. of Karnataka has agreed for allotment
of 50% of the deposit to KIOCL. However, the matter was delayed
due to stay by High Court. High Court of Karnataka has pronounced

21
its Judgement on 27.11.2006. Government of Karnataka has reportedly
filed a Review Petition in the High Court. The hearing has been
completed and the judgement is reserved. This has been further taken
up by the Secretary (Steel) in a meeting with Chief Secretary, Karnataka
on 26.4.2008 to expedite early judgement and allotment of mining lease
to KIOCI.,
(c) Mining lease at Khandadhar, Orissa.
KIOCL had applied for mining lease at Khandadhar in Orissa.
The drilling/exploratory work has been done by Directorate of Geology,
Bhubneshwar. KIOCL has paid an amount of Rs. 1.11 crore for this
work. Suddenly, Govt. of Orissa has decided not to allow M/s. KIOCL
for setting up beneficiation/pelletisation plant for the iron ore reserves
in Khandadhar and recommended to allot mining lease in favour of
M/s. POSCO. KIOCL has filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of
Orissa in the matter. High Court on 16.4.2007 directed that the objection
filed by KIOCL to the orders of the Orissa Govt. may be considered
as a Revision Petition by The Mining Tribunal under the Ministry of
Mines and disposed of the Revision Petition within 3 months. The
Tribunal, Ministry heard the matter on 5th July, 2007 and directed to
Govt. of Orissa to dispose of all the applications received for mining
lease prior to the POSCO. Department of Mines of Government of
Orissa conducted the hearing on 12.11.2007, 30.11.2007 and 10.4.2008.
The decision of Government of Orissa is awaited.
3. Implementation of Plan Schemes and utilization of allocated
funds in 2008-2009.
During the year 2008-09, an outlay of Rs. 100 crores has been
made for implementation of Plan schemes. However, the Audit
Committee/Board of the KIOCL has decided to reduce the original
outlay from Rs. 100 crores to Rs. 60 crores due to delay in the receipt
of possession of the required land for execution of schemes of
Permanent Railway Siding & Bulk Material Handling and Infrastructure
System at Mangalore as well as delay in execution of DISP (Ductile
Iron Spun Pipe) plant due to time consuming process of Global
Tendering/Re-tendering.
The entire expenditure envisaged for the Plan scheme would be
met out from the internal resources generated by the Company and
no budgetary support or grant is envisaged from the Government.

22
The details of the various schemes being implemented by KIOCL are
as under:-
(Rs. in crore)
Schemes BE 2008-09 RE 2008-09
A. Ongoing Schemes
1. Development of permanent Railway siding at Mangalore 5.00 10.00
2. Construction of bulk material handling 5.00 5.00
3. Other Mine Development 5.00 1.00
4. Ductile Spun Pipe Plant 30.00 25.00
5. Addition/Modification/Replacements 20.00 14.00
6. Expenditure on R&D & Feasibility studies 5.00 1.00
Total (A) 70.00 56.00
B. New Scheme
1. Eco Town Development at Kudremukh 10.00 0.50
2. Coal Injunction System at Blast Furnace 10.00 3.00
3. Coke Oven Plant 10.00 0.50
Total (B) 30.00 4.00
Grand Total 100.00 60.00
4. Formation of diversification plan to improve its business sales
In terms of Supreme Court, Mining has been stopped at
Kudremukh w.e.f. 31.12.2005. The Company has embarked upon various
diversification plans and investment will commence from the current
financial year onwards. The various projects undertaken by the
Company and their present status is as under:—
(i) Setting up of Ductile Iron Spun Pipe project (DISP) of
1 lakh tonne capacity with an estimated expenditure of
Rs. 225 crores. A Global Tender was published in January,
2008 and the bids were received in March, 2008. Techno-
commercial discussions with the qualified bidders held in
July, 2008.
(ii) Setting up of Coke Oven Plant of 0.3 million tonnes capacity .
M/s MECON has been appointed as Consultant who has
submitted the report in July, 2008.
(iii) Eco tourism at Kudremukh—The Government of Karnataka
had agreed in principle for extension of lease for Revenue

23
land at Kudremukh on an interim basis to facilitate the
preparation of detailed project report and thereafter,
extension of lease for 30 years. The project will be executed
initially with M/s. Jungle Lodges and Resorts Limited (a
Karnataka Govt. undertaking). EOI for preparation of DPR,
Open tender were issued in June, 2008. Offers received and
their scrutiny is under progress.
(iv) Contract Mining—An MoU for mining has been signed with
OMDC in June, 2008. Detailed agreement has been finalized
and sent for the concurrence of OMDC. KIOCL is further
exploring the scope of contract mining with other CPSEs
like NMDC & SAIL.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl. dated
24th September, 2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 5.15)
The Committee note securing coking coal and iron ore plays an
important role for sustainable growth and development of steel
industry. At present the India steel industry import large quantity of
coking coal due to inferior quality of Indian coking coal and its limited
availability. The requirement of iron ore is being met from domestic
reserves. Export of iron ore has surpassed the domestic consumption
since 2002-03 and it reached 93.79 million tonnes in 2006-07. The high
and medium grade iron ore at the average consumption level would
last for next 19 years only.
The Government have admitted that conservation of iron ore
reserves is of paramount importance and the same may not be achieved
by banning or capping the export of iron ore but by taking recourse
to fiscal measures. However, no such fiscal measures have been
provided in 2008-09. Even the Government have not acceded to the
request of the Ministry to provide fiscal and other measures for
promotion of beneficiation and agglomeration of iron ore.
The Committee feel that fiscal measures on iron ore would have
little impact in restricting the export of iron ore. The Committee are
of firm view that considering the ambitious production target set out
in the National Steel Policy and increased addition of steel making
capacities, it is necessary to conserve iron ore for the use of domestic
steel industry in future. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Government should examine the feasibility of banning the export
of iron ore and provide necessary fiscal incentives to the companies

24
for production of value-added items of iron ore. At the same time the
Government ought to encourage exploration of iron ore reserves.
The Committee also desire the Ministry to take necessary steps for
uninterrupted supply of superior quality on non-coking coal to small
scale industry.
Action Taken
Ministry of Steel has been taking up the matter regarding allocation
of superior grade coal linkages as well as allotment of coal blocks
with superior quality sponge iron grade non coking coal and coking
coal, with Ministry of Coal at appropriate level of respective
Committees constituted for examination and recommending of coal
linkage and coal block. These are also subjected to other techno-
economic factors such as geographical location and availability of
logistics and transportation arrangement.
1. Ministry of Steel is of the view that export of iron ore should
be discouraged so as to ensure long term availability of iron ore for
the domestic steel industry. The Government has decided that although
conservation of iron ore resources of the country is of paramount
importance, the same may not be achieved by banning or capping the
export of iron ore but by taking recourse to appropriate fiscal measures.
In accordance with this, Govt. of India imposed an ad-valorem export
duty of 15% on all varieties of iron ore, irrespective of Fe content
w.e.f. 13th June, 2008.
2. Banning exports, however, with immediate effect may hit
employment in mining sector and the problem of disposal of fines, for
which the absorption facilities are presently inadequate, may arise.
3. The Government has approved National Mineral Policy, 2008
and alongwith it has given in-principle approval to the High Level
committee’s (Hoda Committee) recommendations on the basis of
consultations with State Governments, Inter-Ministerial consultations
and recommendations of the Group of Ministers. This will make
provisions for giving preference to value address in the grant of mineral
concessions for iron ore and preferential allocation of captive iron ore
mines for existing steel industry. The issue of providing fiscal incentives
for pelletisation, a value added product of iron ore, by excluding it
from the purview of export duty will also be taken up for further
discussion at appropriate level by Ministry of Steel.

25
4. The recently approved National Mineral Policy, 2008 also
provides measures for attracting technology and investment on the
required scale in exploration and mining and for developing the
country’s mining sector to its full potential so as to put the nation‘s
mineral resources to best use and thereby maximize sectoral
contribution to the Gross Domestic Product.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.,
dated 24th September, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-1 of the Report)
Recommendation Sl.No. 14 (Para No. 5.24)
The Committee note that Steel is the backbone of infrastructure
development and is directly related to Country’s economy and inflation.
Though in a liberalized economy steel price is determined by market
forces, but it is a matter of concern that prices of steel products have
been rapidly increasing over the years. The Ministry have attributed
the price hike to increase in raw material prices, strong demand both
in the international and domestic market and surge in the global steel
prices.
The Ministry have submitted that various fiscal measures such as
reduction in import duty on steel and export duty on iron ore have
been taken up for stabilizing steel prices. The Government have
constituted an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) to facilitate investors in
new steel making capacities and mitigate the constraints on the demand
side. The Ministry have also constituted a Steel Price Monitoring
Committee (SPCMC) to discuss issues pertaining to steel prices between
the consumers and steel producers. The Ministry have also stated that
discussion with the Industry and fiscal measures are being invoked to
contain the prices. Regulator, if and when appointed, will interact with
the Industry will regulate prices.
It is needless to say that uncontrolled and arbitrary increase of
steel prices would drastically affect the common people and ambitious
programmes of the Government such as Bharat Nirman, Indra Awas
Yojana, irrigation projects and mega power projects and it will also
create unemployment. It should be the duty of the Government to see
that the consumers are protected from the arbitrary increase of steel
prices by the producers. As neither the fiscal measures nor IMG and
SPMC have effectively checked the spiralling steel prices, the Committee

26
recommend that the Government should take immediate appropriate
steps to check the spiralling steel prices.
Action Taken
There has been an up-trend in the domestic steel prices since
2006-07 and the trend accentuated since January this year. Rise in raw
material prices, strong demand in the international and domestic market
and up-trend in the global steel prices have been some of the reasons
citied by the industry for increase in the steel prices in the domestic
market.
The Honourable Steel Minister convened a meeting with major
steel produecrs on 14.02.2008 and during the interaction made an appeal
to review their last round of rise in price. In response to the appeal
steel producers like SAIL., Tata Steel and Jindal Steel & Power rolled
back prices by Rs. 1000 per tonne for TMT, rounds and bars and
Rs. 500 per tonne for other steel products.
The mismatch in demand and supply is considered to be the main
reason on the demand side for the rise in steel prices. The Honourable
Steel Minister held discussion with all major steel investors including
Arecllor-Mittal, POSCO, Tata Steel, Essar, Ispat and also SAIL, RINL
on 03.03.2008 to explore the possibility of expediting the ongoing as
well as envisaged steel projects.
The Government continued its dialogue and extensive discussions
were again held with major steel producers, secondary steel producers
and iron ore producers separately on 2nd and 3rd April 2008 to rein
the rising steel prices and its contribution to the inflation in the
economy. As a result of these deliberations, price of different long
products, which includes bars, rods and structurals, used by even the
common man for housing, came down in the range of Rs. 4000-5000
per tonne during 25th March to 12th April 2008.
The Government also took various fiscal and other measures for
stabilizing the steel prices like exempting pig iron, non alloy steel and
steel making inputs like zinc, ferro-alloys and metcoke from customs
duty; withdrawing DEPB benefits on export of various categories of
steel products and bringing back railway freight on iron ore from
classification 180 to 170 for domestic steel producers.
The CEOs of major steel producing companies, namely, Steel
Authority of India Limited, Tata Steel, RINL, JSW, Essar Steel, Ispat
Industries Ltd. and representative of Jindal Steel & Power Limited met

27
the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 7th May 2008. They shared the
Government’s concern regarding the inflationary situation in the country
and in accordance with the Prime Minister’s advice to contain prices,
decided to take the following measures, with immediate effect:
a. Those producers, who had increased the prices in April,
would reduce the price of flat products by Rs. 4000 per
tonne. In addition prices of re-bars and structurals where in
increase was effected in April/May 08 would also be
reduced by Rs. 2000 per tonne.
b. These reductions will be applicable for all steel that gets
consumed in India either directly or after further processing.
c. The Steel Producers will hold these prices for the next three
months.
In May, the Government imposed 15% export duty on semi-finished
products, and hot rolled coils/sheet, 10% export duty on cold rolled
coils/sheets and pipes and tubes and 5% export duty on galvanized
steel in coil/sheet from in order to further curtail rising prices and
increase supply of steel in the domestic market.
The retail price movement of a representative category of steel
items at Mumbai from December 2007 to May 2008 on monthly basis
(Table-1) and from 2nd week of April to 2nd week of May 2008 on
weekly basis (Table-2) is given below:—
Table-1: Market Prices of Select Steel Items at
Mumbai on Monthly basis
(In Rs./tonne)
Pig TMT Wire Rounds Plates HR CR GP Pencil
Iron 10 mm Rods 16 mm 12 mm Coils Coils Sheets Ingot/
LM 8 mm 2.5 mm 0.63 0.63 Billets
Gr. IV mm mm 100 mm
15th Dec., 2007 20000 33000 30800 30800 33750 34250 38000 42750 26600
15th Jan., 2008 21400 35000 32100 33250 34500 34500 38000 42500 28500
15th Feb., 2008 21700 36500 33250 35500 34750 35250 38000 43250 28900
15th Mar., 2008 28800 49150 43175 44975 42375 43675 47600 49675 39825
15th Apr., 2008 36500 47700 44000 45900 47400 48450 52000 55000 38900
13th May, 2008 33500 43950 40250 — — — 47300 50500 34500
(Source: ERU/JPC)
Note: Prices are inclusive of excise duty and sales tax

28
Table-1: Market Prices of Select Steel Items
at Mumbai on Weekly basis
(In Rs./tonne)
Pig TMT Wire Rounds Plates HR CR GP Pencil
Iron 10mm Rods 16 mm 10 mm Coils Coils Shheets Ingot/
LM 8 mm 2.0 0.63 0.63 Billets
Gr. IV mm mm mm 100 mm
15.04.2008 36500 46600 43500 45000 46500 47500 51000 54000 38500
22.04.2008 36500 48100 44000 45800 47250 48300 52000 55000 38900
29.04.2008 36000 47600 43700 45600 45250 45400 49450 53000 38650
06.05.2008 34000 47200 43000 45000 44750 45200 49750 52500 36850
13.05.2008 33500 43950 40250 42800 42500 42950 47300 50500 34500
(Source: ERU/JPC)
Note: Prices are inclusive of excise duty and sales tax
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.,
dated 24th September, 2008]

29
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT‘S REPLIES
-NIL-

30
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
-NIL-

31
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation Sl. No. 4 (Para No. 3.18)
The Committee understand that 11th Five Year Plan allocation of
the Ministry of Steel has been increased to Rs. 61755.59 crore from
Rs. 45678.08 crore because of increase in Internal and Extra Budgetary
Resources (IEBR) to Rs. 61538.59 crore from Rs. 45390.08 crore. But the
Budgetary Support (BS) has been reduced to Rs. 217.00 crore from
Rs. 288.00 crore mainly due to non-allocation of Rs. 54.00 crore to
Bharat Refractories Ltd. (BRL). Further, BS of Rs. 1.00 crore has been
provided to BRL in 2007-08 in view of proposed restructuring scheme
and Rs. 8.00 crore in 2008-09 for Addition, Modification and
Replacement (AMR) schemes. A proposal for financial restructuring
and merger of BRL with Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) is stated
to be under consideration of the Government.
The Ministry have also proposed BS of Only Rs. 1.00 crore for
Bird Group of Companies (BGC), a financially weak and loss making
Government company, for 11th Five Year Plan and the same have
been allocated in 2008-09. No amount has been proposed for the
remaining period of 11th Five Year Plan. The Ministry have informed
that to improve over all performance of BGC, a restructuring proposal
is under their active consideration and appropriate action will be taken
in this regard in due course of time.
The Committee would urge upon the Government to approve the
restructuring proposals of BRL and BGC expeditiously and adequate
funds should be provided to these companies till approval of the
restructuring proposals.
Action Taken
The proposal of Restructuring/re-organisation of Bird Group of
Companies is under consideration in the Ministry in consultation with
Bird Group of Companies.
Government on 24.4.2008 has approved merger of BRL with SAIL
including financial restructuring of BRL. Action has been initiated by

32
both the companies for effecting the merger and the merger process is
expected to be completed by March, 2009.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl. dated
24th September, 2008]
Recommendation Sl.No. 8 (Para No. 3.38)
The Committee note that out of 31 on-going Plan schemes, only 7
schemes pertaining to Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) have so far
been completed. The remaining 24 schemes are presently under various
stages of implementation. The Ministry have attributed the delay in
implementation of scheme mainly to environment and forest clearances.
The Committee observe that delay in environment and forest clearances
is taking unduly long time which is the biggest impediment for steel
sector. The Committee feel that time-bound implementation of on-going
expansion and modernization programmes of steel PSUs and full
utilization of funds in 11th Five Year Plan wholly depends on timely
grant of environment and forest clearances. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should set up a separate monitoring
mechanism for environment and forest clearances for steel projects.
Action taken
As the environment and forestry clearances of all projects (including
steel projects) are approved by the Ministry of Environment and Forests
(MoEF), this Ministry has referred the observations/recommendations
of the committee to MoEF for their consideration.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl. dated
24th September, 2008]
Recommendation Sl.No. 13 (Para No. 5.18)
According to the Ministry, the National Task Force (NTF) for steel
industry on environment was constituted by the Government in 1989
for identification of critical areas and is still in existence. The Ministry
of Steel have submitted that setting up of a new Task Force or extension
of the existing Task Force is considered desirable in view of the
changing phase of the Indian iron and steel industry with massive
capacity addition and manifold increase in the requirement of iron
ore, coal and other inputs and the related environmental considerations.
The Committee observe that the steel PSUs viz. Kudremukh Iron Ore
Company Ltd. (KIOCL) and NMDC Ltd. have already been affected
because of the closure of mines due to orders of Hon’ble Supreme

33
Court on account of environmental/ecological concerns. The Committee
feel that there is need to strike a balance between the environment
and growing steel sector for development of the economy. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should re-
constitute the existing Task Force to look into the emerging
environmental issues affecting the steel sector.
Action Taken
The National Task Force for Steel Industry was constituted by the
M/o Environment and Forests, Government of India. Therefore, the
recommendations of the Standing Committee have been forwarded to
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and Ministry of Environment
& Forests for suitable follow-up-action.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(3)/2008-Parl.,
dated 24th September, 2008]
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December, 2008 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

34
ANNEXURE I
(vide Recommendation Sl. No. 3 of Chapter II)
REASONS FOR REDUCTION OF ANNUAL PLAN OUTLA Y IN RE
2007-08 VIS-A-VIS THE APPROVED OUTLAY FOR 2007-08 (BE)
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name Approved Revised Shortfall Reasons for reduction of
No. of PSU Plan outlay Plan outlay in RE outlay in RE 2007-08
2007-08 (BE) 2007-08 (RE)
12 3 4 5 6
1. SAIL 2641.00 2007.00 (-) 634.00 The Plan outlay for 2007-08
(BE) was finalized in Sept.-
Oct, 2006 and was based on
the projected physical
progress and scheduled
completion of the schemes/
projects during 2007-08.
However, the fund allocation
for various schemes had to
be revised downward in RE
2007-08 due to delays in
actual progress of work on
these schemes and
reprioritization of schemes in
time with the expansion
plans of the company.
2. RINL 3056.70 1861.15 (-) 1195.55 The major reasons for the
reduction in RE was scaling
down of the estimates for the
6.3 MTPA capacity expansion
scheme. Orignally it was
anticipted that work on all
major packages would
commence at the beginning
of F Y 2007-08 and therefore,
an outlay of Rs. 2500 crore
was provided in BE 2007-08
for the scheme. However,
due to delay in fixing of
Project Consullant, extension

35
12 3 4 5 6
of time for opening of
tenders to get more
participation, bidders seeking
more time for submission of
offers, etc., signing of
contracts for major packages
got extended up to the
middle of the 3rd quarter of
2007-08. Consequently, there
was delay in commencement
of site activities and hence
the outlay for the expansion
scheme was reduced to
Rs. 1500 crore in RE 2007-08.
Thus, of the total reduction
of Rs. 1195.55 crore in the RE
2007-08 outlay of RINL
Rs. 1000 crore is accounted
for by reduced estimates for
the capacity expansion
scheme.
Further the outlays for some
of the other schemes of the
company like Coke Oven
Battery No IV (Phase II)
Pulverised Coal Injection. An
Separation Plant. Blast
Furnace I (Cal. 1 Repairs)
and Acquisition of Iron Ore
Mines were also reduced in
RE 2007-08. Broadly , reasons
for reduced outlays for
these schemes are delay in
fixation of consultants, non-
finalisation of contracts,
delays in tendering and
receipt of bids, delay in
execution of works, pending
of company’s applications for
iron ore/coking coal/
limestone mines with
various State Govts. and
reprioritization of schemes in
line with the expansion plans
of the company .

36
12 3 4 5 6
3. NMDC 250.00 150.00 (-) 100.00 Reduction of outlay in RE
2007-08 was mainly due to
the downward revision in
the allocations for the
following schemes:
(i) Windmill in Karnataka in
view of the deviations in the
technical and commercial
terms between the tender
and the offers, there was
delay in the finalization of
tenders and hence the
scheme allocation of Rs. 50.00
crore in BE 2007-08 had to
be revised to Rs. 11.30 crore
in RE.
(ii) AMR (including
Township)-Provision had to
be revised to Rs. 58 crore
from Rs. 100 crore as the
tender for 5 nos. shovels had
to be canclled due to poor
response and the tendering
process had to be restared.
(iii) R&D Schemes-As the
selection of type of hydrogen
generator for one of the R&D
pilot projects ‘Production of
Carbon Free Sponge Iron
Powder from Blue Dust
could not be finalized
provison for R&D had to be
reduced to Rs. 10 crore in RE
from the BE allocation of
Rs. 25 crore.
4. KIOCL 75.00 45.00 (-) 30.00 Reduction in the outlay for
the following schemes
resulted in KIOCL reducing
its total outlay in RE
2007-08:
(i) Railway siding at
Mangalore and Construction

37
12 3 4 5 6
of bulk material handling
facilities—As the land
required for both these
schemes was under litigation,
no work could he executed
on the two schemes till Sept-
Oct., 2007. However,
expecting the resolution of
the dispute before the end of
F Y 2007-08, the BE provision
of Rs. 17 crore was reduced
to Rs. 10 crore in RE.
(ii) Ductile Iron Spun Pipe
Plant—This scheme was
earlier being implemented by
KISCO, subsidiary company
of KIOCL., Following merger
of KISCO with KIOCL w.e.f.
1.4.2007, the order for which
was received from BIFR only
by the end of July, 2007,
global tender though floated
could not result in placement
of order due to certain
contractual conditions/
clarifications. Thereafter.
Board of KIOCL, directed to
issue a fresh global tender.
Consequently , the BE
provision of Rs. 30 crore for
the scheme was reduced to
Rs. 14 crore in RE.
(iii) Other Mine
Development—Though the
Govt, of Karnataka had
agreed to allot 50% of
Ramandurg deposit to
KIOCL., the matter fell under
litigation between the State
Govt and other parties. As
the issue was sub-judice, the
BE allocation of Rs. 5 crore
for the scheme was reduced
to NIL at the RE stage.

38
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2008-09) HELD ON 5.12.2008 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1530 hrs. to 1720 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya —  Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
4. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
5. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
7. Smt. Karuna Shukla
8. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
11. Shri Jeasudas Seelam
12. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
** ** **
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up first agenda regarding
consideration and adoption of the following draft Action Taken
Reports:-
(i) ** ** **

39
(ii) ** ** **
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Thirty-third Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(2007-08) on “Demands for Grants (2008-09)” of the Ministry
of Steel.
3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports. The
Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports and
present the same to both the House of Parliament.
4. ** ** **
5. ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
**Does not pertain to this Report.

40
ANNEXURE III
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 14
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by 11
the Government
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6,
7, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14)
Percentage of total 78.57
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not Nil
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of Nil
the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 3
replies of the Government are still awaited
(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4, 8 and 13)
Percentage of total 21.43

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.