 
4 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2004-2005) 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2004-2005)  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2004 / Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 


FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON COAL AND STEEL 
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2004-2005)  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  23.12. 2004 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on   23.12. 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2004 / Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

CC&S. No.4   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. 20.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  
Business in Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,  
New Delhi-110 005. 

CONTENTS 
  
 
               
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
  
CHAPTER I  Report    
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which final replies 
of the Government  have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
 ANNEXURES 
 
I. Status of ongoing Environm ental Measures and Subsidence 
Control (E MSC) schem es in Eas tern Coalfields Ltd. (E CL), 
Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL) and Central Coalfields Ltd. 
(CCL) 
 
II. 
 
Details of Rehabilitation Control of Fire and Subsidence (R CFS) 
schemes 
 
III. 
  
Minutes of Seventh sitting of the Standing Co mmittee on Coal 
and Steel (2004-05) held on 22.12.2004  
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by the Governm ent on the 
Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel (2004-05) 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2004-05)          
 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar    - Chairman 
 Members 
            
           Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Bikash Chowdhury 
6. Shri  Chandra Sekhar Dubey 
7. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
9. Shri Nitish Kumar 
10. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam 
11. Shri  Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta 
12. Shri Hemlal Murmu 
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad Alias Sadhu Yadav 
14. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
16. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
18. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
19. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
20. Shri Ramsewak Singh (Babuji) 
21. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Devdas Apte 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
24. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
25. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad 
26. Shri B.J.Panda 

27. Shri Jibon Roy 
28. Shri G.K.Vasan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.K.Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri B.D.Dhyani  - Sr. Committee Assistant  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, pres ent this Fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Action Taken by the Government on the recomme ndations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  on “Demands  for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Coal”.  
 
2.  The First Report of the St anding Committee on Coal and Steel  was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 25th August, 2004. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 25th November,  2004.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel c onsidered and adopted th is Report at their 
sitting held on 22nd  December, 2004.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the G overnment on the recommendations contained in 
the First Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-IV.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    ANANTH KUMAR 
 22   December, 2004                                               Chairman, 
1    Pausa , 1926 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER -I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the First Report (F ourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Coal and Steel on “Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Coal” which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 25.8.2004.    
 
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised as follows:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that ha ve been accepted by the Government:  
   
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13 and 14.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies:  
 
Sl. Nos. 6 and 11.  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee. 
 
 Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replie s of the Government are still 
awaited. 
 
 Sl. No. 15. 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the recommendations which have been 
categorised as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest. 
   
1.4 The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given to the implementation of 
recommendations accepted by the Government.  In case, where it is not possible for the Government 
to implement the recommendations in letter and spir it for any reasons, the matter should be reported 
to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Acti on Taken by the Government on some of their 
Recommendations/Observations made in the First Report. 

A.  Formulation of Vision Document 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1, Para No.1.13) 
 
1.6 The Committee had observed that in the abse nce of a Vision Document, Department of Coal 
was not in a position to plan and act in order to meet the future coal demand.  The Committee, 
therefore, expressed grave concern for want of a vision document for the coal for the next 20-25 
years, a long-term perspective plan because of which not only the performance of coal companies 
was being crippled but also there would be a yawning gap of more than 95 million tonnes in the next 
five to ten years in the demand and supply of coal that was required for core sectors like power 
generation steel, aluminium and infrastructure.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended 
that the Department of Coal should come forward with a vision document, i.e. “Coal – 2025” 
without any further delay and constitute a task force for holding consultation/discussions with 
experts and industry at large, in this direction, so that the Department could have a long term view of 
the industry. 
 
1.7 In their reply, the Department of Coal ha s started that action for drawing up Coal Vision 
2025 has already been initiated.  Views of Coal India Limited and other stake holders have been 
sought in this regard. 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended that the Minist ry of Coal should come forward with a 
Vision Document, i.e. “Coal-2025”  without any further delay and constitute a Task Force for 
holding consultations/discussions to have a long-term view of the industry.  The Ministry have 
stated in their brief reply that they have in itiated action for drawing up “Coal Vision-2025” and 
views of Coal India Limited and other stake ho lders have been sought in this regard.  The 
Committee are extremely unhappy with the sketchy re ply of the Government which shows utter lack 
of urgency and direction. The Committee are surprised that no Task Force has so far been 
constituted to hold discussions with the industry  and no time frame has b een chalked out for the 
finalization of the Vision Document. 
 
1.9 The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate that the Ministry should at once constitute a 
Task Force and prepare a time frame for preparation/finalization of the Vision Document, i.e. “Coal-
2025” and keep the Committee apprised of the progress made at periodic intervals of one month.   
 

B.  Need for Realistic Estimates 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No.2.10) 
 
1.10 The Committee had observed that the budgetary a llocations (Plan) of the Department of Coal 
had been downsized year–after-year. In the year 2001-02, the allocation was Rs 652.00 crore, but it 
was only Rs. 223.32 crore in the current year. In just four years, the allocations under the budgetary 
support had been brought down drastically, from Rs. 652.00 crore to Rs. 223.32 crore. The 
utilisation of the funds had also hardly been near the estimates. Some of the reasons given by the 
Department for non-utilisation of the budgetary support were: poor progress of some of the on-going 
projects, non-implementation of schemes of restoration of abandoned mines and non receipt of 
proposals from the coal companies. The Committee were not convinced with the arguments of the 
Department and these clearly indicated administrative slackness on the part of the Department. The 
Committee further observed that the funds “saved” were given to the Department for expending 
them fully for the various projects. The “savings” were because of the under utilisation of the funds. 
In other words, it was because of the inactiveness of the Department of Coal, in implementing the 
projects. The Committee further noted that the IEBR component for Coal India Limited (CIL), 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) and Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd. (SCCL) were never made 
realistic in the last four years. The CIL’s IEBR component for the last year, i.e. 2003-04 had been 
revised to Rs. 1,846.00 crore from Rs. 2,240.00 crore but the actual achievement remained only  
Rs.1,224.65 crore, about 66 per cent achievement of R.E. Likewise, the IEBR component of NLC 
during 2003-04 of Rs.455.40 crore was revised downward to Rs.314.25 crore and the actual 
remained at Rs.158.04 crore. It was only 50% achievement of the RE. The financial achievements of 
SCCL, during the same period had also been similar to those of CIL and NLC. The Committee 
desired that the Government should take steps to ensure that IEBR component of coal and lignite 
companies were projected on realistic basis so as to ensure that the plans of various undertakings do 
not go haywire because of non-realisation of IEBR component year-after-year. 
 

1.11 In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of Coal has stated that the downsizing of the 
budgetary allocation during 2004-05 as compared to 2001-02 is due  to the reasons that during 2001-
02 NLC was given budgetary support of Rs.282.69 crore. During the subsequent years NLC has 
stopped availing budgetary support and is financing its projects entire ly from its internal and extra 
budgetary resources. CIL and SCCL are also not being given budgetary support by the Government 
and their projects are being financed from their IEBRs. The main reasons fo r under utilisation of 
IEBR of the companies is mainly due to delay in obtaining environmental clearance, delay in 
rehabilitation of villagers, delay in acquisition of  forestry and   non-forestry land, delay in 
procurement of HEMM due to court cases and change of norms of utilisation of HEMM. In order to 
ensure that the IEBR component of the companies are projected on realistic basis the companies are 
advised to make realistic assessmen t of the project cost and the expe nditure involved at the project 
formulation stage itself. The meeting are held on quarterly basis in the Department to review the 
physical and financial performance of the company.  The companies are also advised to hold review 
meetings on a monthly basis in this regard. The de ficiencies in the performance are discussed at 
length and companies are advised to take concrete  steps to achieve the targets set out in annual 
plan/annual action plan.    
 
1.12 The Committee had taken note of downsizing of  budgetary allocations of the Ministry of 
Coal along with under-utilization thereof and felt that the administrative slackness compounded the 
mess in implementation of the projects.  The Committee were also unhappy  with the unrealistic 
IEBR component in the Budget Estimates of the Coal  India Ltd.(CIL) and other Coal companies and 
had desired realistic projections by the Ministry, CIL and its subsidiaries. 
 
1.13 The Committee are extremely unsatisfied with th e reply of the Ministry which is merely of a 
routine nature devoid of any concrete measures to ensure the realistic Budget Estimates.  The 
Committee note with concern that no proactive ro le was played by the Ministry/CIL to get the 
required clearances expedited and obviate delays in various projects.  The Committee would like to 
emphasise the need to review the entire gamut of  project planning, formulation and implementation 
strategy so that scarce budgetary resources are allocated on a realistic basis and utilized gainfully as 
well.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific measures taken by the Ministry at the 
earliest. 
 
C.  Procurement of Heavy Earth Moving Machines (HEMM)  

 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No. 3.8) 
 
1.14 The Committee were distressed to note that there had been inordinate delay in procurement 
of HEMM in the Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiaries as also in SCCL leading to less utilisation of 
funds allocated for the said purpose.  The utilisati on had been less than 50 % over the last 2-3 years.  
Whereas the financial targets for the year 200 1-02 for procurement of HEMM were Rs.1,063.32 
crore, the actual utilistion rema ined at Rs.454.02 crore.  Like-wis e, in the year 2002-03, it has been 
more deplorable.  During the years 2001-02, 2002- 03 and 2003-04, the utilisation of funds by SCCL 
for the above purpose had been as low as 33%, 65% and 16 % respectively.    The reasons adduced 
by the Department were hardly convincing.  The Committee observed that previously, as per the 
stipulation of Department of Public Enterprises,  10% price preference had to be given to a public 
sector company.  It led to account case by a pr ivate company and thereby delayed the procurement 
process.  Now all such bottlenecks/problems had been solved.  Therefore, the Committee hoped that 
from the current year onwards, there would be  no delay in procurement of HEMM and the funds 
would be utilised to the fullest extent.  At th e same time, the Committee desired that a time bound 
programme should be drawn up for the procurement of equipments/machines and responsibilities 
should be given to some senior officers in this regard. 
 
1.15 In their reply, the Department of Coal has st ated that in Coal India Ltd., the procurement case 
which is sub judice in the Hon'ble Supreme Court is still to be disposed of. As per the interim decree  
of Hon'ble Supreme Court, order for 40% quantity of HEMM is to be placed and balance 60% 
awaits the final judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court. The matter has been listed for final hearing in 
the year 2005.  
 
1.16 The mid-term review meeting has been held and while preparing RE the realistic estimate has 
been made regarding procurement of HEMM. It is expected that during the current year utilisation 
on this account will improve.  
 
1.17 In every coal producing company, the material  management Department is functioning and is 
headed by senior officers in the rank of General Ma nager who reports directly to the Director of the 
company. 
 

1.18 With regard to the Singareni Collieries Comp any Ltd.(SCCL), the Department has stated that  
the details of funds provided for HEMM vis-à-vis actuals for the year 2001-02 to 2003-04 are: 
    ( R s . i n  c r o r e s )  
_________________________________ 
Year           BE           RE      Actual           
   2001-02     65.97     63.12       20.93 
   2002-03      43.86     14.82         9.73 
   2003-04    27.32     27.49         4.31  
 
1.19 The provision for HEMM is proposed whil e preparing Annual Plans on the basis of  
CMPDIL Norms against survey-off of equipment.  But, while the equipment is proposed for survey-
off, again a thorough monitoring was done by introduction of condition monitoring  cell and the 
economic viability  for survey-off  vis-à-vis reconditioning has been considered.  Accordingly, 
procurement of some of the equipment is deferred, viz. 85T & 35T Dumpers, Drills and Dozers. 
Hence, the envisaged expenditure could not be made. 
 
 1.20 Certain HEMM were gainfully re-deployed in place of new HEMM/replacement  from the 
closed/being closed projects.  This also contributed for deferment of procurement of HEMM.  
HEMM proposed for new projects like Kasipet OCP, Sathupalli OCP and Khairagura OCPs were 
deferred as they could not come up as expected. 
 
1.21 Regarding 2003-04:   Against the proposal, orde rs were placed to the tune of  Rs.11.00 crore 
but expenditure booked has been only Rs 4.31 crore as most of the equipment ordered  are in 
pipeline and yet to be commissioned during 2004-05. 
 
1.22 While  preparing  item–wise  requirement of  the annual plan,  time  frame for  procuring the 
equipment/machine is  incorporated. 
 
1.23 Monitoring of capital expenditure is  reviewed at the highest level of 
Director(Finance) regularly. 
 
1.24 The Committee were distressed at the inordina te delays in procurement of HEMM in Coal 
India Ltd. and its subsidiaries with less than 50 per cent utilization of funds allocated for the said 
purpose and had, therefore, recommended that a time bound programme should be drawn up for 
procurement of equipments and machines.  The Committee had al so recommended that the coal 

companies should re-assess their requirements of HEMM and utilize the machines to the maximum 
extent.  The Ministry has, in its reply stated that  as per the interim order of Hon’ble Supreme Court, 
the  orders for 40 per cent quantity of HEMM can  be placed now and the balance 60 per cent should 
await the final judgment of the Court.  The Mini stry has also stated that the mid-term review 
meetings have been held and while preparing RE, the realistic estimate ha s been made regarding 
procurement for HEMM and expected that during th e current year, utilization on this account will 
improve.  The Committee, however, have serious a pprehensions that the ongoing projects of Coal 
India Ltd. would be adversely affected with depl eted procurement and truncated availability of 
HEMM.  The Committee also feel th at it has become all the more v ital for the Ministry to improve 
the utilization of HEMM to tide ove r the crisis situation.  The Co mmittee would like the Ministry to 
urgently formulate a contingency plan to meet the shortages of HEMM and improve the level of 
their utilization. 
 
1.25 The Committee would also like to be apprised at the earliest of the co ncrete steps taken by 
the Ministry in this regard.  
 
D.   Implementation of Projects by Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
Recommendation(Sl. No.9, Para No.4.25) 
 
1.26 The Committee were sad to note that after in curring a substantial amount of project 
formulation, etc., the NLC had not been able to implement the Barsingsar lignite mine and power 
projects even after a lapse of about 14 years due to one reason or the other.  The Committee were 
fully aware that a proposal in this  regard was originated in 1987 and the projects were sanctioned in 
1991, during the 8 th Plan period.  But, due to fund constraint s, the projects did not proceed further.  
The Rajasthan Government’s efforts to develop it through a private develope r also went awry.   
However, NLC once again started working on the pr oject and after completing all the formalities, 
are now awaiting the approval of PIB.  The Comm ittee were in agreement with the Secretary, 
Department of Coal that there is a need to compress the time taken in project formulation and project 
approval.  The Committee, therefore, had desi red that the Government should prepare a draft 
proposal on this aspect  immediately for which an Empowered Committee should be set up, as 
suggested by the Department of Coal for the speedy approval of the projects and to commission 
them faster.  So far as the Barsingsar(Rajasth an) Lignite-cum-Power Project was concerned, the 
Department of Coal/Neyveli Lignite Corporati on should pursue the matter vigorously with the 

Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for an early approval.  The Committee had desired 
that they would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
1.27 The Government in its reply has stated that in  November 1987 an MoU was signed among 
the Government of India, Government of Rajasthan and NLC  for developing a lignite mine with a 
capacity of 1.7 million tonnes per annum at a cost of Rs.242.31 crore and setting up of 240 MW (2 x 
120 MW) lignite-based power plant at a cost of Rs.585.73 crore.  The project was sanctioned by GOI 
in April, 1991 at a total estimated cost of Rs.828.04 crore.  Subsequently, due to non-availability of 
funds, GOI decided to drop the project in Octo ber 1996.  M/s Hindustan Vidhyut Corporation 
(HVC) was offered to take over the project as the sponsor by the G overnment of Rajasthan.  Since 
there was no progress in respect of HVC, NLC has proposed to take over the project.  
 
1.28 A Memorandum of Understanding between Government of Rajasthan, Ministry of Coal and 
NLC was signed on 10 June 2002 to restart the projec t by NLC.  The Barsingsar Lignite-cum-Power 
Project has been considered by the PIB in its m eeting held on  19 August 2004 and recommended to 
CCEA. 
 
1.29 The Committee had desired the Government to set up an Empowered Committee to look into 
the various aspects of project formulation and project approval. However, the Committee observe 
that  the reply of the Government is silent on this aspect. The Committee would like the Government 
to ensure that the Empowered Committee is constituted immediately to look into the whole gamut of 
project formulation to project approval and finally their speedy implementation. 
 
1.30 The Committee had also desired that the Bars ingsar Lignite and Power Project in Rajasthan 
should be approved at the earliest. The Committee noted that a Memoran dum of Understanding 
between Government of Rajasthan, Ministry of Coal and Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) was 
signed on 16 June 2002 to start the project by NLC but the project has been cleared by Public 
Investment Board (PIB) on 19 August 2004 and recommended to CCEA. The Committee take a 
serious view of the fact that more than two years have already el apsed since an MoU was signed in 
June 2002 and the approval from th e Cabinet is still awaited. The Co mmittee, therefore, expect that 
the Government would approve the project immediately. The Committee also hope that this project 
will take off smoothly and will not be dropped for want of funds as had happened in 1996. 
 

E.   Disposal of Urea Plant 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10, Para No.4.26) 
 
1.31 The Committee noted that Urea plant of NLC had been closed in January-2003 as the 
Company had accumulated a large stock of Urea whic h could not be sold due to availability of 
imported urea at cheaper price. The Committee ha d recommended that the Company should sell the 
accumulated stock at the best available price, if any stock had been left with it. The Company should 
also examine whether there was any possibility of restructuring the urea uni t and if not, then how 
they proposed to deal with closed plant. The Committee should be informed of the decision taken in 
the matter. 
 
1.32 The  Ministry of Coal, in its Action Taken Reply has stated that the accumulated stock of urea 
has been already sold. As of now, there is no stock of Urea . Restructuring the unit will not help in 
avoiding losses. Therefore, NLC has decided to dispose of the plant. The plant and equipments have 
been valued and M/s MSTC, a Central Public Sect or Undertaking, has b een entrusted with the 
disposal activities of the Urea Plant. 
 
1.33 The Committee note that the Mi nistry of Coal/Neyveli Lignite Corporation have already 
decided to dispose of the Urea Plant as it was not felt proper/economical to revive the same.  The 
Committee are, however, disappointed to note that the Urea Plant could not be disposed of even after 
the lapse of about two years leading to the considerable loss to Neyveli Lignite Corporation as its 
value is depreciating year after year.  The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend that Neyveli Lignite 
Corporation should impress upon M/s. MSTC to expedite the process of dis posal of the plant and 
machinery.   
 
F.   Environmental Measures & Subsidence Control (EMSC)    
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 5.22) 
 
 
1.34 The Committee were perturbed to note the sluggish pace at which different schemes under 
Environmental Measures & Subsidence Control (EMS C) were being implemen ted resulting in the 
under–utilization of budgeted amount.  During last year i.e. 2003-04, a provision of Rs. 27.56 crore 
made at the BE stage was reduced to Rs 10.92 cror e at RE stage but the actual utilization has been 
almost nil.  The Committee noted th at during the last four  years, the Department of Coal had failed 

to utilise the budgeted amount.  The Committee furt her observed that out of total 30 schemes 
sanctioned by the Government of India under EMSC, 14 schemes spilled over to 10 th Plan from 9 th 
Plan.  Out of 14 schemes, only two could be complete d so far and rest were said to be under various 
stages of implementation.  The various reasons a dvanced by the Department of Coal for the non-
implementation of these schemes during 9 th Plan resulting in spilling over to  10 th Plan are long lead 
and bad road conditions during rainy seasons, slow progress of the scheme, due to break down of 
machines, non-rehabilitation of the people, delay in start of the plantation and delay in procurement 
of plant and machinery, etc.  The Committee took se rious note of the delay in the implementation of 
various schemes under Environmental Measures & S ubsidence  Control as al l the reasons indicated 
above were nothing but administrative slackness on the part of the Department.  The Committee 
opined that there had been serious deficiencies in the implementation of such schemes.  The 
Committee, therefore, desired that Government should review the schemes immediately, propose 
them and implement without further loss of time.  The Committee recommended that the 
Department should introduce system of personal re sponsibility of the o fficers responsible for 
implementation of such schemes.  
 
1.35 In its Action Taken Reply, the Mi nistry of Coal has stated that:- 
 
1. The implementation of various schemes under Environmental Measures and Subsidence Control 
have been reviewed and priorities have been deci ded.  Activities are being planned for new jobs 
along with time bound implementation programme. 
 
2. Monitoring is being done at various leve ls including subsidiary/Coal India Ltd and 
Department of Coal for speedier implementation of such schemes and firming up the time 
schedule,  milestone activities budget provision vis-a-vis achievements, expenditure etc. A  
Monitoring Committee headed by Secretary (Coal),  has been formed which includes 
representatives from respective State Governments  CIL/BCCL/ECL and related 
Ministries/Departments to review the implementation work of various subsidence/fire control 
and rehabilitation schemes undertaken in ECL and BCCL. 
 
3.  At present the Environmental Measures and Subsidence Control (EMSC) Scheme is approved at 
Ministry level. To cut down time it has been decided that henceforth,  all EMSC schemes will be 
approved by the Company Board. 
 
4.  To take up an early completion, the Department of Coal  has made arrangement  of additional 
funds to take up work of Environmental  Control Measures of Raniganj and Jharia Coalfields. 
 
5.  Coal India Ltd management has decided to appoint an IAS officer from State Govt. on 
deputation, senior to rank of DC for co-ordination with State Govt. for early implementation of 
the programme. 
 
        

1.36 The Ministry had also enclosed a detailed status of the ongoing EMSC and other schemes. 
 
1.37 The Committee are quite unhappy  to learn about the pathetic status of various on-going 
Environmental Measures and Subsidence Control (EMSC) schemes in Eastern Coalfields Limited 
and reclamation of mined out area s in Central Coalfields Limited.   The Committee  note that in 
reality, there is no improvement even after the steps initiated by the Government for the speedy 
implementation of various schemes under EMSC .  The Committee feel th at unless sincere and 
concerted efforts are made by the all concerned,  the successful implementation and completion of 
the projects will always remain doubtful.  The Committee expect that Ministry of Coal and Coal 
India Limited will ensure adequate availability of funds for the projects under EMSC and take 
necessary steps to accomplish the desired objectives  within a time bound ma nner.    The Committee 
also desire that there should be no funds constraint for the projects under EMSC and the allocated 
funds are utilized fully. 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (S1. No.1, Para No. 1.13) 
 
The Committee observed that in the absence of  a Vision Document, Department of Coal is 
not in a position to plan and act in order to meet the future coal demand. The Committee, therefore, 
express grave concern for want of  a vision document for the coal for the next 20-25 years, a long-
term perspective plan because of which not onl y the performance of coal companies is being 
crippled but also there will be a yawning gap of mo re than 95 million tonnes in the next five to ten 
years in the demand and supply of coal that is re quired for core sectors like power generation, steel, 
aluminium and infrastructure. The Committee, ther efore, strongly recommend that the Department 
of Coal should come forward with a vision document, i.e. "Coal-2025" without any further delay and 
constitute a task force for holding consultation/ discussions with experts and industry at large, in this 
direction, so that the Department can have a long term view of the industry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Coal has initiated action for drawing up Coal Vision 2025. Views of Coal 
India Limited and other stake holders have been sought in this regard. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol. IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Paras 1.8 &1.9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S1. No.2, Para No. 2.10) 
 
The Committee observed that the budgetary allo cations (Plan) of the Department of Coal 
have been downsized year-after-year. In the year  2001-02, the allocation was Rs.652.00 crore, but it 
is only Rs.223.32 crore in the current year. In ju st four years, the al location under the budgetary 
support have been brought down drastically, from Rs.652.00 crore to Rs.223.32 crore. The 
utilisation of the funds has also hardly been near the estimates. Some of the reasons given by the 
Department for non-utilisation of the budgetary support  were: poor progress of some of the on-
going projects, non-implementation of schemes of restoration of abandoned mines and non receipt of 
proposals from the coal companies. The Committee are not convinced with the arguments of the 
Department and these are clear indicator of admini strative slackness on the part of the Department. 
The Committee further observe that the funds" save d" were given to the Department for expending 
them fully for the various projects. The "savings" was because of the under utilisation of the funds. 
In other words, it was because of the inactiveness of the Department of Coal, in implementing the 
projects. The Committee further note that the IEBR component for Coal India Limited, Neyveli 
Lignite Corporation and Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd. were never made realistic in the last four 
years. The CIL's IEBR component  for the last year, i.e. 2003-04 has been revised to Rs.1846 crore 
from Rs. 2,240.00 crore but the actual achieveme nt remained only Rs.1224.65 crore, about 66% 
achievement of RE. Likewise, the IEBR component of NLC during 2003-04 of Rs. 455.40 crore was 
revised downward to Rs.314.25 crore and the actual  remained at Rs.158.04 crore. It was only 50% 

achievement of the RE. The financial achievements of SCCL, during the same period has also been 
similar to those of CIL and NLC. The Committee desi re that the Government should take steps to 
ensure that IEBR component of coal and lignite comp anies were projected on realistic basis so as to 
ensure that the plans of various undertakings do not go haywire because of non-realisation of IEBR 
component year-after-year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The downsizing of the budgetary allocation during 2004-05 as compared to 2001-02 is due to 
the reasons that during 2001-02 NLC was given budge tary support of Rs.282.69 crore. During the 
subsequent years NLC has stopped availing budgetary support and is financing its projects entirely 
from its internal and extra budgetary resources. CIL and SCCL are also not being given budgetary 
support by the Government and their projects ar e being financed from their IEBRs. The main 
reasons for under utilisation of IEBR of the co mpanies is mainly due to delay in obtaining 
environmental clearance, delay in rehabilitation of villagers, delay in acquisition of forestry and non-
forestry land, delay in procurement of HEMM due to court cases and change of norms of utilisation 
of HEMM. In order to ensure th at the IEBR component of the comp anies are projected on realistic 
basis the companies are advised to make realistic assessment of the project cost and the expenditure 
involved at the project formulation stage itself. The meeting are held on quarterly basis in the 
Department to review the physical and financial performance of the company. The companies are 
also advised to hold review meetings on a monthly basis in this regard. The deficiencies in the 
performance are discussed at length and companies ar e advised to take concrete steps to achieve the 
targets set out in annual plan/annual action plan. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.12 & 1.13 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 2.11) 
 
Since under-utilisation of funds has a direct bearing on the financial and physical targets of 
any organisation, the Committee strongly feel that under utilisation of fund would have hit hard the 
on-going projects/scheme of the Department. The Committee do not find the reasons given by the 
Department in this regard convincing. The Committee,  therefore, take a serious note of lackadaisical 
approach of the Department in failing to utilise the budget estimates prudently. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Physical target of CIL for coal production an d off-take have been more than the targets 
during 2003-04. Production was 306.38 M.T. against targets of 298.50 M.T. and off-take was 304.51 
M.T. against 299.85 M.T. during 2002-03. During the mid term review of Xth Plan, it has been 
proposed to increase the promotional drilling from the unutilised fund of s upplementary services. 
The approval is awaited. Proposal for providing mo re funds for taking up more detailed drilling in 
Non-CIL blocks has been submitted during the mid te rm review of Xth Plan. The proposal is likely 
to be approved shortly. Under R&D activities th ere is an on-going high value project on coal bed 
methane recovery. Another project on underground gasification of lignite is in the pipe line. Such 
projects are expected to improve significantly the utilisation of funds for R&D activities. Though 

there was under utilisation of IEBR by SCCL dur ing 2003-04, the company has achieved all its 
physical and financial targets duri ng the year. The physical targets of NLC for production of lignite 
and power generation has been more in 2003-04 than the previous year 2002-03. During 2003-04 
lignite production has been 20.56 M.T. agains t 18.62 M.T. of 2002-03 and power generation has 
been 16388.97 Million Units against the 1496 9.95 Million Unit during 2002-03. Financial 
performance of NLC has also been encouraging. During 2003-04 the net worth of the company has 
been Rs. 6824.25 crore against Rs.5974.54 crore during 2002-03. 
 
However, Committee's observations have been taken note off and will be kept in mind while 
preparing budget and monitoring by Ministry will be strengthened. 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Recommendation (S1. No.4, Para No. 3.8) 
 
The Committee are distressed to note that there has been inordinate delay in procurement of 
HEMM in the Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiaries as also in SCCL leading to less utilisation of funds 
allocated for the said purpose. The utilisation has been  less than 50% over the last two, three years. 
Whereas the financial targets for the year 2001-02 for procurement of HEMM were Rs.1063.32 Crs., 
the actual utilisation remained at Rs.454.02 Crs. Like-wise, in the year 2002-03, it has been more 
deplorable. During the years 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04, the utilisation of funds by SCCL for 
the above purpose has been as low as 33%, 65% and 16% respectively. The reasons adduced by the 
department are hardly convincing. The Committee understand that previously, as per the stipulation 
of Department of Public Enterprises, 10% pri ce preference had to be gi ven to a public sector 
company. It led to a court case by a private comp any and thereby delayed the procurement process. 
Now all such bottlenecks/problems have been solved. Therefore, the Committee hope that from the 
current year onwards, there will be no delay in pr ocurement of HEMM and the funds will be utilised 
to the fullest extent. At the same time, the Co mmittee desire that a time bound programme should be 
drawn up for the procurement of equipments/machines  and responsibilities should be given to some 
senior officers to this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
CIL 
 
The procurement case which is sub-judice in the Hon'ble Supreme Court is still to be 
disposed off. As per the interim decree of Hon'ble Supreme Court, order for 40% quantity of HEMM 
is to be placed and balance 60% awaits for the final judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court. As per the 
order of Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in its sitti ng held on 9.8.04, the matter shall be listed for 
final hearing in the year 2005. Till such time the procurement of 60% of requirement of HEMM 
against cases (sub-judiced in Hon'ble Supreme Court) may not be finalised. 
 
The mid term review meeting has been held and while preparing RE the realistic estimate has 
been made regarding procurement of HEMM. It is expected that during curr ent year utilisation on 
this account will improve. 
In every coal, producing company, the material  management Department is functioning and 
is headed by senior officers in the rank of Genera l Manager who reports directly to the Director of 
the company. 
 

SCCL 
 
The details of funds provided for HEMM Vis-a-Vis actuals for the year 2001-02 to 2003-04 
are:- 
 
   (Rs. Crores)
Year BE RE Actual 
2001-02 65.97 63.12 20.93 
2002-03 43.86 14.82 9.73 
2003-04 27.32 27.49 4.31 
 
1. The provision for HEMM is proposed while pr eparing Annual Plans on the basis of CMPDIL 
Norms against survey-off of equipment. But while equipment is proposed for survey-off, again a 
thorough monitoring was done by introduction of condition monitoring cell and the economic 
viability for survey-off vis-a-vis reconditioning has been considered. Accordingly, procurement of 
some of the equipment is deferred, viz. 85T & 35T Dumpers, Drills and Dozers. Hence, the 
envisaged expenditure could not be made. 
 
2. Certain HEMM were gainfully re-deployed in place of new HEMM/ replacement from the 
closed/being closed projects. This also contributed for deferment of procurement of HEMM. HEMM 
proposed for new projects like Kasipet OCP, Sat hupalli OCP and Khairagura OCPs were deferred as 
they could not come up as expected. 
 
3. Regarding 2003-04. Against the proposal, orders  were placed to the tune of 11 crores but 
expenditure booked is only Rs. 4.31 crore as most of the equipment ordered are in pipe line and yet 
to be commissioned during 2004-05. 
 
4. While preparing item-wise requirement of  annual plan, time frame for procuring the 
equipment/machine is incorporated. 
 
5. Monitoring of capital expenditu re is reviewed at the highest level of Director (Finance) 
regularly. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/U4-IF (Vol IV) dated 24th November, 2004_ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.24 & 1.25 of the Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S1. No.5, Para No. 3.9) 
 
The Committee also note that there has been some savings in the procurement of machines 
on account of change in norms for utilisation of HEMM. The Committee recommended that Coal 
companies should re-assess their requirements of HEMM and utilise the mach ines to the maximum 
extent. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
CIL 
 
Revised productivity norms, wherever applicab le and enhanced survey off norms of 
equipment has been taken into consideration by th e subsidiaries, while assessing the requirement of 
equipment for procurement. 
 
Task force has been constituted in each subsidia ry company at the area level and headquarter 
level for identifying the reasons for low utilization each project and take action to utilise the 
machines to the maximum extent. 
 
There is an increasing trend in the utilization of Shovel, Dumper, Dozer and Drill in all 
subsidiaries during 2004-05 (till August) as compar ed to same period last year. The Utilization 
figures for Coal India Ltd is tabulated below: 
 
 
%Utilization of Major HEMM (Absolute) 
April to August'2004     April to August'2003 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Shovel     45       41  
D u m p e r     3 3       3 0  
D o z e r       2 8       2 4  
D r i l l      2 4       2 2  
SCCL 
 
Regular review of the performance of HEMM is  being done to re-assess the requirements of 
various projects and suitable steps are being taken to deploy the HEMM for optimum utilization. 
Special attention is paid towards condition based monitoring of HEMM, procurement of 
spares and functioning of base workshops in open  cast projects. Capacity utilization has improved 
from 74% in 2001-02 to 91% in 2003-04. All efforts are made to achieve high standards of work. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04 (Vol IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7, Para No. 4.23) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note that there has been considerable mis-match between 
their financial targets and achievements in th e Neyveli Lignite Corporation. The Financial 
Achievements during 2002-03 and 2003-04 have been  as low as 70% and 50% of the revised 
estimates. This shows that the track record of NLC in achieving Financial Targets has been far from 
satisfactory. The Committee would like to point out th at there have been majo r deficiencies on the 
part of the NLC in formulating budgetary proposals. The reasons advanced by the Department of 
Coal that the funds could not be fully utilized du e to delay in obtaining Government sanctions are 
not convincing as most of these are administrati ve reasons and show the slackness on the part of 
NLC. In view of the above, the Committee desire  the Government to project only realistic and 
achievable budget so that the funds do not lapse year after year. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
Provisions made for the new projects like Mi ne II Expansion, TPS II Expansion and 
Rajasthan projects could not be commenced due  to delay in obtaining sanctions from the 
government. Provision made for TPS I Expansion could not be utilized as the matter is still under 
arbitration. Out of total outlay of Rs.480.70 Crores, Rs.253.31 Crores has been provided in BE 2004-
05 for new projects. This is mainly to meet prelim inary expenses, preparation of Detailed Feasibility 
Report, Hydrological studies, Topo-survey, EMP report and advance payments. 
 
No budgetary support was proposed or drawn for plan outlay during the last three years. 
NLC's plan outlay is financed by internal reso urces and borrowings. During the years mentioned 
above, NLC has generated more internal resources  than what could be utilised. The unutilised/ 
surplus fund was carried over to subsequent year. Hence, the question of lapse of funds does not 
arise. 
 
The projects like Mine II expansion, TPS II expansion and Barsingsar Mine & TPS which 
were in the process of sanction dur ing the last three years have now reached the advanced stages of 
sanction. Therefore, the projections would now be more realistic and NLC will also put its all out 
efforts to prepare more realistic projections. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Recommendation (S1. No.8, Para No. 4.24) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that NLC has planned to extend its activities in the States 
of Rajasthan, Kerala, Orissa and Madhya Prades h. The Committee recommend that all our efforts 
should be made to complete these projects in ti me. The Committee desire that NLC should take a 
proactive attitude in attending to the various issues relating to the obtaining of various clearances so 
that these four projects could be completed well within the sc heduled time. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress of all the three projects from time to time. 

Reply of the Government 
NLC is not taking up any m ining or power project  in State or Kerala. T he present status of 
projects in the State of Rajasthan are as below: 
 
Rajasthan Lignite P roject Capacity-2.10 
MTPA Estimated Revised Cost Rs.254.07 
crores 
* PIB in its meeting held on 19.08.2004 had 
approved the project and recomm ended to 
CCEA 
Rajasthan Power Project Capilcity-2x125 
MW 
Estimated Cost-Rs. 1114.18 crores 
 
* PIB in its m eeting held on 19.08.2004 had 
approved the project and recomm ended to 
CCEA 
Coal Based Power Plant at LB 
calley, Orissa. Capacity-4x500 MW. 
Estimated cost-Rs. 8000 Crore (tentative) 
* In-principle approval has been granted by 
Ministry in 06/2003 
 * Action has been taken to establish coal 
linkage for the project 
 * AAP is under implementation by NLC 
 
 * Action has been taken to identify the 
beneficiaries and to obtain expression of 
intention letters to buy power. 
 * Mega Power Project Status issued by 
Ministry of Power subject to certain 
conditions 
 * Final Draft Memorandum of Undersigned to 
be signed by Government of Orissa, NLC 
and MOC&M is in the final stage 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Recommendation (S1. No.9, Para No. 4.25) 
 
The Co mmittee are sad to note that after incurring a subs tantial am ount of project 
formulation, etc., the NLC has not been able to implement the Barsings ar lignite mine and power  
projects even after the lapse of about 14 years due to one reason or the other. The Comm ittee are 
fully aware that a proposal in this  regard was originated in 1987 a nd the projects were sanctioned in 
1991, during 8th Plan period. But, due to fund constr aints, the projects did not proceed further. The  
Rajasthan Government's efforts to develop it through a private devel oper also went awry. However, 
NLC once again star ted working on the proje ct and af ter com pleting all th e f ormalities, no w are 
awaiting the approval of  PIB. The Comm ittee are in agreement with the  Secretary, Departm ent of 
Coal that there is a need to compress the time taken in project formulation and project approval. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Governm ent should prepare a draft proposal on this aspect 
immediately for which an Em powered Committee should be set up, as suggested by the Departm ent 
of Coal for the speedy approval of the projects and to comm ission them  faster. So far as the 
Barsingsar (Rajasthan) Lignite-cum-power project is concerned, the Departm ent of Coal/Neyveli 
Lignite Corporation should pursue the m atter vigorously with the Min istry of Finance (Departm ent 

of Expenditure) for an early approval. The Committ ee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In November 1987 an MoU was signed among Government of India, Government of 
Rajasthan and NLC for developing a lignite mine w ith a capacity of 1.7 million tonnes per annum at 
a cost of Rs.242.31 crore and setting up of 240-MW (2x120 MW) lignite-based power plant at a cost 
of Rs. 585.73 crore. The project wa s sanctioned by GOI in April, 1991 at a total estimated cost of 
Rs. 828.04 crore. Subsequently, due to non-availability  of funds, GOI decided to drop the project in 
October 1996. M/s Hindustan Vidhyut Corporation (HVC) was offered to take over the project as the 
sponsor by the Government of Rajasthan. Sinc e there no progress in re spect of HVC, NLC has 
proposed to take over the project. 
 
A Memorandum of understanding between Governme nt of Rajasthan, Ministry of Coal and 
NLC was signed on 10.06.2002 to restart the project  by NLC. The Barsingsar Lignite-cum-power 
project has been consid ered by the PIB in its meeting held on 19.08.2004 and recommended to 
CCEA. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.29 & 1.30 of the Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S1. No. 10, Para No. 4.26) 
 
The Committee also note that Urea plant of NLC had been closed in January-2003 as the 
Company had accumulated a large stock of Urea whic h could not be sold due to availability of 
imported urea at cheaper price. The Committee recommended that the Company should sell the 
accumulated stock at the best availa ble price, if any stock has been left with it. The company should 
also examine whether there is any possibility of restructuring the ur ea unit and if not , then how they 
propose to deal with closed plant. The Committee should be informed of the decision taken in the 
matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The accumulated stock of urea has been already sold. As of now, there is no stock of Urea. 
Restructuring the unit will not help in avoiding losse s. Therefore, NLC has decided to dispose of the 
plant. The plant & equipments have been va lued and M/s MSTC, a Central Public Sector 
Undertaking, has been entrusted with the disposal activities of the Urea Plant. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.33 of the Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 

Recommendation (S1. No. 12, Para No. 5.22) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note the sl uggish pace at which different schemes under 
Environmental Measures & Subsid ence Control (EMSC) are being implemented resulting in the 
under-utilization of budgeted amount. During last year i.e. 2003-04, a provision of Rs.27.56 Crs. 
made at the BE stage was reduced to Rs.10.92 Crs. at RE stage but the actual utilization has been 
almost nil. The Committee note that  during the last three of the four years, the Department of Coal 
have failed to utilise the budgeted amount. The Co mmittee further observe that out of total 30 
schemes sanctioned by the Government of India un der EMSC, 14 schemes spilled over to 10th Plan 
from 9th Plan. Out of 14 schemes, only two could be  completed so far and rest are said to be under 
various stages of implementation. The various reas ons advanced by the Department of Coal for the 
non implementation of these schemes during Ninth Plan  resulting in spilling over to X Plan are long 
lead and bad road conditions duri ng rainy seasons, slow progress of the scheme, due to break down 
of machines, non-rehabilitation of  the people, delay in start of the plantation and delay in 
procurement of plants and machinery, etc. The Committee take serious note of the delay in the 
implementation of various schemes under Environmental measures & Subsidence Control as all the 
reasons indicated above are nothing but administra tive slackness on the part of the Department. The 
Committee opine that there have been serious defici encies in the implementation of such schemes. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that Government  should review the schemes immediately, propose 
them and implement without further loss of time. The Committee recommend that the Department 
should introduce system of personal responsibility of the officers responsible for implementation of 
such schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The implementation of various schemes unde r Environmental Measures and Subsidence 
Control have been reviewed and priorities  have been decided. Activities are being 
planned for new jobs along with time bound implementation programme. 
 
2. Monitoring is being done at various leve ls including subsidiary/Coal India Ltd. and 
Department of Coal for speedier implementation of such schemes and firming up the time 
schedule, milestone activities budget provision vis-a-vis achievements, expenditure etc. A 
Monitoring Committee headed by Secretary (Coal), has been formed which includes 
representatives from resp ective State Governments CIL/BCCL/ECL and related 
Ministries/Departments to review the implementation work of various subsidence/fire 
control and rehabilitation schemes undertaken in ECL and BCCL. 
 
3. At present the Environmental Measures and Subsidence Control (EMSC) Scheme is 
approved at Ministry level. To cut down time it has been decided that henceforth, all 
EMSC schemes will be approved by the Company Board. 
 
4. To take up an early completion, the De partment of Coal has made arrangement of 
additional funds to take up work of Environmental Control Measures of Raniganj and 
Jharia Coalfields. 
 
5. Coal India Ltd. management has decided to  appoint an IAS officer from State Govt. on 
deputation, senior to rank of DC for co -ordination with State Govt. for early 
implementation of the programme. 
 

 
Detailed status of the ongoing EMSC and other schemes are enclosed in Annexure-I. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol. IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.37 of the Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S1. No. 13, Para No. 5.23) 
 
The Committee note that underground hidden burning coal mines are not only a big source of 
pollution but also the country is losing its valuable natural wealth. Department of Coal's efforts to 
extinguish these fires did not produce much results . After the nationalization of coal mines in 1971 
and 1973 only 10 burning fires out of 70 could be extinguished completely in the Jharia coalfields. 
To tackle this problem to some extent, provision of sufficient funds was made under "Rehabilitation 
Control of Fire and Subsidence (RCFS)" schemes but the schemes could not be implemented leading 
to under utilization and even non-ut ilization of the funds. The Committe e is unhappy to note that on 
the one hand, the Government is not able to impl ement schemes due to acute funds constraints but 
on the other hand, the funds allocated sufficiently for certain schemes could not be expended. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that all the sc hemes under RCFS to control Fire and Subsidence 
be implemented on top priority basis and completed within a time bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All the schemes under RCFS to control fire and subsidence have been reviewed and priorities 
have been decided. Activities have been planned with time bound implementation programme. 
 
Monitoring is being done at various levels incl uding subsidiary/Coal India Ltd. and 
Department of Coal for speedier implementation of such schemes. 
 
Status of the ongoing RCFS schemes are enclosed in Annexure-II. 
 
An updated Master Plan (April' 2004) for dealin g with Fire, Subsidence and Rehabilitation is 
in the leasehold of BCCL has been prepared & approved by CIL board and is under consideration at 
Department of Coal. Total capit al outlay projected is Rs.5792.21 crores. The Master Plan is 
envisaged to be implemented for a period of 15 years to deal with fire projec ts & 20 years for other 
(Subsidence and Rehabilitation). 
 
Similarly, a Master Plan to control fire and rehabilitation in Raniganj coalfield of ECL has 
been prepared and approved by CIL and is under cons ideration at Department of Coal for approval, 
the total capital outlay of which is Rs.1769.40 cror es. The Master Plan will be implemented in a 
period of 20 years. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol. IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 

Recommendation (S1. No. 14, Para No. 5.24) 
 
The Committee further note that originally the land belongs to the State Governments. State 
Governments after acquiring the land, hands it over  to the coal companies for mining purposes. The 
coal companies, after completing the mining and reclamation of the land, leave it as it is. The 
Committee find that in the State of Chhattisgarh , so much land has teen acquired by the coal 
company that the administration of the State does not have enough land even for the revenue 
purposes. At present, there is no provision of disposing of/returning back the land either to the State 
Government or to the land oustees (to whom it belonged before acquisition). The Committee were 
informed that the Department of Coal was working on the modus operandi to dispose of such land. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Depa rtment should take expeditious action in this 
direction and bring forward suitable amendments in the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act and Coal 
Bearing Areas ,Acquisition & Development) Act, 1957. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The property acquired under the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition & Development) Act, 1957 
vests absolutely in the Central Government or in  the Central Government Companies. The Central 
Government Companies can transfer this mined and reclaimed property by gift or sale to the oustee 
or the State Government. This view has the in principle support of the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol. IV) dated 16th December, 2004] 
 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE  
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN  
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (S1. No.6, Para, No. 3.15) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note the dismal  performance of the major equipments used 
both in opencast and underground mines in terms of th eir utilisation in all th e subsidiaries of CIL. 
The Committees are further unhappy to observe the yawning gap between the liberal norms of the 
machines have been changed from the earlier 300 days  to 330 days to increase their utilisation. As a 
result of these actions, some improvement has b een noticed, in the firs t quarter of 2004-05 when 
compared to the same period of 2003-04. The Committee are seriously concerned about the losses to 
the coal companies both in term s of decline in production and pr oductivity caused due to non/under 
utilisation of the HEMM. The Committee are of the considered view that the under-utilisation of the 
HEMM and other equipments ultimately affects adve rsely the profitability of the company. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a detailed mine-wise exercise be undertaken to assess the 
reasons for idling and under-utili sation of HEMM and other equipments with a view to fixing the 
responsibility for their idling and under-utilisation. Th ere is also a need to improve the working of 
base workshops which would lead to better maintena nce and utilisation of HEMM. In this context, 
the Committee desire that if there are surplus machines or spare capacity is available, the CIL should 
make arrangements for their diversion to some other subsidiary where there is shortage of machines 
for their better and fullest utilisation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Task Force have been constituted in all subs idiaries at the Area and Head Quarter level for 
identifying the reasons for low utilisation in each project and take immediate corrective action. 
The main reasons for low utilisation of HEMM in projects are stated below: 
 
Constraint for land acquisition, restricted blasting due to proximity of villages, disruption of 
work by neighboring villagers demanding employment, over-aged equipment, hazardous working 
conditions like deployment of HEMM  on developed galleries, presence  of fire, poor infrastructure 
facilities like non-availability of workshops with repair faci lities specially in  ECL and BCCL, Mis-
match of excavation and transport capacities in a mine, steep gradient  of haul roads due to limited 
availability of mining land. 
 
Following action have already been taken to improve the utilization: 
Problem of non-availability of mining land is being sorted out through regular follow up with 
State authorities, special emphasis has been laid on blasting for better fragmentation of blasting 
material to reduce break down of equipment, cons truction and maintenance of proper haul roads, 
shift supervision is being strengthened to ensure timely start of the shift, infrastructural facilities and 
maintenance standards are being upgraded for im proving reliability of the equipment thereby 
enhancing its utilization, replacement plan being made to reduce the number of over-aged equipment 
in phases. 
utilization of Shovel, Dumper, Dozer and Drill in  all subsidiaries during 2004-05 (till August) as 
compared to same period last year. The Utilization figures for Coal India Ltd. is tabulated below: 

%Utilization of Major HEMM (Absolute) 
April to August' 2004    April to August' 2003  
  
Shovel      45     41 
D u m p e r      3 3      3 0   
D o z e r       2 8      2 4  
D r i l l       2 4      2 2  
 
Actions have also been taken to bridge the mismatch between digging and hauling capacities 
by transferring equipment from one project to another. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol. IV) dated 24th November, 2004] 
 
Recommendation (S1. No. 11, Para No. 4.27) 
Committee are distressed to note that a substantial amount of Rs.499.67 crore is outstanding 
against the State Electricity Boards /power utilities. This amount is equivalent to Annual Plan Outlay 
of NLC. Efforts taken in this regard seem to ha ve not yielded much result. The Committee is of the 
firm opinion that such outstanding dues have deleterious impact on the overall financial performance 
of the company. Had this huge amount been recovered, the financial position of the NLC would have 
been better than what it is at present. The Committee desire that NLC should function on the 
principal of  "cash and carry" basis. The Committee are of the view that NLC should follow the 
system devised by the Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd. (SCCL). The system being adopted is there is 
whatever royalty is due to the State Government on sale of coal is normally adjusted against dues 
from State Electricity Boards. NL C could follow it in the case of  Tamil Nadu Government and its 
Electricity Boards. Since finance is key factor for the existence of an organization, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the out standing dues be recovered through the above system and also 
through the process of persuasion. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The outstanding dues of NLC as on 30.06.2004 is  Rs.499.67 Crs. which includes an amount 
of Rs.179.94 Crs. towards the power supply bill for the month of June'04, which have been realized 
subsequently. Out of the balance of Rs.319.73 Crs, an amount of Rs.152 Crs. has been covered under 
one time settlement reached with TNEB and KPTC L based on which the dues are being settled in 
instalments. The total dues under the one time settlement will be settled fully before the end of this 
year. The remaining dues are only surcharge and capacity charges disputed by SEBs. In this 
connection, necessary efforts have been made by  NLC to settle the issue with APTRANSO and 
KSEB. The issues of disputes like surcharge, capacity  charges will be sorted out expeditiously in the 
case of TNEB & KPTCL. Conse quently the outstanding dues wi ll be substantially reduced. 
Regarding the current monthly bills, SEBs are settling the admitted bills without any default. 
 
 
As of now there is no "cash and carry" for power sa les. Pondicherry  Electricity Deptt. is paying 
in advance for their Power suppl y. The terms of payment for power dues are governed by Bulk 
Power Supply Agreements/CERC norms and guidelines . As a part of one tim e settlement of power 

dues, Tripartite Agreement (TPA) has been signe d by all the SEBs. Adequate payment security 
mechanism is provided in TPA where in SEBs are bound to pay by LCs and for defaulted payment 
beyond 90 days, Ministry of Finance, on reques t of power generators, would recover from  the 
allocations to State Govt. For further defaults, State Govt. would not get fund from accelerated 
Power Development & Reforms Programme (APDRP). 
 
The outstanding dues are generally related to the turnover of th e company rather than capital 
outlay. The turnover of the company for the year  2003-04 is Rs. 2808 cror es and the dues as on 
31.03.2004 is around 79 days of sales, which is considered reasonable. 
 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF dated 24th November, 2004] 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
 BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (S1. No. 15, Para No. 6.5) 
 
The Committee note that there have been serious  complaints in regard to contract for 
transportation of coal from mine face to the point where coal is processed, then from surface to 
surface transport and then transpor t from coal company to consumer company. The Committee also 
note that as admitted by Secretary, Department of  Coal, there are 4000 odd industries in the business 
out of which there might be some bogus companie s not using coal and black marketing it. The 
Committee feel that there is a wide spread apprehension that bogus companies are operating in the 
transportation and black marketing of coal ther eby causing immense loss to the coal sector 
ultimately affecting the economy of the country. The Committee further note that quality of coal is 
closely linked to effective materialisation of linkage. The Committee are dismayed to note that out of 
8000 odd industries getting coal quota 4000 such industries, who were reported to be bogus, had 
been eliminated after inspection carried out by the Department of Coal. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department of Coal s hould take a proactive and corrective decision in 
the award of coal transportation contract. The De partment should also unde rtake an exercise to 
identify and weed out the bogus companies which are in the business of black marketing of coal. The 
Committee further recommend that the Department of  Coal should give a fresh look at the whole 
gamut of coal linkage and come out with a cl ear cut policy. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As far as Ex-servicemen Coal Transportation Companies are concerned, some complaints 
have been received against them. The primary re sponsibility of Judging the genuineness of these 
companies lies with Director General Resettlement (DGR), as they are the sponsoring organisation. 
Coal Subsidiaries give transportation contract s only to those Ex-servicemen (ESM) companies 
which are recommended by DGR. The complaints that  have been received against these companies 
have been forwarded to DGR. The Department of Coal in consultation with Coal Subsidiaries had 
suggested to DGR that contracts for surface to  surface transport be awarded through open tender 
with the stipulation that 30% of  the business would be referred for ESM companies. In case ESM -
companies are L-l, they would win entire order. But in case they are not L-l, 30% of the order would 
be awarded to them at L-1 rates. DGR, however has not agreed to this sugges tion of the Ministry of 
Coal and is against ESM companies participating in  any form of tendering process. Therefore, the 
matter has been taken up by Secretary (Coal) with Secretary, Ministry of Defence. In line with 
decontrol of coal as per Colliery Control Order, 2000, Coal India Limited decided to authorise its 
subsidiary companies to formulate their own system and procedure for sale of coal to the non-core 
sector. 
To implement the new coal sales policy, verification of the linked consumers in non-core 
sector was undertaken. All State Governments were requested to verify the status and existence of all 
linked consumers and furnish the report to concerne d coal companies. The Vigilance divisions of 
respective coal companies also carried out the verification on random basis. Almost, 98% of the total 
non-core consumers have been verified. Many non-existent units have been recommended for 

discontinuation of coal supply based on the unfavourable verification report received from State 
authorities/ sponsoring authorities and internal vigilance terms of coal companies. 
 
Ministry of Coal had issued the new coal sales policy for non-core in January, 2003 for 
further implementation by the coal producing subs idiaries. However, in a recent High Court of 
Kolkata judgement, the court has set aside the policy of the Govt. for distribution of coal to non-core 
consumers based on sponsorship and linkage and has directed to distribute coal through Open Sales 
Scheme (OSS) except wherever contractual commitments have been made for supply. The order of 
the High Court has been stayed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on appeal by CIL. However, the 
Department of Coal/CIL is formulating the new policy. In the new policy, sale of coal is proposed to 
be done through e-auction, i.e. electronic bidding.  Before finalising the fi ner points in the proposed 
e-auction, a series of trials th rough pilot e-auctions are proposed to be held  and the experience 
gained thereby will be factored in to the policy to be finalised. First e-auction was held in BCCL in 
November, 2004 and it is proposed to extend the coverage to other subsidiaries in phases. 
 
As regards coal linkage to core  sector consumers, it is don e through the Standing Linkage 
Committee of the Department of Coal having representatives from Mi nistries of Railways, Power, 
Industrial Promotion and Policy, Fertiliser, CEA etc. The Committee meets every quarter to decide 
the coal linkage to power, cement, steel, ferti lizer etc. The working of the Committee has been 
reviewed from time to time and is found useful by all the consumers. 
[Department of Coal O.M. No. 20011/3/04-IF (Vol. IV) dated 16th December, 2004] 
 
NEW DELHI;         ANANTH KUMAR, 
22 December, 2004                                                                                              Chairman, 
1 Pausa, 1926 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE I 
STATUS OF ON-GOING EMSC SCHEMES RELATED TO  
FIRE, SUBSIDENCE AND REHABILITATION IN ECL 
 
Stabilisation under EMSC Scheme  
Sl.No. Name of 
Scheme 
Sanctioned Status upto August, 04 Remarks 
  Cost in 
Rs.Lakhs 
Qty. in 
m3 
Rev. Qty. 
in m
3 
Sand filled 
in m
3 
Expenditure 
in Rs. Lakhs 
 
1. Fatehpur 500 90000 60000 41999 281.57 41999m3 
completed upto 
Aug. 04. phase-I 
& phase-II 
completed. 
Phase-III in 
progress. 
2. Haripur 187.77 20000 35000 26557 130.45 26557m3 
completed. 
Stowing in 
progress for 
Phase-II. 
3. Gowalabasti 187.77 20000 46000 24831 87.39 24831m3  of 
phase-I 
completed in 
Feb.04 and 
Stowing in 
progress for 
additional 
quantity of 
26000m
3  
4. Palasban 187.77 20000 8000 1349 53.92 In progress  
5. Pottary 187.77 20000 20000 13479 75.75 In progress 
6. Sanctoria 4.78.38 40000 40000 19416 69.52 In progress 
 Total 1729.46 210000 211000 127631 698.60  
 

Rehabilitation 
 
Sl.No. Name of Scheme Sanctioned 
cost in Rs. 
Crores 
Expenditure 
in Rs. Crores 
Remarks 
1. EMSC (Rehabilitation of 
Samdih, Bangallpara, Kenda 
and Harishpur village 
32.525 0.5042 1. Rehabilitation schemes 
in ECL will be 
implemented by ADDA. 
    2. As per request of ADDA, 
ECL has released Rs.50 
Lakhs to them to start the 
activities for opening of a 
separate cell to 
implement rehabilitation 
schemes. 
    3. The following jobs will 
be taken by ADDA. 
(a) Demographic 
survey  
(b) Issue of Identity 
card 
(c) Valuation of 
properties  
    4. Relocation site has been 
identified for Samdih and 
Bangalpara but no formal 
agreement has been 
executed as yet.  
 
RESTORATION OF ABANDONED COAL MINES IN ECL 
 
Sl.No. Name of Scheme Bio-
reclamation 
of land 
Sanctioned 
amount (Rs. 
Lakhs) 
Total Bio-
reclamation 
to be done 
(In Ha) 
Achievement Expenditure 
upto Aug. 
04 
Remarks 
 Restoration of 
abandoned in 
ECL EMSC-03 
OCP 
 
OB 
 
Fire  
490.00 
 
120.40 
 
260.00 
490 
 
301 
 
100 
366.7 
 
458.58 
 
29.00 
 Completed 
 Total  870.40 891 854.28 436.31  
 
 
Note: Fire is being controlled by Stabilisation and drowning at Sanctoria village. 
 

 
 
STATUS OF ON-GOING EMSC SCHEMES RELATED TO FIRE, SUBSIDENCE AND 
REHABILITATION IN BCCL 
 
A. Fire Dealing Schemes 
 
Sl.No. Name of Scheme Sanctioned cost 
(Rs. Lakhs) 
Cumm. 
Expenditure 
(Rs. Lakh) 
Status 
1. Scheme for Dealing 
with fire at S. Lodna 
333.72 269.06 In progress. Sand flushing target 4950Om3, 
completed 49512m3. 
Filling & Blanketing Target 340Om3. Mutti 
Transported completed 41400m3 Isolation 
stoppings Completed Nitrogen Flushing 
continuing 
 
2. Scheme for Dealing 
with fire at Rajapur 
 
471.87 314.83 Work in progress. 
Drilling & sand stowing in progress. Sand 
flushed Target 77000m3 
Completed 28050m3 (it is estimated that the 
actual quantity of sand required will be less 
than the target) Filling & Blanketing in 
progress Target: 2.5 lakhs m3 
Completed 48431Om3 (Extra quantity being 
done in view of fire in V /VI/ 
VIII/combined scams) 
Mutti transport: Target 0.95 lakhs m3. 
18127m3 done 
 
3. Scheme for Dealing 
with fire at Alkusa Fire 
368.39 254.730 Work in progress. Sand flushing target 
500000m3, completed 895012m3. (Actual sand 
stowing quantity estimated to be less than 
target) Filling & Blanketing in progress. 
Target 2.37 lakhs m3. 
Completed 117899m3 
 
4. Scheme for Dealing 
with fire at Industry 
 
253.8 86.685 Sand stowing has been completed Target: 
35000m3. 
Completed: 48581m3. 
Re-tending for multi blanketing done. 
Shifting of house: Target 391.218 houses 
vacated and persons rehabilitated. 
 
 
 
 

B.  Status of demonstration scheme for shifti ng of persons from most endangered areas of BCL. 
 
Sl.No. Name of Scheme Sanctioned 
cost (Rs. 
Lakhs) 
Cumulative 
Expenditure 
(Rs. Lakh) 
Satus 
1. Shifting of persons 
from most 
endangered areas 
of BCCL 
6109.00 883.00 For BCCL houses Construction 
taken up 344 nos. Completed 344 
Nos. Shifting under process 150 
houses occupied. Tender of 
another 1152 houses done earlier is 
being re-tendered. 
    For non-BCCL persons: 
• Rehabilitation site for the non-
BCCL has been finalized by the 
State Govt. at Belgoria Mouza. 
State Government has intimated 
actions for formation of Agency 
for shifting and rehabilitation of 
Non-BCCL people living in 
endangered area of Coalfield, 
DRDA has been entrusted with the 
job of construction of Non BCCL 
houses of Belgaria Mouza under 
the ongoing demonstration scheme 
i.e." Shifting of people from most 
endangered area of BCCL" 
 
As per request of State Govt., 
BCCL has deputed 6 persons (one 
EE(C), 3 Engg. Asst. and 2 
Computer operators) for this 
purpose. As per request of State 
Govt. BCCL has paid Rs.2.03 
crores to State Govt. for starting 
construction of about 250 Nos. 
BCCL houses. Preliminary work 
regarding tendering for 
construction of Non BCCL houses 
has been initiated by District 
authorities. 
 
 Total 6109.00 883.00  
 
 
 

RECLAMATION OF MINED OUT AREA IN CCL 
 
Sl.No. Name of 
Scheme  
Total area to be 
reclaimed as 
per scheme 
(Ha) 
Achievement 
(Ha) 
Expenditure 
upto March,04 
(Rs. Lakhs) 
Remarks 
1. Reclamation of 
mined out area 
in CCL (EMSC-
04) 
728 75.97 226.19 Completed 
 
 

ANNEXURE II 
DETAILS OF RCFS SCHME 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Scheme  Sanctioned 
cost  
(Rs.Lakhs)
Cumulative 
Expenditure 
(Rs. Lakh) 
Status 
1. Scheme for control of fire and 
subsidence for protection of 
Dhanbad-Patherdih Railway 
line at Lodhna (N) and 
Bagidigi Colliery RCFS-01 
635.23 2.28 In view of the stoppage of 
the Dhanbad-Patherdih 
Railway line & decision 
taken to dismantle the 
railway, this scheme is not 
necessary as planned earlier. 
This is proposed to be dug 
out and removed separating 
coal and other non-
combustible material. 
2. Scheme for control of fire and 
subsidence for protection of 
Adra-Gomoh railway line at 
Block-II OCP and Phularitand 
Colliery RCFS-02 
578.40 172.16 Work in progress. P&M 
procurement done, 
blanketing with mutti & 
non-combustible OB in 
progress. Approx. 1.9 lakhs 
cum blanketing done. 
Further work in progress. 
3. Scheme for control of fire and 
subsidence for protection of 
Chatkari Jore at Neenagora 
Barrace Colliery RCFS-03 
769.82 191.60 Work in progress. P&M 
procurement done, partial 
work of diversion of 
Chatkari Jore done. Tender 
for civil work finalized. 
Work order  to be issued 
shortly. Other works under 
progress. 
4. Scheme for control of fire and 
subsidence for protection of 
Dhanbad-Patherdih railway 
line at Barace Colliery RCFS-
04 
577.27 115.95 The scheme has been 
discontinued in view of the 
proposed dismantling of 
Dhanbad-Patherdih Rly. 
Line. The original scheme 
was for protection of 
railway line which is not 
required now. The scheme is 
being  revised for dealing 
with fire by digging out 
active fire in coal and taking 
out coal from the area and 
filling with incombustible 
material. 
 

ANNEXURE III 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SI1TING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL (2004-05) HELD ON 22 DECEMBER 2004 IN COMMITTEE ROOM 'C', PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar-In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3.  Shri Bikash Chowdhury 
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5.  Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
6. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
7.  Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
8.  Smt. Karuna Shukla 
9.  Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav 
10.  Shri B. J. Panda 
11.  Shri G.K. Vasan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri John Joseph - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Sec etary r
3. Shri AK. Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Member s to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, 
the Committee considered and adopted the following Draft Reports: 
 
(i) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the 1st Report (14th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Coal. 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations  contained in the 2nd Report (14th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Mines. 

3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draf t Reports with minor additions/deletions/ 
amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to fi nalise these Reports after making consequential 
change arising out of factual verification by the concerned Ministries and to present the same to both 
the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

ANNEXURE IV  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made     15 
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9,   12 
 10, 12, 13 and 14) 
 
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         8 0 %  
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies       2 
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 6 and 11)      
 
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         1 3 %  
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of whic h replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee      Nil 
 
Nil 
 
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         N i l  
 
V. Recommendations in respect of whic h final replies of the Government  
are still awaited (vide recommendation at S1.No. 15) 
 
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         7 %  
 
 
 
 