STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEEL
(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF MINES
THE MINES AND MINERALS
(DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
3939393939
THIRTY-NINTH REPORTTHIRTY-NINTH REPORTTHIRTY-NINTH REPORTTHIRTY-NINTH REPORTTHIRTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF MINES
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT
AND REGULATION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2008
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.2.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.2.2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.C.&S. No. 39C.C.&S. No. 39C.C.&S. No. 39C.C.&S. No. 39C.C.&S. No. 39
Price : Rs. 46.00
© 2009 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by The Indian
Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
23
26
28
30
33
C
OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2008-09)..............................................
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................
Report............................................................................................................
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel held on 05.12.2008…………………………………....
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel held on 20.01.2009………………...............................
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel held on 10.02.2009……………………………............
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel held on 17.02.2009…………………………................
APPENDIX
I. The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Bill, 2008………………………………………........
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2008-09)
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
 3. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu
 4. Shri Hiten Barman
 5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
 6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
 7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
 8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
 9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
12. Shri Tarachand Sahu
13. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
14. Smt. Karuna Shukla
15. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
16. Shri Sugrib Singh
17. Shri Bhishm Shanker alias Kushal Tiwari
18. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
19. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
20. Shri Arun Yadav
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
23. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri Jesudas Seelam
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
27. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
28 Shri T.K. Rangarajan
29. Shri B.J. Panda
30. Shri R.C. Singh alias Ram Chandra Singh
31. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “The Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2008”
pertaining to the Ministry of Mines.
2. One of the functions of the Standing Committee on Coal and
Steel as laid down in Rule 331E (1) (b) of ‘The Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’ is to examine such Bills
pertaining to the concerned Ministries as are referred to the Committee
by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, Lok Sabha, as the case
may be, and make Report thereon. In pursuance of this Rule, “The
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill,
2008”, introduced in Rajya Sabha on 17th October, 2008, was referred
by the Hon’ble Speaker to this Committee on 31st October, 2008 for
examination and Report.
3. The Committee had a briefing from the representatives of the
Ministries of Coal and Mines on the Bill on 5th December, 2008.  The
Committee further discussed the Bill at their sitting held on 20th
January, 2009. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministries of Coal and Mines on 17th February, 2009.
4. The Committee express their thanks to the officials of the
Ministries of Coal and Mines for placing before them the material and
information desired from time to time in connection with examination
of the Bill.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee in connection with examination
of the Bill and drafting of the Report thereon.

  N EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
18 February , 2009 Chairman,
29 Magha , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
sitting held on  17th February, 2009.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
(vi)

REPORT
“The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Bill, 2008” has been referred by the Hon’ble Speaker to
the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel for examination and report.
1.2 In this connection, the Ministry of Coal have furnished the
following background note:—
“Most of the major coal mines in the country were nationalised
in 1972 and 1973, except those with the producers of iron and
steel. Coal mines that could not be nationalized were still being
worked by private leaseholders. In 1976, the Coal Mines
(Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 1976 was enacted.  It, inter-alia,
terminated all the mining leases with the private lease holders
except those of the iron and steel producers who were allowed
by the Act to carry on coal mining.  In June 1993, the Coal Mines
(Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 1993 was passed which
allowed Indian companies engaged in generation of power, in
addition to the iron and steel producers, to carry on coal mining
for their captive use. It also allowed washing of coal obtained
from a mine at the pithead. Further, by an enabling provision
contained in the said Act, production of cement was notified as
an end use for mining of coal with effect from the 15th March,
1996. Thus, as per the existing law, mining of coal by Indian
private companies is allowed for their captive use in iron and
steel production, generation of power, and cement production.
Production of syn-gas obtained through coal gasification
(underground and surface) and coal liquefaction were notified as
specified end uses for the purpose of captive mining on 12th July,
2007.
The Central Government had decided in February, 1997 to allow
mining of coal by an Indian company without the restriction of

2
captive mining.  A Bill, namely, the Coal Mines (Nationalisation)
Amendment Bill, 2000 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
24th April, 2000 for the purpose and the same is pending in that
House.
In order to implement the provisions for captive mining of coal,
a Screening Committee was set up in the Ministry of Coal, through
an administrative order, to consider applications made by various
companies interested in captive mining and to allocate coal blocks
for development, subject to the provisions of the other statutes
governing coal mining. A number of coal blocks, which were not
in the production plan of the Coal India Limited (CIL) subsidiaries
and the Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL), were
identified in consultation with CIL/SCCL and a list of 229 such
blocks were prepared and placed on the website of the Ministry
for information of public at large. Further, a set of guidelines were
prepared for the guidance of prospective applicants.  The
Screening Committee comprises the Secretary (Coal) as the
Chairman, Joint Secretary (Coal) as the Member-Secretary,
Adviser (Project), representatives of Ministry of Steel, Department
of Industrial Policy and Promotion (Ministry of Commerce and
Industry), Ministry of Power, Ministry of Environment and Forest,
Ministry of Railways, Chairman-cum-Managing-Director of the
coal company of the command area where a coal block is located
and Chief Secretaries of the State Governments concerned. The
Screening Committee is an Inter-Ministerial and Inter- Govern-
mental Committee. It follows a process of consultation and
deliberation in its functioning. Allocation of blocks under the
captive mining dispensation has been based on the assessed
merits of individual cases through Inter-ministerial and Inter-
Governmental consultations, both outside and within the forum
of Screening Committee.
Under the procedure, applications received for allocation of coal
blocks are forwarded to the administrative Ministries concerned

3
who, inter-alia, scrutinize the track record of applicant company,
techno-economic viability of the project, state of project
preparedness and assessment of coal requirement in terms of
quality and quantity etc., and make their recommendations to the
Screening Committee. The Central Mines Planning & Design
Institute Limited (CMPDIL)/CIL scrutinize the recommended
applications from the point of qualitative and quantitative
matching of the projected coal requirement with that available
in the sought block, and other associated matters and make
recommendations to the Screening Committee.
The Screening Committee, with the benefit of these recommen-
dations, and after giving an opportunity to the applicant to present
his case, decides each case on its relative merits.  The Screening
Committee also reviews the progress made by various allocatees
in developing the captive coal mines and installing the associated
end use projects.
The Coal Mines Nationalisation Act, 1973 (26 of 1973), allows
private companies engaged in generation of power, production
of iron and steel, washing of coal obtained from mines and
such other end-uses as may be specified by the Central
Government by notification to carry on coal mining for their
captive end-use.
In order to allocate coal blocks to private companies for captive
mining of coal, a Screening Committee was set up in the Ministry
of Coal through an administrative order, to consider applications
made by various companies. The Screening Committee is an Inter-
Ministerial and Inter-Governmental body, having representatives
from various administrative Ministries/Departments/ concerned
of the Central Government, the State Governments where the coal
blocks are located, and coal companies, etc.
While efforts are on hand to continuously add blocks to the
captive list, it was also expected that the demand for blocks would

4
remain far ahead of supply. Therefore, a necessity has arisen to
bring in a process of selection that is not only objective but also
transparent. Auction through competitive bidding for allocation
of coal blocks to private companies is one such acceptable
selection process. While the Coal Mines Nationalisation Act, 1973,
besides providing for nationalization and associated provisions,
specifies who can and who cannot undertake coal mining in India,
the entities permitted to carry on coal mining under the said Act
follow the provisions of the Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1957 and the rules made thereunder, for
acquiring minerals rights, mining lease and other matters related
to mineral administration. Hence, selection process by auction
through competitive bidding for allocation of coal blocks to
private companies is sought to be introduced through an
amendment in the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957.”
Clause 2 of The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Bill, 2008
1.3 In the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), After section
11, the following section is proposed to be inserted, namely:—
“11A. The Central Government may, for the purpose of granting
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in
respect of an area containing coal and lignite, select, through
auction by competitive bidding on such terms and conditions as
may be prescribed, a company engaged in,-
(i) production of iron and steel;
(ii) generation of power;
(iii) washing of coal obtained from a mine; or
(iv) such other end use as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, and the State
Government shall grant such reconnaissance permit, prospect-

5
ing licence or mining lease in respect of coal and lignite to
such company as selected through auction by competitive
bidding under this section:
Provided that the auction by competitive bidding shall not
be applicable to an area containing coal or lignite,-
(a) where such area is considered for allocation to a
Government company or corporation for mining or
such other specified end use;
(b) where such area is considered for allocation to a
company or corporation that has been awarded a power
project on the basis of competitive bids for tariff
(including Ultra Mega Power Projects).
Company - for the purposes of this section, “Company” means
a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956
and includes a foreign company within the meaning of section
591 of that Act. 
Ultra Mega Power Project (UMPP) - a power project of
approximately 4000 MW capacity so designated by the Ministry
of Power. 
Power project awarded on tariff based competitive bidding – A
power project to be awarded on the basis of competitive bidding
for power tariff so designated by the Ministry of Power.
Explanation – For the purposes of this section “company” means
a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956
and includes a foreign company within the meaning of section
591 of that Act.
In Section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) after clause
(c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
“(d) the terms and condition of auction by competitive bidding
for selection of the company under section 11A;”

6
1.4 The Committee sought the views of the Ministry of Coal as
to what were the views of each of the State Governments and Industry
Associations on the said Bill and the decision taken by the Ministry.
The Ministry have informed the Committee as under:—
“The Bill was not circulated to the State Governments or Industry
Associations. However, when the proposal was mooted by the
Ministry of Coal, a meeting was held under the Chairmanship
of Secretary(Coal) on the 28th June, 2004 with some of the
applicants, representatives of industrial associations concerned,
other stake holders and the representatives of the Ministries/
Departments concerned of the Central Government. While
allocation through competitive bidding as a transparent and
objective process for selection  appeared acceptable in principle,
reservations were expressed by some. The gist of the views/
comments of the Industry representatives/Associations along with
the views of the Ministry of Coal  could be summarized as below;
Comments of stake holders  Observation of Ministry
of Coal
11111 22222
(i) It will add to the cost of coal
and will lead to increased
price of end products
(i) Coal mining is a capital-
intensive activity. It needs
substantial investments.
Competitive bidding is likely
to add only a small percent-
age to that cost. Since alter-
native to captive mining is to
either purchase coal from
Coal India Ltd. (CIL) or
import it, informed and
rational bidding would ensure
that the cost of coal through
the competitive bidding route
is less than that of coal

7
sourced from other alterna-
tive sources. As such, there
would be a minimal impact
of the bid amount on the
price of the end product. The
bidding system will only tap
part of the profit for public
purposes.
(ii) Argument about discrimina-
tion between new and exist-
ing allocatees is not a sound
one. Any change in policy
that is considered in public
interest can be made only
prospectively and cannot be
found fault with on the
ground that beneficiaries of
earlier policy had greater
advantage.
(iii) Similarly, the argument of
discrimination between future
allocatees and CIL/SCCL is
also not tenable. CIL and
SCCL carry huge costs of
social overheads  and exces-
sive  manpower which can-
not be reduced in short-term
for socio-political reasons.
CIL and SCCL, therefore, can
not be compared with new
allocatees who will not be
compared with new
11111 22222
(ii) There will be discrimination
between the existing
allocatees and the future
allocatees.
(iii) There will be discrimination
between the future allocatees
and CIL/SCCL, who will
continue to have blocks with-
out the associated cost of
competitive bidding.

8
allocatees who will not be
subjected to these costs.
Besides, CIL and SCCL
address the national
concerns of energy security
while the private captive
blocks would be available to
the allocatees for their own
express needs alone.
(iv) Argument that the three
permitted sectors for captive
mining cannot be treated
equally is also fallacious.
For efficient allocation of
resources, inter-se priority
has to be decided not on
subjective considerations but
on objective parameters. No
one will quote a price in
open bidding that will make
coal so mined more expen-
sive than the CIL coal or
imported coal. As long as
power utilities can get coal
through captive mining at
price lesser than that charged
by CIL, they should have no
objection to an open bidding
system.
(v) It is true that steel, cement
and sponge iron need
superior quality of coal as
(iv) The three permitted sectors
for captive mining cannot be
treated equally. While steel
and cement sectors produce
commodities, power sector is
a utility and operates in a
regulated environment. The
power sector, therefore, can-
not pay a higher price that
the steel and the cement
sector can afford to. Further,
they differ in their scales of
investment and priority in
the economy. Viewed in this
context, competitive bidding
would lead to a sectoral
imbalance.
(v) Steel, cement and sponge
iron need higher grades of
coal with some specific
11111 22222

9
compared to coal required
for power generation.
However, sectors of industry
which need superior grades
of coal should also be willing
to pay higher prices for
better quality. In any case,
price should be the best
determinant of the most
efficient allocation of coal
resources.
(vi) As regards techno-economic
feasibility and viability for
those who have already
planned their projects, no
commitments for allocation
of blocks were made to any
applicant. Uncertainty  about
availability of coal blocks
remains the same irrespec-
tive of whether the block is
allocated through Screening
Committee process or
through a bidding process.
(vii) Any competitive bidding
based on technical and physi-
cal parameters alone and not
on financial parameters
would be that much less
objective and transparent and
would not serve the purpose
sought to be achieved.
properties, whereas power
sector can use any kind of
coal.  Use of higher grade
coal for power sector through
competitive bidding will lead
to sub-optimal use of higher
grade coal.
(vi) The techno economic feasi-
bility and viability of those
projects that were planned
on the basis of existing
procedure and have since
progressed substantially will
be adversely affected in case
of change in the selection
process midstream.
(vii) Competitive bidding should
be based on technical and
physical parameters and not
on financial parameters.
11111 22222

10
1.5 The Ministry have further stated that the views of the coal/
lignite producing States were also asked separately on the proposed
policy shift.  The comments of the governments of Chhattisgarh,
West Bengal and Rajasthan were received. The comments from the
State Governments of Assam, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and
Tamil Nadu have not been received.
1.6 According to the Ministry, the views conveyed by some of
the State Governments were to the effect that there would be increase
in the cost of coal; the pipeline new projects will become unviable;
would be detrimental to inland States like Chhattisgarh as it would
shift the industry to rich coastal States.  The Screening Committee
process should be continued and made more transparent by bringing
in financial and technical criteria; the prerogative of the State
Government in the selection of a lessee will get diluted, if competitive
bidding is introduced; State Government should have the liberty to
evolve policy to lease lignite blocks only to those who are willing to
set up power plants in their States (Rajasthan); allocation of lignite
blocks through competitive  bidding would place the State Government
at a disadvantage while negotiating other terms and conditions with
the power project developers; the present system is preferable on the
grounds that it provides for both subjective and objective assessment;
it gives priority to power generation; it takes into account the views
of the State Government and its efforts for industrial development; and
provides for decentralization of industries in the State, while on other
hand, the competitive bidding would be based solely on higher prices
offered, treats all sectors equally and would render views of the
Government redundant.
1.7 The aforesaid views of the stakeholders were stated to have
been considered by the Ministry and the response thereto is as
under:—
“Rational bidding is unlikely to increase the cost of coal when
compared to notified price of CIL. Location of industry is not

11
determined solely by availability of coal. Various other parameters
such as other inputs, markets, basic infrastructure etc. play an
equally important role. The continuance of the present process
of allocation does not guarantee allocation of captive blocks to
any applicant who has applied after 28.06.2004. The Techno-
economic viability of project is never assessed on the presumption
of captive source of coal but on the market price of coal. Therefore,
the assumption that projects would become unviable due to
change in the selection process appears devoid of merit.
Introduction of competitive bidding would in no way change the
“prerogative situation”  vis-à-vis the existing Screening Committee
route. Allocation of lignite blocks and award of power projects
could be done in a planned and coordinated manner between the
State Government and the Central Government. It may not be
desirable to make an exception in the competitive bidding process
in relation to lignite as no intelligible differentia is apparent on
the face of it. The power companies in the public sector will have
access to captive coal mining blocks through government
company dispensation without necessarily  participating in the
competitive bidding. Competition among sectors would result in
more efficient selection and utilization of scarce resource such as
coal or lignite. Coal and lignite as a resource belong to the
entire country and cannot be allowed to be used for the
development of only the producing States Market dynamics
should determine the allocation of these precious resources within
the country.”
1.8 As regards including the physical parameters for the proposed
competitive bidding, the Ministry have furnished the following
information:—
“Competitive bidding is proposed to be in two parts: (i) technical
bid and (ii) commercial bid. The technical bid would be qualifying
in nature. It would essentially seek information about the

12
credentials and capabilities of the bidder with respect of end use
project and coal mine development project etc. The end use-cum-
mining project may need to be appraised by a reputed financial
institution. Those who qualify in the technical part  would be
short-listed and commercial bids of only such applicants would
be considered further.
The commercial bid would ask the applicant to indicate a lump
sum amount that he is willing to offer to the Government, in cash.
The bid with highest value would be declared successful.
Any competitive bidding based on technical and physical
parameters and not on financial parameters would be that much
less objective and transparent and would not serve the purpose
sought to be achieved.
The objections raised by the State Governments have already been
addressed in para 1.2 above and the interests of State
Governments are taken care in the following manner:—
(a) It is proposed that in the bidding process, preference
may be given to a company which proposes to set up the
end-use industry in the State in which the coal block is
located, if its bid is within 5% of the highest bid for the
said block and the company is willing to match the highest
bid.
(b) There is a strong feeling in the coal bearing areas that coal
mining activity results in serious damage to the social and
economic life of coal residents in that area. Mining activity
also leads to degradation of environment in spite of
safeguards mandated by Law. The royalty that State
Government receives on coal mining is credited to the
general revenues of that State and does not result in any
specific benefit to the local community. For the reasons
aforesaid, it is observed that mining activity gets delayed

13
because of resistance from local inhabitants. Therefore, it is
proposed that the receipts generated by competitive bidding
should accrue to the State Government where the coal block
is located.”
1.9 The Ministry of Coal in their written reply have stated that
the Bill was not circulated to the State Governments or Industry
Associations. However, when the proposal was mooted by the Ministry
of Coal, a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal)
on the 28th June, 2004 with some of the applicants, representatives of
industrial associations concerned, other stakeholders and the repre-
sentatives of the Ministries/Departments concerned of the Central
Government.....
1.10 On being asked as to why the Ministry of Coal obtained
fresh comments of the stakeholders, State Governments and the
Ministries/Departments of Central Government as the Ministry held
discussions with them way back in 2004, the Ministry in their reply
have stated:—
“In order to know the views of the concerned industries to the
proposed change and other related issues the meeting of some
of the applicants, representatives of the industry associations,
other stakeholders and the representative of Ministries/
Departments was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(Coal) on 24th June, 2004. Further, in a meeting chaired by the
Principal Secretary to PM on 25.07.2005, the proposal firmed up
by the Ministry on the basis of previous round of meeting with
the stakeholders was further discussed, where the representatives
of the concerned State Governments were also invited. Based on
this feedback, the Ministry had finalised the proposal for
amendment. Thus, comprehensive consultations were held with
the stakeholders and the State Governments. This is a very time
consuming process, and a fresh round of consultations would
again cause considerable delay in carrying the process forward.”

14
1.11 In reply to a query, the Ministry have informed that the Coal
mining is a capital-intensive activity. It needs substantial investments.
Competitive bidding is likely to add only a small percentage to that
cost. Since alternative to captive mining is to either purchase
coal from CIL or import it, informed and rational bidding would ensure
that the cost of coal through the competitive bidding route is less than
that of coal sourced from other alternative sources.  As such, there is
likely to be only a marginal impact of premium (bid amount) on the
overall cost of production or price of the end product
(coal).  The bidding system will only tap part of the profit for public
purposes.
1.12 The Ministry have informed the Committee that the
parameters regarding size of power projects or steel projects would
need to be determined having regard to the type and extent of reserves
available in a particular coal/lignite block and its ability to sustain the
project for a specified period of time (life term of the end use project).
These shall have to be finalized in consultation with the Ministry of
Power and the Ministry of Steel in each case based on the resource
position in the block.
1.13 On being asked about the time-frame set for grant of RP,
PL or ML and whether it is binding on the parts of Central and
State Governments, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as
under:—
“No such time-frame is set out in the MMDR Act at present.
However, in order to ensure expeditious development of the coal
blocks, at the time of allocation of a coal block, a time-frame is
stipulated with milestones for achieving different activities
involved in developing the mine. An open cast mine is required
to be developed within 36 months (42 months if forest land is
involved) and an underground mine within 48 months (54 months
if forest land is involved). As per the present guidelines, coal
production from  a captive coal block should commence within

15
36 months (42 months in case the area falls in forest land) in case
of an open cast mine and in 48 months (54 months in case the
area falls in forest land) in case of an underground mine, from
the date of allocation.  If the coal block is not explored in detail,
additional two years are allowed for detailed exploration and
preparation of geological report. However, once the competitive
bidding system is introduced, these may change. When the
modalities are evolved, time-frame within which a coal block is
proposed to be developed could also be included as one of the
parameters, for which certain weightage may be assigned for the
purposes of evaluation.”
1.14 The Ministry have further stated that the proposed
amendment is brought among other things, for the following reasons:—
(a) Number of coal blocks available for allocation declining;
(b) Number of applications per block increasing;
(c) Present selection process cumbersome, difficult and
vulnerable to criticism; and
(d) Need for greater transparency and objectivity.
1.15 In this regard, the Ministry have explained as below:—
“Constant efforts were made to improve the system of allocation
of coal/ lignite blocks. The lists of coal blocks identified from time
to time for allocation were placed on the website of the Ministry.
The system of offering identified coal/lignite blocks through a
public advertisement published in the major national and regional
newspapers as well as on the Ministry’s website was introduced.
The guidelines for allocation of blocks were reviewed, modified,
rationalised and amplified after each round of allocation based
on the experience gained. However, it was found that the element
of subjectivity could not be eliminated entirely under the different
mechanisms adopted so far. Only a process of competitive bidding

16
can possibly provide a completely rational and objective system
of evaluation. Hence the proposed amendment.”
1.16 In regard to a specific query on forfeiture of upfront
payment, why the allocatee should not be strictly penalized by charging
a fixed amount and banning them for certain period from participation
of bidding, the Ministry stated that:—
“The block allocattees are also required to deposit a bank
guarantee equal to one year’s royalty and if the block is not
developed as per the agreed milestones, then a proportionate
amount is liable to be deducted as per the delay in respect of
each milestone. If the entire bank guarantee amount is forfeited,
then the block is liable to be de-allocated. The suggestion about
de-barring the party from participating in the future auctions for
a specified period has been noted and would be considered when
the modalities of auctioning are finalised.”
1.17 The Ministry have stated in their reply as under:—
“The processes of acquiring land, resettlement and rehabilitation,
obtaining forest and environmental clearances etc. are quite time
consuming because of multi-stage examinations involved. Coal
and lignite blocks developments are monitored periodically.
Penal action is taken where delay is found”.
1.18 To expedite the process of grant of prospecting licence, it
has been decided by the Ministry to convey the prior approval of
the Central Government at the time of allocation of block itself. This
would reduce the time lost in obtaining the prior approval quite
significantly.
1.19 The Ministry of Coal have also been pursuing with the other
Ministries/State Governments concerned to streamline the processes of
land acquisition, and grant of statutory clearances. Through closer
monitoring and better coordination with the State Governments, the
situation would be improved further.

17
1.20 Regarding what action would be taken if the winner in the
bidding process is unable to develop the block due to problems of land
acquisition,  lack of adequate coordination and cooperation of the State
Governments and demands compensation for non-materialization of
his projects due to the above-said problems, the Ministry in their
written reply have  stated as under:—
“The statutory obligations and the problems associated with the
development of blocks would be known to the prospective
bidders and would be common to all. The prospective bidder for
a block shall have to bid for the coal resources knowing fully
well the associated problems and risks. Hence, there is no
question of compensation for non-materialization of project due
to any problems faced by the bidder.
Development of mines would involve significant capital
investment and would generate lot of economic activity within
the State. This would mean greater employment opportunities,
higher investment in infrastructure development, higher revenue
generation and would provide impetus to overall economic
development of the region. Therefore, the States would have a
stake in encouraging optimal exploitation of mineral resources
and facilitating early development of coal mines. The Ministry
would also seek to establish better coordination with them for
this purpose”.
1.21 About the bidding amount for various kinds of coal blocks
would be finalised and authority who decides the amount, the Ministry
in their written reply  have stated as under:—
“For easy determination of value of different grades of coal, the
notified price of coal as fixed by CIL and SCCL and the import
price of coal would be available as benchmarks. On the basis of
these prices, the Central Government shall be able to determine
the floor price. Further, transparent bidding through the inter-play

18
of market forces should be the best method of discovering the
right premium for the resource.”
1.22 As regards the steps being taken by the Ministry to prevent
such malpractices in the proposed new system of allotment of
coal blocks, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as
below:-
“Coal blocks for commercial mining are allotted to a
Government company or corporation only, as under the
provisions of the CMN Act, 1973 only a Government company
can carry on commercial mining of coal.  A Government
company/corporation, when allotted a coal block under this
dispensation, can use the coal obtained from that block for
commercial trading, without the restriction of captive consump-
tion. In order to attract capital, technology and expertise, the
allocatee Government company/corporation may chose to form
a joint venture with private partners to develop the block.
However, the requirement or condition remains that the joint
venture so formed shall have to retain the character of a
Government company as defined under the Companies Act, 1956.
As long as the statutory  requirements are satisfied by the
allocattee, the Government cannot prohibit what is permitted by
law.”
1.23 The Ministry have further informed the Committee that the
Ministry will be responsible for conducting the auction through
competitive bidding. If it becomes necessary to engage consultants to
assist the Ministry, they would be selected through a transparent and
open system.
1.241.241.241.241.24 While explaining the background for bringing “TheWhile explaining the background for bringing “TheWhile explaining the background for bringing “TheWhile explaining the background for bringing “TheWhile explaining the background for bringing “The
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) AmendmentMines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) AmendmentMines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) AmendmentMines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) AmendmentMines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment
Bill, 2008”, the Ministry of Coal have stated that with theBill, 2008”, the Ministry of Coal have stated that with theBill, 2008”, the Ministry of Coal have stated that with theBill, 2008”, the Ministry of Coal have stated that with theBill, 2008”, the Ministry of Coal have stated that with the
progressive allocation of coal blocks, the number of coal blocksprogressive allocation of coal blocks, the number of coal blocksprogressive allocation of coal blocks, the number of coal blocksprogressive allocation of coal blocks, the number of coal blocksprogressive allocation of coal blocks, the number of coal blocks
available for allocation is declining while the number of applicantsavailable for allocation is declining while the number of applicantsavailable for allocation is declining while the number of applicantsavailable for allocation is declining while the number of applicantsavailable for allocation is declining while the number of applicants

19
per block is increasing, as the demand for coal keeps increasing.per block is increasing, as the demand for coal keeps increasing.per block is increasing, as the demand for coal keeps increasing.per block is increasing, as the demand for coal keeps increasing.per block is increasing, as the demand for coal keeps increasing.
This has made selecThis has made selecThis has made selecThis has made selecThis has made selec tion of an applicant in respect of a blocktion of an applicant in respect of a blocktion of an applicant in respect of a blocktion of an applicant in respect of a blocktion of an applicant in respect of a block
difficult and vulnerable to criticism on the ground of lack ofdifficult and vulnerable to criticism on the ground of lack ofdifficult and vulnerable to criticism on the ground of lack ofdifficult and vulnerable to criticism on the ground of lack ofdifficult and vulnerable to criticism on the ground of lack of
transparency and objectivity.  While efforts are on continuously totransparency and objectivity.  While efforts are on continuously totransparency and objectivity.  While efforts are on continuously totransparency and objectivity.  While efforts are on continuously totransparency and objectivity.  While efforts are on continuously to
add blocks to the captive list, it was also expected that the demandadd blocks to the captive list, it was also expected that the demandadd blocks to the captive list, it was also expected that the demandadd blocks to the captive list, it was also expected that the demandadd blocks to the captive list, it was also expected that the demand
for blocks would remain far ahead of supply.  Therefore, a necessityfor blocks would remain far ahead of supply.  Therefore, a necessityfor blocks would remain far ahead of supply.  Therefore, a necessityfor blocks would remain far ahead of supply.  Therefore, a necessityfor blocks would remain far ahead of supply.  Therefore, a necessity
has arisen to bring in a process of selection that is not only objectivehas arisen to bring in a process of selection that is not only objectivehas arisen to bring in a process of selection that is not only objectivehas arisen to bring in a process of selection that is not only objectivehas arisen to bring in a process of selection that is not only objective
but also transparent.  Auction through competitive bidding forbut also transparent.  Auction through competitive bidding forbut also transparent.  Auction through competitive bidding forbut also transparent.  Auction through competitive bidding forbut also transparent.  Auction through competitive bidding for
allocation of coal blocks to private companies according to theallocation of coal blocks to private companies according to theallocation of coal blocks to private companies according to theallocation of coal blocks to private companies according to theallocation of coal blocks to private companies according to the
Ministry, is one such acceptable selection process.Ministry, is one such acceptable selection process.Ministry, is one such acceptable selection process.Ministry, is one such acceptable selection process.Ministry, is one such acceptable selection process.
The Committee feel that it would have been appropriate if theThe Committee feel that it would have been appropriate if theThe Committee feel that it would have been appropriate if theThe Committee feel that it would have been appropriate if theThe Committee feel that it would have been appropriate if the
Ministry of Coal had brought out a comprehensive White PaperMinistry of Coal had brought out a comprehensive White PaperMinistry of Coal had brought out a comprehensive White PaperMinistry of Coal had brought out a comprehensive White PaperMinistry of Coal had brought out a comprehensive White Paper
giving details of the coal reserves available, the minable coal, coalgiving details of the coal reserves available, the minable coal, coalgiving details of the coal reserves available, the minable coal, coalgiving details of the coal reserves available, the minable coal, coalgiving details of the coal reserves available, the minable coal, coal
blocks allotted so far with the present status, reasons for the delayblocks allotted so far with the present status, reasons for the delayblocks allotted so far with the present status, reasons for the delayblocks allotted so far with the present status, reasons for the delayblocks allotted so far with the present status, reasons for the delay
in the development of such blocks along with contingency plan toin the development of such blocks along with contingency plan toin the development of such blocks along with contingency plan toin the development of such blocks along with contingency plan toin the development of such blocks along with contingency plan to
develop them in a time bound manner so as to achieve thedevelop them in a time bound manner so as to achieve thedevelop them in a time bound manner so as to achieve thedevelop them in a time bound manner so as to achieve thedevelop them in a time bound manner so as to achieve the
envisaged coal production target before starting the process ofenvisaged coal production target before starting the process ofenvisaged coal production target before starting the process ofenvisaged coal production target before starting the process ofenvisaged coal production target before starting the process of
auction of such blocks.auction of such blocks.auction of such blocks.auction of such blocks.auction of such blocks.
1.251.251.251.251.25 The Ministry are stated to have sought the views of theThe Ministry are stated to have sought the views of theThe Ministry are stated to have sought the views of theThe Ministry are stated to have sought the views of theThe Ministry are stated to have sought the views of the
concerned stakeholders and the State Governments where theconcerned stakeholders and the State Governments where theconcerned stakeholders and the State Governments where theconcerned stakeholders and the State Governments where theconcerned stakeholders and the State Governments where the
coal/lignite resources are located. While the comments from thecoal/lignite resources are located. While the comments from thecoal/lignite resources are located. While the comments from thecoal/lignite resources are located. While the comments from thecoal/lignite resources are located. While the comments from the
State Governments of Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and West BengalState Governments of Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and West BengalState Governments of Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and West BengalState Governments of Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and West BengalState Governments of Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and West Bengal
were received by them, the comments from other coal bearingwere received by them, the comments from other coal bearingwere received by them, the comments from other coal bearingwere received by them, the comments from other coal bearingwere received by them, the comments from other coal bearing
States viz. Assam, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Tamil NaduStates viz. Assam, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Tamil NaduStates viz. Assam, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Tamil NaduStates viz. Assam, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Tamil NaduStates viz. Assam, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Tamil Nadu
were not received. The States have expressed apprehensionwere not received. The States have expressed apprehensionwere not received. The States have expressed apprehensionwere not received. The States have expressed apprehensionwere not received. The States have expressed apprehension
that allocation of coal blocks through competitive bidding wouldthat allocation of coal blocks through competitive bidding wouldthat allocation of coal blocks through competitive bidding wouldthat allocation of coal blocks through competitive bidding wouldthat allocation of coal blocks through competitive bidding would
add to the cost of coal and would be discriminatory betweenadd to the cost of coal and would be discriminatory betweenadd to the cost of coal and would be discriminatory betweenadd to the cost of coal and would be discriminatory betweenadd to the cost of coal and would be discriminatory between
existing allottees and the future allottees. According to them theexisting allottees and the future allottees. According to them theexisting allottees and the future allottees. According to them theexisting allottees and the future allottees. According to them theexisting allottees and the future allottees. According to them the
competitive bidding should be based on technical and physicalcompetitive bidding should be based on technical and physicalcompetitive bidding should be based on technical and physicalcompetitive bidding should be based on technical and physicalcompetitive bidding should be based on technical and physical
parameters and not on financial parameters. It was also suggestedparameters and not on financial parameters. It was also suggestedparameters and not on financial parameters. It was also suggestedparameters and not on financial parameters. It was also suggestedparameters and not on financial parameters. It was also suggested
by the State Governments that incentives should be given toby the State Governments that incentives should be given toby the State Governments that incentives should be given toby the State Governments that incentives should be given toby the State Governments that incentives should be given to
encourage value-addition within the State where coal resources areencourage value-addition within the State where coal resources areencourage value-addition within the State where coal resources areencourage value-addition within the State where coal resources areencourage value-addition within the State where coal resources are
located.located.located.located.located.

20
The Committee firmly believe that since States are the ownerThe Committee firmly believe that since States are the ownerThe Committee firmly believe that since States are the ownerThe Committee firmly believe that since States are the ownerThe Committee firmly believe that since States are the owner
of the scarce mineral resources, the consultation with them andof the scarce mineral resources, the consultation with them andof the scarce mineral resources, the consultation with them andof the scarce mineral resources, the consultation with them andof the scarce mineral resources, the consultation with them and
consideration of their suggestions is absolutely necessary beforeconsideration of their suggestions is absolutely necessary beforeconsideration of their suggestions is absolutely necessary beforeconsideration of their suggestions is absolutely necessary beforeconsideration of their suggestions is absolutely necessary before
switching over to new policy regime. The Committee, therefore,switching over to new policy regime. The Committee, therefore,switching over to new policy regime. The Committee, therefore,switching over to new policy regime. The Committee, therefore,switching over to new policy regime. The Committee, therefore,
would like the Ministry to suitably address the grievances of Statewould like the Ministry to suitably address the grievances of Statewould like the Ministry to suitably address the grievances of Statewould like the Ministry to suitably address the grievances of Statewould like the Ministry to suitably address the grievances of State
Governments and stakeholders by convening immediately aGovernments and stakeholders by convening immediately aGovernments and stakeholders by convening immediately aGovernments and stakeholders by convening immediately aGovernments and stakeholders by convening immediately a
meeting with all of them before going ahead with the proposedmeeting with all of them before going ahead with the proposedmeeting with all of them before going ahead with the proposedmeeting with all of them before going ahead with the proposedmeeting with all of them before going ahead with the proposed
legislation so as to safeguard their interest.legislation so as to safeguard their interest.legislation so as to safeguard their interest.legislation so as to safeguard their interest.legislation so as to safeguard their interest.
1.261.261.261.261.26 The Committee are of the firm opinion that if the coalThe Committee are of the firm opinion that if the coalThe Committee are of the firm opinion that if the coalThe Committee are of the firm opinion that if the coalThe Committee are of the firm opinion that if the coal
block already allotted are not developed as per the time-frame setblock already allotted are not developed as per the time-frame setblock already allotted are not developed as per the time-frame setblock already allotted are not developed as per the time-frame setblock already allotted are not developed as per the time-frame set
by the Ministry, their allocation should be automatically standby the Ministry, their allocation should be automatically standby the Ministry, their allocation should be automatically standby the Ministry, their allocation should be automatically standby the Ministry, their allocation should be automatically stand
de-allocated and such coal blocks may be disposed off through newde-allocated and such coal blocks may be disposed off through newde-allocated and such coal blocks may be disposed off through newde-allocated and such coal blocks may be disposed off through newde-allocated and such coal blocks may be disposed off through new
policy initiative now being contemplated.  After this exercise ispolicy initiative now being contemplated.  After this exercise ispolicy initiative now being contemplated.  After this exercise ispolicy initiative now being contemplated.  After this exercise ispolicy initiative now being contemplated.  After this exercise is
completed, only then new blocks may be allotted throughcompleted, only then new blocks may be allotted throughcompleted, only then new blocks may be allotted throughcompleted, only then new blocks may be allotted throughcompleted, only then new blocks may be allotted through
competitive bidding.competitive bidding.competitive bidding.competitive bidding.competitive bidding.
1.271.271.271.271.27 After careful consideration of the written informationAfter careful consideration of the written informationAfter careful consideration of the written informationAfter careful consideration of the written informationAfter careful consideration of the written information
furnished to the Committee as well as the oral evidence tenderedfurnished to the Committee as well as the oral evidence tenderedfurnished to the Committee as well as the oral evidence tenderedfurnished to the Committee as well as the oral evidence tenderedfurnished to the Committee as well as the oral evidence tendered
by the representatives of the Ministries of Coal and Mines beforeby the representatives of the Ministries of Coal and Mines beforeby the representatives of the Ministries of Coal and Mines beforeby the representatives of the Ministries of Coal and Mines beforeby the representatives of the Ministries of Coal and Mines before
them, the Committee are of the considered view that if at all itthem, the Committee are of the considered view that if at all itthem, the Committee are of the considered view that if at all itthem, the Committee are of the considered view that if at all itthem, the Committee are of the considered view that if at all it
is essential to bring the proposed Amendment Bill, the Governmentis essential to bring the proposed Amendment Bill, the Governmentis essential to bring the proposed Amendment Bill, the Governmentis essential to bring the proposed Amendment Bill, the Governmentis essential to bring the proposed Amendment Bill, the Government
ought to take following measures  before taking legislative routeought to take following measures  before taking legislative routeought to take following measures  before taking legislative routeought to take following measures  before taking legislative routeought to take following measures  before taking legislative route
for the Amendment Bill:—for the Amendment Bill:—for the Amendment Bill:—for the Amendment Bill:—for the Amendment Bill:—
(i) Every coal block is different in terms of geological
formation, coal reserves, quality and quantity of coal,
available infrastructure, method of mining, surface
features, environmental and local considerations. As such,
each coal block will have different financial value. In
order to assess the correct value of a particular coal block,
the Ministry of Coal should engage the services of a
reputed Consultant besides the services of CMPDIL
(Central Mine, Planning and Design Institute Limited) for
the entire process of competitive bidding;

21
(ii) The feasibility study report, mine valuation and financial
modelling needs to be done in advance for each coal block
proposed to be auctioned;
(iii) The process of selection of coal block  through auction
should be documented in detail and deliberated before
hand to avoid any ambiguity and manipulation during
implementation;
(iv) The coal blocks in reserve forests/protected forests should
not be allotted to save forest environment and local
population;
(v) Coal blocks should be categorised in three categories viz.
good, moderate and reasonable based on quantity and
quality of coal, mining cost, available infrastructure,
environmental considerations and human environment
before auctioning;
(vi) The technical and financial criterion for competitive
bidding should be finalised realistically;
(vii) Before allotting coal block to a particular end user, its
exact requirement for coal should be determined prior to
allotment 
vis-a-vis its planned future projection;
(viii)The land use map needs to be clearly defined so as to
avoid allotment of coal bearing land for establishment of
any other industry;
(ix) The reasons for delay in commencing coal production
from coal blocks should be adequately addressed so that
schedule for development and coal production is timely
achieved;
(x) The process of Resettlement and Rehabilitation for
project affected people should be clearly defined in
document of auction including financial packages and

22
employment opportunities and implementation schedule
thereof;
(xi) Detailed community welfare and peripheral development
for the affected people should be included in the
document of auction with financial provisions; and
(xii) Special Local Coal Area Development Authority should
be set up to regulate the development and welfare of the
community.
  N EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
18 February , 2009 Chairman,
29 Magha , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

23
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2008-09) HELD ON 05.12.2008 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1530 hours to 1720 hours.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
12. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
13. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
14. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
15. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
16. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla
18. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
11. Shri Jesudas Seelam
12. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
2323

24
LIST OF WITNESSES
Ministry of CoalMinistry of CoalMinistry of CoalMinistry of CoalMinistry of Coal
1. Shri C. Balakrishnan, Secretary
2. Shri K.S. Kropha, Joint Secretary
3. Shri P.R. Mandal, Adviser
4. Shri K.C. Samria, Director
Ministry of MinesMinistry of MinesMinistry of MinesMinistry of MinesMinistry of Mines
1. Shri Shantanu Consul, Secretary
2. Smt. A.B. Pande, Joint Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Director
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up first agenda regarding
consideration and adoption of the following draft Action Taken
Reports:—
(i) ** ** ** ** **
(ii) ** ** ** ** **
(iii) ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** **
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up the second agenda
regarding briefing by the Ministries of Coal and Mines on “The Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2008”
as introduced in Rajya Sabha on 17.10.2008 and referred to the
Committee for examination and report. The Chairman welcomed the
representatives of Ministries of Coal and Mines. The Secretary, Ministry
of Coal made a visual presentation on the subject followed by
**Does not pertain to this Report.

25
briefing. Then, the Secretary, Ministry of Mines briefed the Committee
on the subject. The following points were emerged during the
discussion:—
(i) Necessity of bringing out the proposed amendment in The
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR)
Act, 1957;
(ii) Objections to the proposed amendment made by the
stakeholders and replies of the Ministries of Coal and Mines;
(iii) Considerations of physical parameters (in addition to
technical and financial parameters as proposed) in the
process of competitive bidding;
(iv) Possibilities of retrenchment in employment in Coal India
Ltd.(CIL) and its subsidiaries;
(v) Re-look into the coal blocks allotted during the period when
proposed amendment bill was in process; and
(vi) Any other amendments likely to bring into the MMDR Act,
1957 in the near future.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.

26
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 20th JANUARY, 2009 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM  NO. ‘139’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI.
The Committee sat from 1600 hours to 1645 hours.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
4. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
5. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
6. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
7. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
10. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
11. Shri R.C. Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee and apprised them that “The Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2008” has
been referred by the Hon’ble Speaker on 31st October, 2008 to the
Committee for examination and report within three months. The
26

27
Chairman stated that the Committee had heard the representatives of
the Ministries of Coal and Mines on the various aspect of the Bill and
invited the Hon’ble Members to offer their suggestions for inclusion
in the Draft Report on Bill. After some deliberation, the following issues
were raised by the Hon’ble Members:—
(i) Allotment of captive coal blocks and their status;
(ii) Competitive biddings for coal blocks;
(iii) Parameters for competitive bidding of coal block;
(iv) Need for new technology for underground coal mining;
(v) Feasibility for land use map for coal bearing areas; and
(vi) Assessment of coal reserves and their correct values
earmarked for competitive biddings;
3. The Committee then decided to seek more clarifications on
the Bill from the concerned Ministries on the aforesaid points so that
the Committee could arrive at proper and just conclusions before
finalizing the Draft Report.
4. The Committee also assured the Chairman to seek extension
of time from the Hon’ble Speaker upto the last day of next session
for presenting this Report on the Bill to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

28
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 10TH FEBRUARY, 2009 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1630 hours to consider and
adopt the draft Report on “The Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2008”.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansagopal Choudhary
4. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
5. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
6. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
7. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
8. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
9. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
10. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
11. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
12. Shri R.C. Singh alias Ram Chandra Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members
of the Committee.
28

29
3. The Committee then took up for consideration  draft Report
on “The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amend-
ment Bill, 2008.
4. Most of the Members of the Committee pointed out that the
Ministry of Coal had invited comments from the State Governments
on the proposed Amendment Bill. While the views of the State
Government of Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Rajasthan were
received, the comments from the State Governments of Assam,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Tamil Nadu have not been
received. The Committee, therefore, decided that it might not be
appropriate to finalize the Draft Report as their suggestions/views
apparently had not been taken into consideration by the Ministry
before finalizing the details of the Legislative Proposal.  The Committee
authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to request Hon’ble Speaker to grant
extension of time for finalization and presentation of Report to
Parliament on the Amendment Bill to enable the Committee to hear
the views/comments of the concerned State Governments.  The
Committee, therefore, decided to defer the consideration of the draft
Report on the Bill.
The Committee then adjourned.

30
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 17TH FEBRUARY, 2009 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1710 hours
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansagopal Choudhary
4. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
5. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
6. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
7. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
8. Shri Sugrib Singh
9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
11. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
12. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
13. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
14. Shri R.C. Singh alias Ram Chandra Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.S.Chera — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
30

31
LIST OF WITNESSES
Ministry of Coal
1. Shri C. Balakrishnan, Secretary
2. Shri K.S. Kropha, Joint Secretary
3. Shri K.C. Samria, Director
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Shantanu Consul, Secretary
2. Ms. A.B. Pande, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members
of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting
of the Committee has been convened to hear from the representatives
of the Ministries of Coal and Mines whether the comments of the States
on “The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amend-
ment Bill, 2008” have been received by them and what action has been
to be taken thereon. He also requested the Members to seek
clarifications from the representatives of the Ministries so that the
Committee could finalise the Report as Hon’ble Speaker has granted
extension of time only upto 23rd February, 2009 to present the Report
to Parliament.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministries of Coal and Mines. The Secretaries, Ministry of Coal
and Ministry of Mines briefed the Committee on the Bill explained
to the various queries raised by the Members.
The witnesses  then withdrew.
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the Draft
Report of the Committee on “The Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2008” and  adopted  the same with
some modifications.

32
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report
after making consequential changes arising out of factual verifications
by the concerned Ministries and to present the Report to Parliament
during the current session.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.

33
APPENDIXAPPENDIXAPPENDIXAPPENDIXAPPENDIX
AS INTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. XXXIX of 2008
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Mines and Minerals (Develop-
ment and Regulation) Act, 1957 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), after section 11,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘11A. The Central Government may, for the
purpose of granting reconnaissance permit,
prospecting licence or mining lease in respect
of an area containing coal and lignite, select,
through auction by competitive bidding on
such terms and conditions as may be pre-
scribed, a company engaged in,—
(i) production of iron and steel;
67 of 1957.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Insertion
of new
section
11A.
Procedure
in respect
of coal and
lignite.
33

34
(ii) generation of power;
(iii) washing of coal obtained from a mine;
or
(iv) such other end use the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify,
and the State Government shall grant such
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or
mining lease in respect of coal and lignite to
such company as selected through auction by
competitive bidding under this section:
Provided that the auction by competitive
bidding shall not be applicable to an area
containing coal or lignite,—
(a) where such area is considered for
allocation to a Government company or corpo-
ration for mining or such other specified end
use;
(b) where such area is considered for
allocation to a company or corporation that has
been awarded a power project on the basis of
competitive bids for tariff (including Ultra
Mega Power Projects).
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section “company” means a company as
defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956
and includes a foreign company within the
meaning of section 591 of that act.’
3. In section 13 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(d) the terms and conditions of auction by
competitive bidding for selection of the com-
pany under section 11A,”.
Amend-
ment of
section 13.
1 of 1956.

35
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Coal Mines Nationalisation Act, 1973 (26 of 1973), allows
private companies engaged in generation of power, production of iron
and steel, washing of coal obtained from mines and such other end-
uses as may be specified by the Central Government by notification,
to carry on coal mining for their captive end-use
2. In order to allocate coal blocks to private  companies for
captive mining of coal, a Screening Committee was set up in the
Ministry of Coal through an administrative order, to consider
applications made by various companies. The Screening Committee is
an Inter-Ministerial and Inter-Governmental body, having representa-
tives from various administrative Ministries/Departments concerned of
the Central Government, the State Governments where the coal blocks
are located, and coal companies, etc.
3. With the progressive allocation of coal blocks, the number
of coal blocks available for allocation is declining while the number
of applicants per block is increasing, as the demand for coal keeps
increasing. This has made selection of an applicant in respect of a block
difficult and vulnerable to criticism on the ground of lack of
transparency and objectivity.
4. While efforts are on hand to continuously add blocks to the
captive list, it was also expected that the demand for blocks would
remain far ahead of supply. Therefore, a necessity has arisen to bring
in a process of selection that is not only objective but also transparent.
Auction through competitive bidding for allocation of coal blocks to
private companies is one such acceptable selection process. While the
Coal Mines Nationalisation Act, 1973, besides providing for
nationalisation and associated provisions, specifies who can and who
cannot undertake coal mining in India, the entities permitted to carry
on coal mining under the said Act follow the provisions of the Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and the rules
made thereunder, for acquiring mineral rights, mining lease and other
35

36
matters related to mineral administration. Hence, selection process by
auction through competitive bidding for allocation of coal blocks to
private companies is sought to be introduced through an amendment
in the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.
5. In the proposed arrangement, auction by competitive
bidding shall not be applicable in respect of allocation of coal blocks
to Government company or a Central or State Public Sector
Undertaking. Further, competitive bidding shall not be applicable for
allocation of coal blocks to a company or corporation that has been
awarded a power project on the basis of competitive bids for tariffs,
including Ultra Mega Power Projects.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
 N
EW D ELHI; SIS RAM OLA.
The 25 th March , 2008.

37
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 11A in the
Mine and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. The said
clause seeks to empower the Central Government to prescribe the terms
and conditions for the selection of a company through competitive
bidding in respect of an area containing coal and lignite. Clause 3
enables the Central Government to make rules for the purposes covered
by the aforesaid new provision.
2.  The matters in respect of which the said rules may be made
are essentially matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
37

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE M INES AND M INERALS (R EGULATION AND
DEVELOPMENT) A CT, 1957
(67 OF 1957
**** *
13. (1) *** *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
**** *
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules
in respect of
minerals.
38

39
RAJYA SABHA
________
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957.
________
(Shri Sis Ram Ola, Minister of Mines)

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.