LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
COAL  AND STEEL
(2006-2007)
MINISTRY OF MINES
PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL MINING
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
27


TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF MINES
PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL MINING
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.08.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.08.2007
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)


CC&S No. 27
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by S. Narayan & Sons, New Delhi-20.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... ( V)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ......................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................ 22
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
 accepted by the Committee ..................................... 23
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ....................................................................... 27
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel (2006-07) held
on 14.6.2007 ............................................................... 32
ANNEXURE II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee
on Coal and Steel ....................................................... 34

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2006-2007)
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu
4. Shri Hiten Barman
5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
12. Shri Brajesh Pathak
13. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
14. Shri Tarachand Sahu
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
16. Smt. Karuna Shukla
17. Shri Prabhunath Singh
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
19. Shri Sugrib Singh
20. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
21. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
24. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
25. Shri Surendra Lath
26. Shri Ajay Maroo

(iv)
27. Shri B.J. Panda
28. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
29. Shri Jesudas Seelam
30. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
31. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
4. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. Surinder Marwaha — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Twenty Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on “Prevention of
Illegal Mining” of the Ministry of Mines.
2. The Nineteenth Report on the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 4th August 2006. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 15th March 2007.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 14.6.2007.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee
is given at Annexure-III.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
   N
EW DELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
16 August, 2007 Chairman,
25 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER-I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(2005-06) on the subject “Prevention of Illegal Mining” of the Ministry of
Mines which was presented to Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2006.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 10 and 12
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Sl. No. 9
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. Nos. 4 and 14
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 6, 7, 11 and 13.
1.3 The Committee desire that final reply in respect of the
recommendation which has been categorized as interim reply by the
Committee should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.
1.4 The Committee also desire that utmost importance should
be given to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, it is not possible for the Government to implement
any recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reasons, the matter
should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-
implementation.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations made in
the Nineteenth Report.

2
A. Prepare and Implement Mine Closure Plans properly
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.18)
1.6 The Committee had noted that in most of the cases, illegal
mining had been taking place stealthily and clandestinely from the
abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-working part of mine or from
outcrop region, as admitted by the Union Minister of State for Coal in
reply to a Starred Question No. 306 dated 14.12.2005 in Lok Sabha. The
Committee were anguished to note that Union as well as State
Governments had neither the details of abandoned/closed/disused
mines nor taken effective steps for prevention of illegal mining from such
mines. This gave credence to the fact that no mine closure plans for the
purpose of decommissioning, reclamation and rehabilitation in the mine
or part thereof after cessation of mining and mineral processing
operations were properly being prepared and implemented.
1.7 The Committee had, therefore, desired the Ministry/IBM to
ensure that the mine closure plans were prepared and executed
immediately after cessation of mining activities and also that no mine
was left in an abandoned state. The Committee had also liked the Ministry
to keep the State Governments informed about the mine closure plans in
order to have a well coordinated approach for prevention of illegal
mining.
1.8 The Ministry of Mines in its reply has stated that it has
introduced the concept of the progressive mine closure plan and final
mine closure plan for proper reclamation and rehabilitation of the area
held under mining lease w.e.f. 10.4.2003. Every mining leaseholder has
to submit a progressive and final mine closure plan in the progressive
mine closure plan the mining lease has to indicate the protective,
reclamation and rehabilitative measures to be taken progressively and
in final mine closure plan such measures to be taken after the cessation
of mining operations.  Every lease holder has to furnish financial
assurance to the competent authority and if the mining lease does not
carry out protective reclamation and rehabilitative measures as
envisaged in the approved mine closure plan the financial assurance
can he realized by the State Government to carry out the requisite
protective measures in the area held under mining lease.
1.9 The Committee had earlier desired the Ministry/IBM to
ensure that the mine closer plans were prepared and executed

3
immediately after cessation of mining activity and also that no mine
was left in abandoned stage. The Ministry has informed the Committee
that it had introduced the concept of progressive mine closure plan
and final mine closure plan for proper reclamation and rehabilitation
of the area held under mining lease with effect from 10.4.2003. The
Committee, however, feel that despite the provision of mine closure
plan already in place, the menace of illegal mining continued unabated.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to strictly implement
the mine closure plan in close coordination with the State Governments
in order to prevent the illegal mining. The Committee also desire the
Ministry to furnish them the details of mine closure plans executed
since April, 2003.
B. Issue directions to States to frame Rules for Prevention of Illegal
Mining, transportation and storage of minerals
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.15)
1.10 The Committee had noted that Mines & Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1957, Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, Mines and
Minerals Development Rules, 1988 provide the legal framework for
prevention of illegal mining. In pursuance to the recommendations of
Tandon Committee, MMDR Act, 1957 was amended in 1999 by inserting
new Section 23C empowering the State Governments to frame rules for
prevention of illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals. The
State Governments were also required to regulate and provide for
establishment of check posts, regulation of mineral transport, inspection,
checking and search of minerals at the place of excavation, storage or
during the transit.
1.11 The Committee had felt that Section 23C of MMDR Act was
immensely crucial provision for managing the mineral wealth of the
country and its exploitation for the welfare of the people. The Committee
were dismayed that even after the lapse of more than seven years, only 9
State Governments had framed the necessary rules under Section 23C of
MMDR Act. The Committee were deeply concerned that several States
with high incidents of illegal mining were still blissfully unaware of
their responsibilities as well as ground realities which was eating into
their vital source of revenue.
1.12 The Committee could not but deprecate the lackadaisical
attitude of the State Governments as well as the failure of the Ministry to
convince them to frame such rules resulting in rampant illegal mining.

4
1.13 The Committee had, therefore, desired the Ministry of Mines to
seriously look into the matter and issue directions to recalcitrant States
to immediately frame the rules for prevention of illegal mining,
transportation and storage of minerals.
1.14 In Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Mines has informed the
Committee that it is taking pro-active steps to prevent illegal mining. The
Ministry has devised a three-pronged action strategy to effectively curb
illegal mining by writing to Chief Minister’s, Chief Secretaries and
concerned Secretary of State Governments which is as follows:-
(i) Constitution of Task Forces/Flying Squads at both State and
district levels for taking effective action against illegal mining.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments to constitute
Task Forces/Flying Squads at State and District level. These bodies
would have a member from IBM. So far 19 States i.e. Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam,
Tamilnadu (State Level only) & Bihar have constituted Task Force.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not constituted Task forces to do so immediately.
(ii) Framing of rules by the State Governments under section 23C
of Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 to enable
them to provide for inspection, checking & search of minerals at the
place of excavation, storage and during transit. It also provides for
establishment of check-post and weigh bridges.
So far 14 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West  Bengal, Rajasthan &
Haryana have framed rules under section 23C of the MMDR Act
1957.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not framed Rules under Section 23C of the MMDR Act, 1957 to do so
immediately.
(iii) Regular monitoring by the Central Government of instances of
illegal mining, action taken by the State Government against such
activities and other steps taken by State  Governments  to curb illegal
mining with the Secretaries of State Governments in the review
meeting held for the purpose.  State Governments have been asked

5
to furnish quarterly returns in the prescribed proforma on instances
of illegal mining and action taken by State Governments thereof to
Indian Bureau of Mines, which are also reviewed by the Central
Government by holding meetings with State Governments. So far
the Ministry has held three meetings with the chief mineral
producing States.
1.15 Since the non-framing of rules by most of the State
Governments was the main reason for the rampant illegal mining in
the country, the Committee had desired the Ministry to direct the States
who had not framed rules for prevention of illegal mining,
transportation and storage of minerals to do so. The Ministry in its
reply has stated that so far 14 States have framed rules under section
23C of MMDR Act 1957 for the prevention of illegal mining and
instructions have been issued to the remaining State Governments for
framing such rules. The Committee are pained to note that illegal mining
has already played havoc on the mineral resources of the country and
caused great loss to the national exchequer but some of the State
Governments are still oblivious to the fact that massive illegal mining
is taking place in their respective States in the absence of rules to curb
this menace. The Committee would like to reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire the Ministry to take up the matter
vigorously with such State Governments.
C. Amend MMDR Act suitably to review/revise inconsistent orders
of the State Governments
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.16)
1.16 The Committee had noted that under section 23C (3) of MMDR
Act 1957,the Central Government have no power to revise any order
passed by a State Government or any of its authorized officer or any
authority under the rules made under sub-section (1) and (2). The
Committee considered this an anomalous situation as in the absence of
powers to revise any order passed by the State Governments, there might
be conflicting provisions and deviations, inconsistent with the spirit of
the Central Act.
1.17 The Committee felt that the Central Government should retain
its moderating role and therefore desired that MMDR Act should be
suitably amended to provide powers to the Central Government to
review/revise inconsistent orders passed by the State Governments.

6
1.18 The Ministry of Mines in its Action Taken Reply has submitted
that a high level meeting had taken up a review of the national mining
policy and it has submitted its recommendations to the Government.
Based  on the recommendations, inter-ministerial  consultations and
consultations with State Governments, approval on National Mineral
Policy, 2007 which address the policy issues raised by the Standing
Committee, has been sought from the Cabinet.
1.19 The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that
MMDR Act should be suitably amended to provide powers to the
Central Government to review/revise the inconsistent orders passed
by the State Governments.  The Ministry has submitted that a high
level Committee had reviewed the National Mineral Policy and
submitted its recommendations to the Government. Based on the
recommendations, approval of the National Mineral Policy 2007 has
been sought from the Cabinet. The Committee stress that debarring
the Central Government from revising any inconsistent order passed
by a State Government under section 23(c)(3) of MMDR Act is against
the spirit of the Central  Act and the issue needs to be addressed in
right perspective. The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate
that MMDR Act should be suitably amended to provide powers to the
Central Government to revise the inconsistent orders passed by State
Governments.
D. Take measures to contain unlawful mining activities
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.17)
1.20 The Committee observed that MMDR Act, 1957 was silent
whether mining activities beyond the permissible lease constitutes illegal
mining. The Act was also silent whether any mining activity in the
abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-working part of mine or from
out crop regions constitutes illegal mining. The representatives of the
Ministry during the course of evidence, had however, informed the
Committee that mining activity beyond the permissible lease constitutes
illegal mining until the approval of the Central Government  obtained
for relaxing the limit in the interest of mineral development. The
Committee consider it as a glaring lacunae in the Act as definition of
illegal mining did not find place in it.
1.21 The Committee viewed with concern the manipulation of
existing mining plans and the violations in mining of major minerals in

7
various States. As was evident from large-scale transportation activities
visible in the area, the mining companies were indulging in excessive
excavation of minerals beyond the permissible limits under the approved
plans. The Committee were also anguished to note that whereas mining
plan approved for a particular area, mining activities were clandestinely
being carried out much below the ground level and beyond the approved
area sometimes jeopardizing the historical and ancient monuments.
1.22 The Committee were also perturbed to find a large number of
casualties taking place on account of dubious means adopted for carrying
out illegal mining particularly in coal bearing areas of several States.
The Committee also believed that such activities necessarily involve large-
scale exploitation of the labourers.
1.23 The Committee desired the Ministry to immediately come out
with short term measures to contain such unlawful mining activities.
The Committee also desired the Ministry to expeditiously frame the clear
and unambiguous definition of illegal mining and also prepare a
schedule of types of illegal mining for the information of concerned
agencies/individuals and the State Governments.
1.24 In Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Mines has stated that
Indian Bureau of Mines has been requested to suggest draft formulation
for including the definition of illegal mining in the MCR, 1960. A high
level Committee had taken up review of the National Mineral Policy and
it has submitted its recommendations to the Government. Based on the
recommendations, Inter Ministerial consultations and consultations with
State Governments, approval on National Mineral Policy, 2007 which
also address the policy issues raised by the Standing Committee, has
been sought from Cabinet.
1.25 Keeping in view the large number of causalities taking place
on account of dubious mining activities adopted for carrying out illegal
mining, the Committee had desired the Ministry to immediately come
out with short term measures to contain such unlawful mining activities
and bring out the clear and unambiguous definition of illegal mining.
While the Ministry in its reply has informed that IBM has been
requested to suggest draft formulation for including the definition of
illegal mining in the Mineral Concession Rules (MCR) 1960, it has not
replied about the short term measures being taken or proposed to be
taken to contain unlawful mining activities. The Committee is of the
firm view that the clandestine business of illegal mining would continue

8
to thrive in the absence of urgent proactive measures and non-framing
of rules and enabling legal provisions. The Committee therefore, would
like to reiterate that Ministry/IBM should immediately bringforth a
short term strategy for the prevention of illegal mining pending
finalisation of long term measures. The Committee would also like to
be apprised about the action taken to frame the clear and unambiguous
definition of the illegal mining.
E. Dispose of cases of grant of mining leases immediately
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.18)
1.26 The Committee were anguished to note that as on 31.3.2006,
204 cases for grant of mining lease had been pending with the State
Governments of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka
and Madhya Pradesh and this figure might increase further with the
availability of information from other States. The Committee further noted
that the cumbersome procedure for grant of mining lease had been
identified as one of the reasons for the problem of illegal mining by the
Ministry. The Committee had serious apprehensions that the malaise of
the illegal mining would continue to raise its ugly head and the very
purpose of streamlining the procedure for grant of mining lease would
be defeated if the cases of grant of mining lease are not disposed of
quickly.
1.27 The Committee desired the Ministry/IBM to seriously look at
the problem and to ensure that the cases of grant of mining leases were
disposed of as early as possible. The Committee would like to be apprised
in this regard.
1.28 The Ministry of Mines has replied that a high level meeting
had taken up a review of the National Mineral Policy and it has submitted
its recommendations to the Government. Based on the recommendations,
inter Ministerial  consultations and consultations with State
Governments, approval on National Mineral Policy,  2007which address
the policy issues  raised by the Standing Committee, has been sought
from the Cabinet.
1.29 The Committee had earlier desired the Ministry/IBM to
ensure that the cases of grant of mining lease are disposed of as early
as possible. The Committee deprecate that the Ministry instead of
giving a categorical reply has informed that a high level Committee

9
had taken up review of National Mineral Policy and it has submitted
its recommendations to the Government. The Committee need not
emphasize that timely disposal of mining lease application is in the
overall interest of mineral exploration and any delay in this regard
could be interpreted as encouragement to the menace of illegal mining.
The Committee feel that the Ministry cannot absolve itself from its
responsibilities of timely disposal of mining lease application under
the pretext that the issue is being reviewed by the high level committee
of the Planning Commission. The Committee, therefore reiterate that
the Ministry should take urgent steps to streamline the procedures as
to minimize the delay in the grant of mining lease.
F. State Governments should set up Task Force to prevent Illegal
Mining
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 4.19)
1.30 The Committee had appreciated that the constitution of Task
Force by the State Governments and considered it a step in the right
direction. The Committee had desired the Ministry to direct all State
Governments to set up Task Forces at State level at the earliest.
1.31 The Ministry of Mines in Action Taken Reply has informed
that it is taking pro-active steps to prevent illegal mining. The Ministry
of Mines has devised a three-pronged action strategy to effectively curb
illegal mining by writing to Chief  Minister’s, Chief Secretaries and
concerned Secretary of State Governments which is as follows.
(i) Constitution of Task Forces/Flying Squads at both State and
district levels for taking effective action against illegal mining.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments to constitute
Task Forces/Flying squads at State and District level. These bodies
would have a member from IBM. So far 19 States i.e. Karnataka
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam,
Tamilnadu (State Level only) & Bihar have constituted Task Force.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not constituted Task forces to do so immediately.
(ii) Framing of rules by the State Governments under section 23C
of Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 to enable

10
them to provide for inspection, checking & search of minerals at the
place of excavation, storage and during transit. It also provides for
establishment of check-post and weigh bridges.
So far 14 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh Jammu &
Kashmir, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Rajasthan &
Haryana have frame rules under Section 23-C of the MMDR Act,
1957.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not framed Rules under Section 23Cof the MMDR Act, 1957 to do so
immediately.
(iii) Regular monitoring by the central Government of instances of
illegal mining, action taken by the State Government against such
activities and other steps taken by State Governments to curb illegal
mining with the Secretaries of State Governments in the review
meeting held for the purpose. State Governments have been asked
to furnish quarterly returns in the prescribed proforma on instances
of illegal mining and action taken by State Governments thereof to
Indian Bureau of Mines, which are also reviewed by the Central
Government by holding meetings with State Governments. So far
the Ministry has held three meetings with the chief mineral
producing States.
1.32 The Committee had desired the Ministry to direct all the State
Governments to set up the task forces at State level at the earliest to
carry out inspections for prevention of illegal mining. The Ministry
has informed that so far 19 States have constituted task force and
instructions have been issued to the remaining States for constitution
of task force immediately. The Committee are of the strong view that
constitution of task force is absolutely necessary for the prevention of
illegal mining and in the absence of such mechanism, the malaise of
illegal mining would continue unabated. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Ministry to vigorously take up the matter with the State
Governments who have not constituted task force so far at the highest
level. The Committee would also like the Ministry to stringently monitor
the framing of these task forces and seek periodical reports from them
to ensure early detection and prevention of the cases of illegal mining.

11
G. Introduce advance technology to assess the extent and impact of
Illegal Mining
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 4.22)
1.33 The Committee would like the Ministry to review the
performance of Task Forces at quarterly intervals and conduct a detailed
study and assessment about the efficacy of the new mechanism revolving
around the Task Forces constituted in various States. In the event of
menace of illegal mining continuing unabated despite the efforts of the
new mechanism, the Committee would like the Ministry to entrust more
powers to the IBM by suitable amendments in the Central legislation
and also consider taking back the delegated powers from the State
Governments. The Committee would also like the Ministry to take the
assistant to recent advancement in science and technology including
satellite mapping to assess the extent and impact of illegal mining and
prepare a detailed data bank thereon for the use of State Governments.
The Committee would also like the Ministry to take the assistance to
recent advancement in science and technology including satellite
mapping to assess the extent and impact of illegal mining and prepare a
detailed data bank thereon for the use of State Governments.
1.34 In action taken reply, the Ministry of Mines has stated that it is
taking pro-active steps to prevent illegal mining. The Ministry of Mines
has devised a three-pronged action strategy to effectively curb illegal
mining by writing to chief Ministers, Chief Secretaries and concerned
Secretary of State Governments which is as follows:—
(i) Constitution of Task Force/Flying Squads at both state and
district levels for taking effective action against illegal mining.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments to constitute
Task Forces/Flying squads at State and District level. These bodies
would have a member from IBM. So far 19 States i.e. Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam,
Tamilnadu (State Level only) & Bihar have constituted Task Force.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not constituted Task forces to do so immediately.
(ii) Framing of rules by the state Governments under section 23C
of mines & minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 to enable
them to provide for inspection, checking & search of minerals at the

12
place of excavation, storage and during transit. It also provides for
establishment of check-post and weigh bridges.
So far 14 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West  Bengal, Rajasthan &
Hayana have framed rules under section 23-C of the MMDR Act 1957.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not framed Rules under Section 23C of the MMDR Act, 1957 to do so
immediately.
(iii) Regular monitoring by the Central Government of instances of
illegal mining, action taken by the State Government against such
activities and other steps taken by State  Governments  to curb illegal
mining with the secretaries of State Governments in the review meeting
held for the purpose.  State Governments have been asked to furnish
quarterly returns in the prescribed proforma on instances of illegal
mining and action taken by State Governments thereof to Indian
Bureau of mines, which are also reviewed by the Central Government
by holding meetings with State Governments. So far the Ministry has
held three meetings with the chief mineral producing states.
1.35 The Ministry of Mines is working on an online Mining
Tenement Systems that would digitize all the explored/mineable free
hold, leasehold, forest areas and other unexplored areas.
1.36 The Committee had desired the Ministry that in case of illegal
mining continuing despite the task forces in place in various states, the
Ministry to consider entrusting more powers to IBM by suitable
amendments in the Central Legislation and also consider taking back
the delegated powers from the State Governments in this regard. The
Committee had also desired the Ministry to take the assistance of recent
advancement in science and technology including satellite mapping to
assess the extent and impact of illegal mining. The Committee note that
while the Ministry is working on a online Mining Tenement Systems
that digitize all the explored/mineable freehold, leasehold, forest areas
and other unexplored areas, it has not replied to the recommendation
about considering entrusting more power to IBM by effecting suitable
amendments in the Central legislation. The Committee strongly believe
that if the problem of illegal mining is to be properly tackled, IBM needs
to be equipped with adequate powers to tackle the problem since most
of the State Governments have miserably failed to curb the same. While
the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the
Ministry to seriously consider empowering IBM in this regard.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.9)
The conservation as well as systematic and scientific harnessing of
mineral resources is bedrock of economic development of a nation.
However, unscientific and unlawful mining had been thriving endlessly
causing not only immense loss to the national exchequer but destruction
of natural environment. The Government in its efforts to promote and
develop mining sector had taken a number of steps and commissioned
studies from time to time under National Mineral Policy, 1993. But, the
impact thereof had been far from the satisfactory and exploration and
development of mineral wealth of the country remained unproductive
both economically and socially.
The Committee, therefore, desired that the Ministry should prepare
a revised National Mineral Policy in consultation with the State
Governments, concerned agencies/organizations and other stakeholders
with adequate investment proposals to harness the vast mineral resources
of the country and effectively meet the challenges of future in our strides
towards the status of a developed country.
Action Taken
A high level Committee had taken up the review of the National
Mineral Policy and it has submitted its recommendations to the
Government. Based on the recommendations, inter Ministerial
consultations and consultations with State Governments, approval on
National Mineral Policy, 2007 which address the policy issues raised by
the Standing Committee ,has been sought from the Cabinet.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI dated 15 .3.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee noted that Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), a
subordinate office under the Ministry of Mines has been entrusted with
the responsibilities for the promotion, conservation and scientific
development of minerals in the country other than coal, petroleum,
natural gas, atomic minerals and minor minerals. IBM also performs

14
regulatory functions viz  enforcement the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the Mineral Concession Rules,
1960 and Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988. The
Committee further noted that as an executive arm of the Ministry, IBM
also regulates mining activities as per provisions of the Central Act and
rules made thereunder.
The Committee further noted that the IBM also provides technical
consultancy services to mining industry apart from advising the Central
and State Governments on all aspects of mineral industry, trade
legislation etc. The IBM undertook inspection/studies for the enforcement
of provisions of MMDR Act, 1957 and rules made thereunder for ensuring
that mining operations are carried out in accordance with the approved
mining plans/schemes of mining. The Committee therefore, feel that
while ensuring that mining operations are carried out as per approved
plans and schemes, the IBM is duty bound to point out the violations in
this regad.
The Committee noted that IBM with its 12 Regional Offices and two
Sub Regional Offices has also been implementing a scheme of inspection
of mines for scientific and systematic mining, mineral conservation and
mines environment. The Committee further noted that consequent to
inspections and studies during the year 2005-2006 (upto December, 2005)
1487 violations of MCDR, 1988 were pointed out in respect of 702 mines
and 825 violations were rectified.
The Committee were, however, constrained to note that as compared
to 1487 cases of violations detected by IBM during 2005-06 (upto
December, 2005), 14504 cases of illegal mining have been reported from
various States with the number of cases going on unreported is likely to
be much more. The Committee noted that in ten States namely Andhra
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand and Orissa, the total illegal
mining/illegal transportation cases reported during 2002-2005 were 7536
and 44780 respectively. This includes 3194 cases of major minerals and
4342 cases of minor minerals. In the State of Karnataka alone, 1731 cases
of illegal mining of major minerals were reported during this period. The
Committee were deeply concerned that the IBM though vested with
primary responsibility for scientific development of minerals resources,
has failed to detect even a fraction of illegal mining activities.

15
The Committee were surprised that most of the State Governments
were unable to indicate the exact area under illegal mining and at the
same time, stating that there is no monetary loss in such cases. The
Committee considered the argument of the State Governments untenable
that they recover more money by imposition of penalty, etc. on defaulters
than losses on account of illegal mining of minerals. The Committee were
disappointed at this state of affairs wherein both the Union Government
and State Governments had been unable to check the plague of illegal
mining but were also oblivious of the extent and implications thereof.
The Committee were constrained to observe that the magnitude of
illegal mining activities was not only detrimental to primary objectives
of National Mineral Policy but also causing immense loss to the
exchequer and the revenue realized through penalties imposed by the
State Governments could in no case compensate the huge resources being
drained away. The situation was too grim to be tackled by the State
Governments on their own and, therefore, their insistence for not parting
with the power in favour of IBM is not justifiable.
The Committee, therefore, desired that the State Governments, join
hands with IBM to check the menace of illegal mining. The Committee
also desired the Ministry to regularly sensitize State Governments about
their role and responsibilities under the Act and desirability of scientific
exploration of mineral resources of the country.
Action Taken
Ministry of Mines is taking pro-active steps to prevent illegal mining.
The Ministry of Mines has devised a three-pronged action strategy to
effectively curb illegal mining by writing to chief Minister’s, Chief
Secretaries and concerned Secretary of State Governments which is as
follows:—
(i) Constitution of Task Forces/Flying Squads at both State and
district levels for taking effective action against illegal mining.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments to constitute
Task Forces/Flying squads at State and District level. These bodies
would have a member from IBM. So far 19 States i.e. Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam,
Tamil Nadu (State Level only) & Bihar have constituted Task Force.

16
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not constituted Task forces to do so immediately.
(ii) Framing of rules by the State Governments under section 23C
of Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 to enable
them to provide for inspection, checking & search of minerals at the
place of excavation, storage and during transit. It also provides for
establishment of check-post and weigh bridges.
So far 14 States  i.e.  Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West  Bengal, Rajasthan &
Haryana have framed rules under section 23-C of the MMDR Act
1957.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not framed Rules under Section 23C of the MMDR Act, 1957 to do so
immediately.
(iii) Regular monitoring by the Central Government of instances of
illegal mining, action taken by the State Government against such
activities and other steps taken by State  Governments  to curb illegal
mining with the Secretaries of State Governments in the review
meeting held for the purpose.  State Governments have been asked
to furnish quarterly returns in the prescribed proforma on instances
of illegal mining and action taken by State Governments thereof to
Indian Bureau of Mines, which are also reviewed by the Central
Government by holding meetings with State Governments. So far
the Ministry has held three meetings with the chief mineral
producing States.
[Ministry of Mines, O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI,  dated 15.3.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.18)
The Committee noted that in most of the cases, illegal mining has
been taking place stealthily and clandestinely from the abandoned/
closed/disused mines/non-working part of mine or from outcrop region,
as admitted by the union Minister of State for Coal in reply to a Starred
Question No. 306 dated 14.12.2005 in Lok Sabha. The Committee were
anguished to note that Union as well as State Governments had neither
the details of abandoned/closed/disused mines nor taken effective steps
for prevention of illegal mining from such mines. This gives credence to
the fact that no mine closure plans for the purpose of decommissioning,
reclamation and rehabilitation in the mine or part thereof after cessation

17
of mining and mineral processing operations are properly being prepared
and implemented.
The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry/IBM to ensure that
the mine closure plans are prepared and executed immediately after
cessation of mining activities and also that no mine is left in an
abandoned state. The Committee would also like the Ministry to keep the
State Governments informed about the mine closure plans in order to
have a well coordinated approach for prevention of illegal mining.
Action Taken
Ministry of Mines has introduced the concept of the progressive
mine closure plan and final mine closure plan for proper reclamation
and rehabilitation of the area held under mining lease w.e.f.  10.4.2003.
Every mining leaseholder has to submit a progressive and final mine
closure plan. In the progressive mine closure plan, the mining lease has
to indicate the protective, reclamation and rehabilitative measures to be
taken progressively and in final mine closure plan such measures to be
taken after the cessation of mining operations. Every lease holder has to
furnish financial assurance to the competent authority and if the mining
lease does not carry out protective, reclamation and rehabilitative
measures as envisaged in the approved mine closure plan, the financial
assurance can be realized by the State Government to carry out the
requisite protective measures in the area held under mining lease.
[Ministry of Mines, O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI,  dated 15.3.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.9 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.16)
The Committee noted that under section 23C (3), the Central
Government should have no power to revise any order passed by a State
Government or any of its authorized officer or any authority under the
rules made under sub-section (1) and (2). The Committee considered this
an anomalous situation as in the absence of powers to revise any order
passed by the State Governments, there might be conflicting provisions
and deviations, inconsistent with the sprit of the Central Act.

18
The Committee felt that the Central Government should retain its
moderating role and therefore desire that the MMDR Act should be
suitably amended to provide powers to the Central Government to
review/revise inconsistent orders passed by the State Governments.
Action Taken
A high level meeting had taken up a review of the National Mining
Policy and it has submitted its recommendations to the Government.
Based on the recommendations, Inter Ministerial consultations and
consultations with State Governments, approval on National Mineral
Policy, 2007 which address the policy issues raised by the Standing
Committee, has been sought from the Cabinet.
[Ministry of Mines, O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI,  dated 15.3.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 4.16)
The Committee noted that under the Constitution of India, as
approved by Entry 54 of the Union list in the Seventh Schedule, the
Ministry of Mines had been entrusted with the responsibility for
regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which
such regulation and development under the control of the Union is
declared by Parliament law to be expedient in the public interest. The
State Governments had also been entrusted with the responsibility for
regulation of mines and mineral development under Entry 23 of the State
List, subject to the provision of Entry 54 of the Union List. The Committee
were, therefore, inclined to draw inference that the primary responsibility
for regulation of mines and mineral development, which undoubtedly
includes prevention of illegal mining, rest with the Central Government,
even though under Section 23C of MMDR Act,  1957, State Governments
had been empowered to make rules to prevent illegal mining,
transportation and storage of minerals. The Committee were convinced
that the said delegation of powers to the State Governments in no case
absolve the Central Government from their inalienable responsibilities.
In this backdrop, the Committee were extremely constrained to note
that no mechanism whatsoever existed in the Ministry till recently for
effective prevention of illegal mining. The Committee were also surprised

19
that though the State Governments were empowered to take action for
prevention of illegal mining, there was no semblance of coordination
between the Ministry of Mines and the State Governments though forums
like Mineral Advisory Council, Conference of State Ministers of Mining
& Geology existed. The lack of seriousness was evident from the fact that
the last conference of State Ministers of Mining & Geology was held in
January, 2003. During all these years, the illegal mining continued
unabated with unscrupulous miners playing havoc with scientific
mineral exploration and environment concerns. The Committee were,
therefore, of the view that Ministry of Mines had performed miserably to
discharge their constitutional responsibility of regulation, scientific
development and exploration of mines and minerals in the country.
The Committee noted that on their initiative, the Ministry is in the
process of setting up of some sort of Monitoring machinery. The Committee
now hoped that the Ministry would hold regular/quarterly meetings
with the State Governments and the Conference of State Ministers which
was last held more than three years back will be held at regular intervals.
The Committee expected that the Conference of State Ministers of Mining
& Geology besides deliberating on various issues concerning mineral
industry would also focus on vital issue of prevention of illegal mining.
The Committee noted that while the Ministry/IBM had taken some
proactive steps to curb the proliferation of illegal mining in pursuance of
the Tandon Committee recommendations, nothing seems to had been
done to educate the villagers regarding the rules and procedures. The
Committee felt that the ignorance on the part of the villagers in this regard
had been one of the reasons for illegal mining.
The Committee recommended that adequate measures should be
taken to educate and sensitize the villagers about the rules and procedures
to rein unintended illegal mining.
Action Taken
State Governments have been also requested to devise a suitable
public awareness campaign to considered to sensitize the local people
in mining areas about the need to adhere to rules and procedures to
check unintended illegal mining. This may be given wide publicity.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]

20
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 4.18)
The Committee felt that the amendments made in MMDR Act in
pursuance of Tandon Committee recommendations had not brought
about desired results as the case of illegal mining continue to take place
unabated. The Committee noted that 8469 cases of illegal mining
spreading over 46 hectares land were reported during the quarter ending
September, 2005 and 6035 such cases spreading over 106 hectares land
were reported during the quarter ending December, 2005 as deposed by
Secretary, Ministry of Mines before the Committee. The Committee strongly
felt that if more inspections were carried out, the possibility of a large
number of cases of illegal mining being detected could not be ruled out
particularly in Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Rajasthan
and Madhya Pradesh.
The Committee, therefore, desired that the Ministry should take
initiative to suggest periodicity of routine and regular inspections by the
State Governments and IBM for detecting and preventing such cases.
Action Taken
State Governments have been asked to constitute Task Forces/Flying
Squads having a representative of Indian Bureau of Mines in it. State
Governments have reported that they have been holding regular meetings
of their Task Forces and based on the observations findings of the Task
Force, follow up action is taken which is reflected by the State Government
in its quarterly return received by this Ministry.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 4.20)
The Committee desired that the composition of the Task Forces apart
from Director of the Department of Geology & Mines of the concerned
State, Deputy Directors, Department of Geology & Mines and District
Mining Officers and officials of the State Forest Department, Regional
Controller of Mines of IBM, Representatives of State Pollution Control
Board, Representatives of the Mine Owners Association and Federation
of Indian Minerals should also include officials concerned with police
and public order with clear mandate, guidelines and adequate powers
for enforcement of rules. The Task Forces should also carry out frequent
random/regular inspections to detect and prevent illegal mining to
achieve their objective.

21
Action Taken
State Governments have been asked to constitute Task Forces/Flying
Squads having a representative of Indian Bureau of Mines in it. State
Governments have reported that they have been holding regular meetings
of their Task Forces and based on the observations findings of the Task
Force, follow up action is taken which is reflected by the State Government
in its quarterly return received by this Ministry.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]

22
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 4.17)
The Committee noted that earlier no separate cell existed in the
Ministry to exclusively deal with problem of illegal mining. A cell for
reviewing/monitoring the returns to be filed by State Governments has
since been set up in the Ministry. The Committee observed that the cell
which had recently came into being had a limited role of reviewing/
monitoring the returns filed by the State Governments.
The Committee desired the Ministry to clearly demarcate the powers
and the responsibilities of this cell to not only review the returns filed by
the State Governments but to also play a greater role in the direction of
prevention of illegal mining. The Committee also desired that cell should
be headed by a senior officer with adequate supporting staff.
Action Taken
The Ministry of Mines has created a cell for illegal mining.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]

23
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.15)
The Committee noted that Mines & Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957, Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, Mines and
Minerals Development Rules, 1988 provide the legal framework for
prevention of illegal mining. In pursuance to the recommendations of
Tandon Committee, MMDR Act, 1957 was amended in 1999 by inserting
new Section 23C empowering the State Governments to frame rules for
prevention of illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals. The
State Governments were also required to regulate and provide for
establishment of check posts, regulation of mineral transport, inspection,
checking and search of minerals at the place of excavation, storage or
during the transit.
The Committee felt that Section 23C of MMDR Act was immensely
crucial provision for managing the mineral wealth of the Country and
its exploitation for the welfare of the people. The Committee were
dismayed that even after the lapse of more than seven years, only 9 State
Governments have framed the necessary rules under Section 23C of
MMDR Act. The Committee were deeply concerned that several States
with high incidents of illegal mining are still blissfully unaware of their
responsibilities as well as ground realities which is eating into their
vital source of revenue.
The Committee could not but deprecate the lackadaisical attitude of
the State Governments as well as the failure of the Ministry to convince
them to frame such rules resulting in rampant illegal mining.
The Committee, therefore, desires the Ministry of Mines to seriously
look into the matter and issue directions to recalcitrant States to
immediately frame the rules for prevention of illegal mining,
transportation and storage of minerals.
Action Taken
It is taking pro-active steps to prevent illegal mining. The Ministry
has devised a three-pronged action strategy to effectively curb illegal

24
mining by writing to Chief Minister’s, Chief Secretaries and concerned
Secretary of State Governments which is a follows:—
(i) Constitution of Task Forces/Flying Squads at both State and
District levels for taking effective action against illegal mining.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments to constitute
Task Forces/Flying squads at State and District level. These bodies
would have a member from IBM. So far 19 States i.e. Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam,
Tamilnadu (State Level only) & Bihar have constituted Task Force.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not constituted Task Forces to do so immediately.
(ii) Framing to rules by the state Governments under section 23Cof
mines & minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 to enable
them to provide for inspection, checking & search of minerals at the
place of excavation, storage and during transit. It also provides for
establishment of check-post and weigh bridges.
So far 14 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West  Bengal, Rajasthan &
Hayana have framed rules under section 23-C of the MMDR Act
1957.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not framed Rules under Section 23C of the MMDR Act, 1957 to do so
immediately.
(iii) Regular monitoring by the central Government of instances of
illegal mining, action taken by the State Government against such
activities and other steps taken by State  Governments  to curb illegal
mining with the Secretaries of State Governments in the review
meeting held for the purpose.  State Governments have been asked
to furnish quarterly returns in the prescribed proforma on instances
of illegal mining and action taken by State Governments thereof to
Indian Bureau of Mines, which are also reviewed by the Central
Government by holding meetings with State Governments. So far
the Ministry has held three meetings with the chief mineral
producing states.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]

25
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 4.22)
The Committee would like the Ministry to review the performance
of Task Forces at quarterly intervals and conduct a detailed study and
assessment about the efficacy of the new mechanism revolving around
the Task Forces constituted in various States. In the event of menace of
illegal mining continuing unabated despite the efforts of the new
mechanism, the Committee would like the Ministry to entrust more powers
to the IBM by suitable amendments in the Central legislation and also
consider taking back the delegated powers from the State Governments.
The Committee would also like the Ministry to take the assistance to
recent advancement in science and technology including satellite
mapping to assess the extent and impact of illegal mining and prepare a
detailed data bank thereon for the use of State Governments.
Action Taken
It is taking pro-active steps to prevent illegal mining. The Ministry
of Mines has devised a three-pronged action strategy to effectively curb
illegal minning by writing to chief Minister’s. Chief Secretaries and
concerned Secretary of State Governments which is as follows:—
(i) Constitution of Task Forces/Flying Squads at both State and
district levels for taking effective action against illegal mining.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments to constitute
Task Forces/Flying squads at State and District level. These bodies
would have a member from IBM. So far 19 States i.e. Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam,
Tamil Nadu (State Level only) & Bihar have constituted Task Force.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not constituted Task forces to do so immediately.
(ii) Framing of rules by the State Governments under section 23C
of Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 to enable
them to provide for inspection, checking & search of minerals at the
place of excavation, storage and during transit. It also provides for
establishment of check-post and weigh bridges.

26
So far 14 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West  Bengal, Rajasthan &
Haryana have framed rules under section 23C of the MMDR Act
1957.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not framed Rules under Section 23C of the MMDR Act, 1957 to do so
immediately.
(iii) Regular monitoring by the Central Government of instances of
illegal mining, action taken by the State Government against such
activities and other steps taken by State  Governments  to curb illegal
mining with the Secretaries of State Governments in the review
meeting held for the purpose.  State Governments have been asked
to furnish quarterly returns in the prescribed proforma on instances
of illegal mining and action taken by State Governments thereof to
Indian Bureau of mines, which are also reviewed by the Central
Government by holding meetings with State Governments. So far
the Ministry has held three meetings with the chief mineral
producing States.
The Ministry of Mines is working on an online Mining Tenement
Systems that would digitize all the explored/mineable freehold,
leasehold, forest areas and other unexplored areas.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.36 of Chapter I of the Report)

27
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.17)
The committee observed that the MMDR Act, 1957 was silent
whether mining activities beyond the permissible lease constitutes illegal
mining. The Act was also silent whether any mining activity in the
abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-working part of mine or from
out crop regions constitutes illegal mining. The representatives of the
Ministry during the course of evidence, had however, informed the
Committee that mining activity beyond the permissible lease constitutes
illegal mining until the approval of the Central Government  obtained
for relaxing the limit in the interest of mineral development. The
Committee consider it as a glaring lacunae in the Act as definition of
illegal mining did not find place in it.
The Committee viewed with concern the manipulation of existing
mining plans and the violations in mining of major minerals in various
States. As was evident from large-scale transportation activities visible
in the area, the mining companies were indulging in excessive excavation
of minerals beyond the permissible limits under the approved plans.
The Committee were also anguished to note that whereas mining plan
approved for a particular area, mining activities were clandestinely being
carried out much below the ground level and beyond the approved area
sometimes jeopardizing the historical and ancient monuments.
The Committee were also perturbed to find a large number of
casualties taking place on account of dubious means adopted for carrying
out illegal mining particularly in coal bearing areas of several States.
The Committee also believed that such activities necessarily involve large-
scale exploitation of the laboures.
The Committee desired the Ministry to immediately come out with
short term measures to contain such unlawful mining activities. The
Committee also desired the Ministry to expeditiously frame the clear and
unambiguous definition of illegal mining and also prepare a schedule of
types of illegal mining for the information of concerned agencies/
individuals and the State Governments.

28
Action Taken
Indian Bureau of Mines has been requested to suggest draft
formulation for including the definition of illegal mining in the MCR,
1960. A high level Committee had taken up review of the National Mineral
Policy and it has submitted its recommendations to the Government.
Based on the recommendations, Inter Ministerial consultations and
consultations with State Governments, approval on National Mineral
Policy, 2007 which also address the policy issues raised by the Standing
Committee, has been sought from Cabinet.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.18)
The Committee were anguished to note that as on 31.3.2006,
204 cases for grant of mining lease had been pending with the State
Governments of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka
and Madhya Pradesh and this figure might increase further with the
availability of information from other States. The Committee further noted
that the cumbersome procedure for grant of mining lease had been
identified as one of the reasons for the problem of illegal mining by the
Ministry. The Committee had serious apprehensions that the malaise of
the illegal mining would continue to raise its ugly head and the very
purpose of streamlining the procedure for grant of mining lease would
be defeated if the cases of grant of mining lease are not disposed of
quickly.
The Committee desired the Ministry/IBM to seriously look at the
problem and to ensure that the cases of grant of mining leases were
disposed off as early as possible. The Committee would like to be apprised
in this regard.
Action Taken
A high level meeting has taken up a review of the National Mining
Policy and it has submitted its recommendations to the Government.
Based on the recommendations, inter Ministerial  consultations and
consultations with State Governments, approval on National Mineral

29
Policy,  2007 which address the policy issues  raised by the Standing
Committee, has been sought from the Cabinet.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 4.19)
The Committee appreciated that the constitution of Task Force by
the State Governments and considered it a step in the right direction.
The Committee desired the Ministry to direct all State Governments to set
up Task Forces at State level at the earliest.
Action Taken
Ministry of Mines is taking pro-active steps to prevent illegal mining.
The Ministry of Mines has devised a three-pronged action strategy to
effectively curb illegal mining by writing to Chief  Ministers, Chief
Secretaries and concerned Secretary of State Governments which is as
follows.
(i) Constitution of Task Forces/Flying Squads at both State and
district levels for taking effective action against illegal mining.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments to constitute
Task Forces/Flying Squads at State and District levels. These bodies
would have a member from IBM. So far 19 States i.e. Karnataka
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam,
Tamil Nadu (State level only) and Bihar have constituted Task Force.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not constituted Task forces to do so immediately.
(ii) Framing of rules by the State Governments under section 23C
of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 to
enable them to provide for inspection, checking and search of
minerals at the place of excavation, storage and during transit. It
also provides for establishment of check-post and weigh bridges.

30
So far 14 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Rajasthan and Haryana
have frame rules under Section 23C of the MMDR Act, 1957.
Instructions have been given to the State Governments, which have
not framed Rules under Section 23Cof the MMDR Act, 1957 to do so
immediately.
(iii) Regular monitoring by the Central Government of instances of
illegal mining, action taken by the State Governments against such
activities and other steps taken by State Governments to curb illegal
mining with the Secretaries of State Governments in the review
meeting held for the purpose. State Governments have been asked
to furnish quarterly returns in the prescribed proforma on instances
of illegal mining and action taken by State Governments thereof to
Indian Bureau of Mines, which are also reviewed by the Central
Government by holding meetings with State Governments. So far
the Ministry has held three meetings with the chief mineral
producing States.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 4.21)
The Committee expected the Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) to play a
major and decisive role in the functioning for Task Forces in consonance
with the primary function of the Ministry of Mines for balanced and
scientific development and exploration of mines and minerals in the
country. The Committee desired the Ministry of Mines to adequately
strengthen IBM both in terms of manpower and finances to enable it to
shoulder the greater responsibilities.

31
Action Taken
IBM has indicated its requirement in terms of manpower and
finances to intensify its involvement in tackling the menace of illegal
mining. This proposal is being taken up with concerned authorities in
the Government.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 16/103/2006-M.VI  dated 15.3.2007]
   NEW DELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
16 August, 2007 Chairman,
25 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

32
ANNEXURE-I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2006-2007) HELD
ON 14TH JUNE, 2007 IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 139,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
Present
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya - In the Chair
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhury
4. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
5. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
6. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
9. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla
11. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
12. Shri Ali Anwar
13. Shri Surendra Lath
14. Shri Ajay Maroo
15. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
16. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
17. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director

33
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2006-07) on “Prevention of Illegal
Mining” of the Ministry of Mines.
3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Report.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report
after making consequential change arising out of factual verification by
the concerned Ministry and to present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

34
ANNEXURE-II
(vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
NINETEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 14
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 10 and 12) 07
Percentage of total 50%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. 9) 01
Percentage of total 7.14%
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 4, 6, 7, 11 and 14) 05
Percentage of total 35.71%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. 13) 01
Percentage of total 7.14%