 
7 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2004-2005) 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 
SAFETY IN COAL MINES  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the  
Forty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Energy  
(Thirteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                           
       SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March , 2005 / Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) 

SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 
SAFETY IN COAL MINES 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Forty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Energy  
(Thirteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  23.3.2005 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on  23.3.2005 
 
                                                              
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2005 / Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) 

CC&S. No.  7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. 50.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure an d Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art, India,  
New Delhi-110 005.   

CONTENTS 
  
 
                      
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION  
CHAPTER I  Report    
  
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted 
by the Government  
  
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
  
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
  
Minutes of Eighth  sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal 
and Steel (2004-05) held on 21.3.2005 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty Seventh Report of 
the Standing Committee on Energy (2004) 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2004-05)          
 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar    - Chairman 
 Members 
            
           Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Bikash Chowdhury 
6. Shri  Chandra Sekhar Dubey 
7. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
9. Shri Nitish Kumar 
10. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam 
11. Shri  Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta 
12. Shri Hemlal Murmu 
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad Alias Sadhu Yadav 
14. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
16. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
18. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
19. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
20. Shri Ramsewak Singh (Babuji) 
21. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Devdas Apte 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 

24. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
25. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad 
26. Shri B.J.Panda 
27. Shri Jibon Roy 
28. Shri G.K.Vasan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T.Achary   - Secretary 
2. Shri N.K.Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri B.D.Dhyani  - Sr. Committee Assistant  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and St eel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Forty Seventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Energy (Thirteenth  Lok Sabha).  
 
2.  The Forty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Energy 
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 4.2.2004.  Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations c ontained in the Report were received 
on 14.1.2005.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 21.3.2005.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty-Seventh  Report of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-II.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      ANANTH KUMAR, 
21   March, 2005                                                                                 Chairman, 
30  Phalguna , 1926 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 

CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Forty Seventh Report 
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on the subject 
“Safety in Coal Mines” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 4.2.2004.  
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl.Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21,  27, 29, 30, 
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52, 
53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 64, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72 and 73. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies; 
Sl.Nos. 2, 5, 16, 22, 23, 25, 55,  62 and 70. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl.Nos. 4, 17, 24, 26, 45, 60 and 63 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited. 
Sl.Nos 28,  49, 65 and 67. 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that final repl y in respect of the recommendation for 
which only interim reply ha s been given by the Governm ent should be furnished 
to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
4. The Committee also desire that utmo st importance should be given to the 
implementation of recommendations acce pted by the Government. In case, 
where it is not possible fo r the Government to implement the recommendations 
in letter and spirit for any reasons, the matter should be reported to the 
Committee well in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their Recommendations/Observations. 
 

A. UNIFORM PERIODICITY FO R CONDUCTING SAFETY AUDIT 
 
Recommendation  (Sl.No.4, Para No.2.23) 
 
6. The Committee had observed that al though safety audit was required to 
be conducted once in two years, yet ther e was no uniformity in undertaking the 
safety audits by the subsidiaries of Coal India Limited (CIL) and other coal 
companies.  The Committee had found  that t he periodicity for conducting safety 
audit varied from one month to three years in coal subsidiaries.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that  CIL should review t heir orders and frame 
guidelines for conducting regular safety audit at uniform interval of time. 
 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, Ministry of Coal has stated that in Coal India 
Limited (CIL),  a uniform periodicity for all mi ning companies may not be a 
practical approach in view of the fact that whereas some companies have lesser 
number of mines (less than 10) and that  too with only opencast workings, the 
number of mines in other companies is in the order of 90s  with very complex 
underground workings in many seams. 
 
8. Keeping this in view, it was deci ded  in the Co-ordination Meeting of 
Director (Tech), CIL with Chiefs of Safety of companies on 14 th May, 2002 that 
Safety Audits are to be conducted every year where the same is the practice and 
in other companies, this shall be completed every 2 year. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
9. Safety audit at all the mines conduc ted once in a year before the onset of 
monsoon. In addition to the above, during the year 2003, two more Special 
Safety Audit Inspections were carried out, one immediately after the occurrence 
of inundation disaster at GDK-7 LEP and the other one after the roof fall disaster 
at GDK-8A Inc.  All the shortcomings pointed out during above inspections have 
been rectified.  ISO coordinated all the works. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
10. In NLC, the Safety A udit is being conducted onc e in a month by Safety 
Audit Teams which are formed exclusively for SME equipments/Conveyors and 
by the Pit Safety Committee in addition to  the routine safety inspection at Mine 
level, as well as by the Central Safety at  Corporate level.  A part from the above, 
the Risk Assessment and Safety Audit was conducted in all the Mines during the 
year 2003 through the external exper t M/s Society for Mining Research 
Sustainable Development and Envir onment, Dhanbad headed by a retired 
DGMS officer.  It is also proposed to conduct the similar Audits once in  2 years. 
 
11. Since there was no uniformity in un dertaking the safety audits by the 
subsidiaries of Coal India Limited (CIL) and other companies, the Committee had 

recommended that new gui delines should be framed for conducting regular 
safety audits at uniform inte rvals of time. The Ministry of  Coal  in its  reply has 
stated that a uniform periodicity for al l mining companies may not be a practical 
approach in view of the fa ct that whereas some comp anies have le sser number 
of mines and that too with  only opencast workings, ot hers have large number of 
complex  underground  mines. It has, however, be en decided to conduct safety 
audit every year where the same has been  the practice, and in other companies, 
this process would be repeated every two years. While the Committee appreciate  
the efforts of Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) in conduting internal safety audit 
once in a month and external  safety audit once in two years, they expect similar 
action on the part of subsidiaries of CIL and Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. in 
undertaking safety audits. The Committee also desire the Mi nistry of Coal to play 
proactive role and prepare uniform guidelines for underground and opencast coal 
mines in time-bound manner. 
 
B. RECLAMATION OF DEGRADED LAND 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para No.3.34) 
 
12. The Committee noted that the coal  companies at times, did not pay 
attention to the protection of the envir onment, as it deserved.  It had been 
brought to the notice of t he Committee that many of  the opencast mines left the 
land degraded after completion of the mi ning operations.  Also Trucks/Dumpers 
loaded with coal pass through residential areas caused dusty  conditions.  In this 
context, the Committee desired that filling up of opencast excavation and 
reclamation of the degraded land should be made mandatory under the law.  The 
Trucks/Dumpers after loading coal should be suitably covered so as to avoid dust 
being raised in the environment. At t he same time, the Committee desired that 
adequate arrangements and infrastructural fac ilities be made available to carry 
out dust surveys in the mines and corrective action taken thereon. 
 
13. In their reply, the Government stat ed that in Coal India Limited (CIL), 
during mining operati on itself, all non-active external OB dumps are reclaimed 
and plantation is done extensively with different variety of sapling including 
medicinal plants.  Voids are back filled with overburden simultaneously as the 
mine progresses.  After the mine is ex hausted some unavoidable void is left out 
which is converted into water reservoi r which becomes source of water for 
domestic use and fisheries for the habitat w ho continue to live after the mine is 
closed.  All the reclaimed land (filled with OB / top soil) is covered with plantation.  

Recently few of the reclaimed sites are being used for growing paddy/vegetable 
crops/medicinal plants by the Project A ffected People (PAP). The provision for 
reclamation/restoration of  the land degraded due to mining is mandatory and 
covered under the Environmental Manage ment Plan (EMP), which has been 
approved by MoEF before a project is cleared for implementation. 
 
14. Regarding covering of the trucks, it is to be m entioned that covering of 
coal loaded trucks is being practiced in some of the subsidia ries like WCL, NCL, 
MCL and is under process of implementation in the other subsidiaries.  
 
15. As regards emission of dust due to mining activities is  concerned, several 
measures such as, (i) Fixed Sprinkle rs along the haul ro ads, (ii) Mobile 
sprinklers, (iii) Cleaning of roads by gr aders as well as manually, are taken so 
that dust emission is kept within allo wable limits set by SPCB/CPCB. Regular 
monitoring of dust emission is underta ken by independent approved agencies as 
per Air Pollution Acts/Rules. 
 
16. Infrastructural facilities have been provided for carrying out dust surveys in 
mines and corrective action is taken wherever necessary. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL); 
 
17. Re-filling arrangement of  the opencast mines and l and re-claiming of the 
degraded land is being taken up as per ap proved project reports and approved 
environmental management plan s.  At the opencast mine s of SCCL, during the 
last two years back-filli ng has been done in 79.30 hecta res of land and 1,82,233 
saplings have been planted. Loaded  tr ucks/dumpers are being covered and 
position reviewed at National Dust Prevention Committee (NDPC) Meetings 
which are held once in mont hs at CIL, headquarters, Kolkata. Reports of dust-
surveys to take up corrective action ar e submitted to NDPC for review and 
recommended measures by the National Dust Prevention Committee are being 
attended. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC); 
 
18. At NLC, after the Lignite exploitation,  the excavated area is back filled with 
overburden soil.  The area t hus back filled is levelled and reclaimed by adopting 
latest techniques like Biological Reclamatio n. Soil Enrichment etc., based on the 
R&D study carried out by the Centre for Applied Research & Development, NLC. 
 
19. The Committee had desired that filling up of opencast excavations and 
reclamation of the degraded land should be made mandatory under the law.  The 
Ministry of Coal has stated that all the degraded land ha s been reclaimed and 
plantation done extensively over it. The provision for reclamation/restoration of 
land, degraded due to mining, is  mandatory and covered under the 
Environmental Management Plan. The Committe e feel that intensive efforts are 

required to ensure that degraded land due to mining is reclaimed and made safe. 
The Committee also fe el that the extant provisi ons ini this regard should be 
reviewed thoroughly to further streamline and strengt hen them. Meanwhile, the 
Committee desire that a me chanism to monitor recl amation of degraded land 
should be set up in the Ministry so that  reclaimed land is gi ven to the project-
affected people them a permanent source of earning. 
 
C. CONTROL OF FIRE AND SUBSIDE NCE IN RANIGANJ AND JHARIA 
COALFIELDS  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No.3.36) 
 
20. The Committee noted that mine fires were a serious and widespread 
problem and resulted in loss of coal  reserves and added to the cost of 
production.  It was estimated that in J haria Coalfields alone, about 1864 million  
tonnes of coal might had been blocked and about 37 million tonnes of coal might 
had been damaged due to these fires.  The m easures for controlling coal mine 
fires in  Jharia Coalfields included bull dozing, levelling and covering with soil to 
prevent the entry of oxygen and to stabilize the land for vegetation.  Efforts made 
so far in this regard could only prevent the spreading of fires but their complete 
extinction in most of the cases was not  possible.  The Committee were of the 
view that the problem of fire and subsi dence control especially  in Raniganj and 
Jharia coalfields should be treated a  “National Pr oblem” and adequate funds be 
allocated by the Government to tackle this problem. 
 
21. In their Action Taken Reply, the Gove rnment has stated  that in Coal India 
Ltd. (CIL) steps have been taken to generate an amount of Rs.395 crore per year 
for implementation of the action plan fo r shifting and rehabilitation, dealing with 
fire and stabilization of unstable area in EC L & BCCL .  For this a separate head 
account would be maintained and CIL will ensure that this amount is used strictly 
for implementation of the action plan. 
 
22. In Singareni Collieries Company Li mited  (SCCL); audit check of the 
mines has been taken up by a Committee headed by Director (Operations).  
Filling arrangements were taken up over the subsidence areas and things are 
monitored by CGM (Safety) regularly.  Reports are being submitted to CMDs. 
 
23. As far as Neyveli Lignite Corporat ion (NLC)  is concerned, separate Fire 
Stations are available inside the Mines with  sufficient number of required type of 
Fire Tenders with crews to quench the fire  immediately without any loss of time 
after the fire cell is received through well Established Network Communication 
System.  Action is also being taken then and there to procure the latest 
Technology for Fire fighting equipments and adopt latest trends available. In this 
regard adequate funds are allotted by NLC for the fire related activities. 
  

24. At the Ministry of Coal level, the problem of fire and s ubsidence control in 
Jharia & Raniganj co alfields is receiving maximum attention of the Government 
at the highest level i.e. at the Cabinet  Secretary level . A monitoring committee 
under the Chairmanship of Se cretary (Coal) with represent atives from the State 
Governments, CIL, BCCL, ECL and related Ministries/Departments of the Central 
Government has been constituted and is  reviewing the progress of work 
periodically. 
 
  
25. The Committee had expressed concer n over the problem of fire and 
subsidence control especially in Raniganj and Jharia Coalfields and desired  that 
adequate funds be allocated by the Gove rnment to tackle this problem. The 
Ministry  in its reply has stated that steps have been taken to generate Rs.395 
crore per year for implementation of the ac tion plan and that th e problems of fire 
and subsidence control in Jharia and Raniganj  coalfields are receiving maximum 
attention of the Government at the high est level i.e. at t he Cabinet Secretary 
level. A Monitoring Commi ttee constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Coal) has been reviewing the progress of work periodically. The Committee note 
with happiness that the Government has constituted a Monito ring Committee to 
address the problems of fi re and subsidence in coal companies. The Committee 
desire that the Government  should continue giving utmost importance to this 
problem and ensure that not only the tar get fixed for generating Rs.395 crore per 
year is achieved but also the funds so collected are ut ilized exclusively for the 
desired purpose. The Co mmittee would like to  be apprised periodically of the  
progress made by the Monitoring Commi ttee and the detail s of the amount 
allocated/spent on the various measures, out of the funds to  the tune of Rs.395 
crore, proposed to be generated.  
D. REVIEW OF EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No.17, Para No.3.38) 
 
26. The Committee had recognized the urgent need for making the 
emergency plan responsive, speedy and effective in each mine.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that  each mine should review the existing emergency 
plan at higher level keeping in view the ri sk from fire.  There was also a need of 
stabilizing rescue rooms in coal mines hav ing risk of fire where more than 350 
persons had been employed in a shift in  underground mine.  The feasibility of 
storing oxygen type of rescuer at strat egic places in underground mine with the 
risk of fire in an emergency situation should also be expl ored.  The coal 
companies should  formulate  and implement st ructured training programmes for 
the miners, officials and management to develop awareness and increasing 
effectiveness of emergency response in case of fire. 
 
27. In its reply, the Government has st ated that in Coal I ndia Limited (CIL), 
Emergency Action Plan are reviewed in the course of Inspections by Internal 
Safety Organisation (ISO).   However, fresh directions have been issued for 
review of Emergency Action Plans at a higher level. 
 
28. The present Mines Rescue Rules, 1985 require establishment of Rescue 
Rooms in underground mines  where on an average mo re than 100 persons are 
employed daily and there is  no Rescue Station within  radius of 35 km. provided 
that it is sufficient to provide one Rescu e Room for a number of mines belonging 
to the same owner, if the to tal number of persons ordina rily employed in all such 
mines does not exceed 5000 and the mines ar e situated within a radius of 35 km 
and connected by road. 
 
29. The feasibility of storing oxygen type of rescuer at strategic places in 
underground mine with the risk of fire  in an emergency situation is being 
examined.  However, this suffers from the disadvantage that the site of storage of 
oxygen type self rescuers may not be accessible at the time of emergency. 
 
30. Training programmes for executiv es and supervisors cover awareness 
about emergency response for various emergencies including fire. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL); 
 
31. Consultative Committee emergency or ganisation will review existing 
emergency plans on quarterly basis and modify emergency plans. 
 
32. Fire prone mines were  identified and establishment of rescue rooms would 
be completed within nine months. 
 

33. 300 oxygen type self-rescuers are being procured and they would be 
stationed initially at rescue stations and later on, it is proposed to position them at 
strategic points in underground at identified fiery mines. 
 
34. Structured training programme has been developed for officers and staff 
to deal with fire accidents.  For miners, it is in the formulation stage and would be 
completed within one year.  A total of 480 persons have been identified for 
training. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation  (NLC); 
 
35. As far as NLC is concerned, as  per the recommendation of the IX 
Conference on Safety in Mines, a Stru ctured Training Programme has been 
formulated for all the Miners, front line supe rvisory officials etc, in NLC  Mines on 
Fire Prevention to develop awareness and increasing effectiveness of 
emergency in case of fire.  The durati on of the Structured Training Programme 
has been programmed for a week durin g the Training Calendar 2004-05 in 
addition to Fire Prevention Mines Act, Rules & Regulations. Mine Operations, 
Identification of Hazards, Fi rst Aid, Worker’s Partici pation in Safety Management 
etc. 
 
36. The Committee had earlie r recommended that t he existing Emergency 
Action Plan in ever y mine should be thor oughly  reviewed ke eping in view the 
risk from fire. The Committee had, theref ore,  desired that in underground mines, 
the feasibility of storing oxygen type self rescuers  at strategic places with the 
risk of fire should be ex plored. Ministry of Coal has  informed the Committee that 
the Emergency Action Plan in  the mines of  Coal India Ltd. (CIL) is reviewed in 
the course of Inspections by  Internal Safety Organisa tion (ISO).  As regards  the 
feasibility of storing oxygen type self-rescuers, at strategic places in underground 
mines with the risk of fire, is being exam ined.  However, this suffers from the 
disadvantage that the site of storage of oxygen type self rescuers may not be 
accessible at the time of emergency. The Ministry has further stated  that in 
Singareni Collieries Comp any Ltd.,   300 oxygen ty pe self-rescuers are being 
procured and they would be stationed initially at rescue stations. It is proposed to 

position them at strategic points in identified undergrou nd fiery mines later on.  
The Committee are indeed  surprised to note the cont radictory stand taken by 
the Ministry regarding posit ioning of oxygen type self rescurers in respect of 
mines of  Coal India Ltd. and SCCL.  It is beyond  co mprehension as to how it 
may  not be possible to plac e oxygen type self rescuer s at strategic points in 
underground mines of Coal India Ltd.  The Committee  considered the oxygen 
self type rescuers as extremely vital safe ty devices and, ther efore would like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation in this regard. 
E. SCIENTIFIC PREPARATION AND UPDATING OF MINE MAPS 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.20, Para No.4.12) 
 
37. The Committee had observed that t here existed an elaborate system for 
preparation and updating of mi ne maps and plans. Deta iled directions had been 
given in this regard in the Coal Mines Regulations, 1957.  Besides, DGMS issued 
circulars from time-to-time for preparing and updating the mine maps for working 
under some specific conditions.  T he Committee had been ap prised that modern 
surveying instruments were being introduc ed for acquiring survey data and for 
preparing Mine Maps with the help of information technol ogy.  Further, Mines 
Act, 1952 empowered the DGMS to exami ne and take possession of any plan, 
section, register, other records etc.  The Committee were perturbed to note that 
despite all these initiative s, the ground reality had not changed.  At times, the 
maps and plans were prepared using sci entific and unreliable old methods.  
Moreover, where such maps and plan s were prepared, their updation, as 
required under Coal, Mines  Regulations, was not undertaken regularly.  The 
Committee took a serious view of this.  The Committee were of the opinion that 
accurate and scientific survey of mine m aps were pre-requisite for mining coal 
safely .  Unscientific and wrong mapping could lead to disasters.  Bagdigi tragedy 
was a glaring example in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, desired that 
mine maps and plans should be prepared scientifically  and updated as required 
under the statute using modern techni ques like satellite imageries, global 
positioning system, etc. and al so with the help of trained manpower/surveyors to  
ensure the correctness of such maps and  plans. At the same time, check and 
recheck survey be undertaken to ensure correctness of maps and plans.  The 
Committee also desired that Government  should fix personal responsibilities of 
top management in the event of failure to ensure corre ctness of maps and their 
updation.  The Committee were of the view that until and unless the plans were 
approved by DGMS, no mining activities should be carried out. 

 
38. In its reply, the Government has stat ed that in Coal Indi a Ltd (CIL), mine 
plans are prepared and updated as requi red under the stat ute using proper 
survey equipment by Mine Surveyors possessing mine surveyor’s certificate 
issued by DGMS.  Subsidiary companies  like BCCL, CCL, NC L, & WCL  have 
introduced modern instruments like Total Stations, EDMs, Electronic Theodilites, 
etc.  At the same time, check and recheck surveys are undertaken to ensure 
correctness of maps and plans as required by the statutes.  External agencies 
like CMPDIL/MECL are also being engaged to conduct check surveys in some 
cases. 
 
39. Coal mining activities are carri ed in accordance with the Mines Act and 
Rules & Regulations fr amed thereunder and DGMS approval is obtained 
wherever required under the above statutes.  
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) 
 
40. As per Reg. No. 58 to 65 of CM R, 1957, mine plans are being prepared 
and submitted to the DGMS.  It is proposed  to procure one GPS for SCCL within 
four months. 
  
41 Trained manpower and Surveyors are bei ng provided to prepare plans. As 
against 217 Surveyors, the existing strength is 198, meani ng thereby a net 
storage of 19 Surveyors.  
 
42. Area Survey Officer is posted in  each Area under the Area General 
Manager to take up check surveys at area level. 
 
43. Following measures are being taken up to ensure correctness of plans. 
 
(a) Check survey of underground worki ngs in relation to surface and 
neighbouring mines is under progress. 
 
(b) Check list is being followed to veri fy the mine plans periodically to 
ensure the accuracy of plans prepar ed under different Regulations 
of CMR, 1957. 
 
(c) It is being ensured that all the survey and levelling networks are 
closed to ascertain the accuracy. 
 
44. Dy. GM (Survey) is In-charge of Survey department. He conducts 
meetings with all Area Survey Officers  and monitors the check survey works 
during such meetings.  CGM (Safety) oversees the works.   
 

45. During general inspections undertak en by DGMS staff, the mine plans and 
records are being scrutinized by them.  Shortcomings point ed out by them and 
deviations if any are rectified. 
 
46. Independent survey work is taken up by Area Surveyors for verification of 
the survey work.  Updated plans of ever y mine are being submitted to the DGMS 
before 31st October every year. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
47. As far as NLC is concerned, t he Mine maps and Plans are prepared 
scientifically and updated as  and when requir ed under the Statute using modern 
technique, and also with the help of tr ained manpower/Surveyors ensure the 
correctness of such maps and Plans.  At the same time, check and recheck 
surveys are also undertaken to ensure correctness of maps and plans. 
 
48. Apart from the above, the Inform ation Technology like GIS (Geographical 
Information System) is bei ng used in Mining, Survey and Geological fields and 
got good results.  Moreover the mining activities are carried out as per the Plans 
approved by the DGMS. 
  
49. The Committee had recommended that  until and unless the plans were 
approved by the Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), no mining 
activities should be carried out.  The Ministry in its repl y has stated that in Coal 
India Ltd. (CIL), mine maps/plans are prepared and up dated as required under 
the statute using proper survey equipment s by mine surveyors possessing Mine 
Surveyor’s Certificate issued by DGMS . In addition to check and recheck 
surveys, external agencies like CMPD IL/MECL are also engaged to conduct 
check surveys in some case s. For carrying out coal mining activities, DGMS 
approval is obtained wher ever required under the st atute.  However, the 
Committee are pained to note t he shortage of surveyors in SCCL and feel that in 
the absence of adequate number of surv eyors, how could the coal company 
survey the mine and prepare mine maps  correctly and timely.  The Committee 

desire that there should be no  shortage, if any,  of surveyors and survey 
equipments, so that the mine maps a nd plans could be  prepared and updated 
correctly and scientifically within the scheduled time.  
F. Publication of Directorate  General Mines Safety (DGMS) Enquiry Reports 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.24, Para No.5.21) 
 
50. The Committee found that Directorate  General Mines Safety (DGMS) did 
not part with copy of enquiry report condu cted by them in the aftermath of the 
fatal coal mine accidents either to Tr ade Unions or its r epresentatives/Members 
of Tripartite Safety Review Committee. In fact, their Report of DGMS was never 
made public.  On the other hand, the Intern al Safety Organisation (ISO) enquiry 
report was made available to the m anagement and/or trade Unions and was 
discussed in the Tripartite Safety Committee.  The Committee were of the view 
that when Reports of Enquir y Committee  constituted in the aftermath of Rail/Air 
accidents, etc. were made public, there was no justification or rationale, 
whatsoever, in withholding the DGMS E nquiry Committee Reports from public.  
The Committee, therefore, recommended that inquiry reports of DGMS should be 
made public and copies t hereof should be made avai lable to concerned Trade 
Unions. 
 
51. In its reply, the Government has st ated that the provision under Sec.10 of 
Mines Act 1952 restricts such reports to  be made public.  However, the cause 
portion of the enquiry reports  are published in DGMS  Annual Report (a public 
document) & also intimated to the mine management while communicating 
charge against them.  Further, on specific requisition from any other authority as 
indicated under Section 10(2), which includes registered/recognized trade  union, 
the findings of the report are furnished keep ing in view of the provisions of Sec 
10 of Mines Act 1952. 
  
52. The Committee  had observed that  the Directorate General of Mines 
Safety (DGMS) enquiry repor t, on fatal accident in co al mines were not made 
available to the public an d had, therefore,  recomme nded that the Inquiry 
Reports of DGMS shou ld be made public and copies thereof  made available to 
the concerned Trade Unions. In  its reply, the Ministry ha s  inter-alia stated that 
the provision under Section 10 of Mines Act 1952 restricts such reports to be 
made public.  However, the “cause portion” of the repo rt is published in DGMS 

Annual Report and also intimated to the mine management. On specific requests 
from recognized Trade Unions, findings of the reports are furnished to them. The 
Committee are not convinced with the re ply of the Government and find no 
justification in withholding DGMS enquir y reports from maki n g    p u b l i c .  T h e  
Committee  are fully convinced  that making such enquir y reports public will not 
only go a long way in reducing the number  of such accidents in coal mines, but 
will also increase awareness amon g workers and mangement towards 
observance of safety norms, besides fixing responsibilit y in cases of lapse. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the relevant provisions of the Mines Act, 
1952 which restrict such reports being made public should be  suitably amended.  
G. EMPOWERING DGMS AS SING LE AUTHORITY TO FIX THE 
RESPONSIBILITY 
  
Recommendation (Sl.No.26, Para No.5.23) 
 
53. The Committee had found that in the event of a mine a ccident, there was 
a tendency of multiple disciplinary action simultaneously emanating from different 
authorities like ISO/DGMS and local police.  The Committee were of the view that 
there was need to curb di sciplinary action by mult iple agencies and only one 
authority should be authorized for taking action, as in the case  of the Railways. 
Further, multiple outside interventions affected timely rescue operations and 
caused demoralization to the workers and o fficers.  The Committee noted that in 
case of Railways, enquiry after accident  was conducted by a single agency i.e. 
Commissioner of Railways, where officers were on deputation from Railway.  The 
police or other authorities did not come into  picture, except in case of sabotage.  
It was in this context that Committ ee recommended that DGMS, which was 
empowered by the Mines Act, 1952, to fi x responsibility and prosecute persons 
held responsible in a Court of Law fo r awarding punishment, should be sole 
authority for fixing responsibility and aw arding punishment in  case of mine 
accidents.  This was all the more impor tant as a person appointed by the Central 
Government to hold Court of Enquiry has all the powers of Civil Court (Section 24 
of the Mines Act, 1952. The Committee al so recommended that Mines Act, 1952 
be amended, if need be for ensuring protection to a miner in this regard. 
 
54. The Ministry  in their Action Taken Reply has stated that the  question of 
parallel enquiries by police authorities into the mining  accidents had earlier been 

examined by Ministry of Labour and all the State Governments were requested in 
the year 2000 that where an Inspector of Mines had commenced an enquiry into 
mining accidents, no Police Officer should st art a fresh enquiry until the enquiry 
in progress had been completed by the authorities of the DGMS. 
 
55. On making Directorate General of Mi nes Safety (DGMS) the sole authority 
to fix responsibility/awar ding punishment in case of  mine accident, Government 
has no objection. 
 
56. The Committee had re commended that the Directorate General of Mines 
Safety (DGMS) which has been empowered by the Mi nes Act, 1952 and has all 
the powers of a civil court, should be the sole authority for fixing the responsibility 
and awarding the punishment in case of mine accidents. The Mi nistry  in its  
reply has stated that the question of  parallel enquirie s by police authorities into 
the mining accidents had earlier been exam ined by Ministry of Labour and all the 
State Governments were reques ted in the year 2 000 that where, an Inspector of 
Mines had commenced an enqu iry into mining accident s, no Police Officer 
should start a fresh enquir y until the enquiry in progr ess had been completed by 
the authorities of the DGMS. The Governme nt also has no ob jection in making 
the DGMS the sole authority to fix responsibility/awarding punishment in case of 
mine accident.  The Commi ttee are anguished to note that this problem has 
remained unresolved since 2000 and neither th e Ministry of Coal nor the Ministry 
of Labour has taken any posit ive step in this regard.   The Committee strongly 
feel that there is a dire  need to hold further  discussions with the State 
Governments to thrash out this long pending  issue. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Government to act in right per spective and hold di scussions with the 
State Govenments. The Committ ee would like to be apprised of th e action taken 
in the matter. 

H. NEED TO INVESTIGATE SERIOUS ACCIDENTS BY DGMS 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.27, Para No.5.24) 
 
57. The Committee noted that at present  the Directorate General of Mines 
Safety’s (DGMS)  role was limited to investigations into fatal mine accidents only.  
Serious accidents were not being enquire d into by DGMS. The Committee 
desired that DGMS should not only inve stigate the fatal accidents but also 
serious ones.  They should then analyze them in detail and issue guidelines and 
develop appropriate legislation to keep pace with time. 
 
58. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Labour & Employment has 
stated that the role of DGMS   is not limited  to inve stigation of Fatal Accidents 
only.  The Government agree with the recommendation that all serious accidents 
should also be enquired to help in analysi s of accidents, issue of guidelines and 
development of appropriate legislation. Logically this would require additional 
manpower or offload the DGMS from routine/check inspection. 
 
59. The Committee had desired that the Dir ectorate General of Mines Safety 
(DGMS) should investigate not only the fatal accidents but also serious ones.  
The Government is in agreement with the recommendation of the Committee that 
all serious accidents should also be inquired into  to help in analysizing the cause 
of accidents, issue of guidelines and de velopment of appropria te legislation, but 
this would require additi onal manpower or alternat ively  the DGMS may be 
offloaded from routine checks/inspections . The Committee are unhappy to note 
that on the one hand, the Ministry agrees that the serious accidents should be 
investigated, on the other, it has made no effort to increa se the manpower of 
DGMS as required. The Commi ttee do not appreciate th e lackadaisical reply of 
the Ministry and, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should 
immediately augment the ma npower of DGMS to enable it not only investigate 
the serious accidents but also facilitate the enforcement of safety measures in 
coal mines.  

 
I. STRENGTHENING  RESCUE STATIONS AND RESCUE ROOMS  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.45, Para No.9.16) 
 
60. The Committee noted that as per t he provision of Mines Rescue Rules, 
1985, it was the responsibility of the owner to establish and ensure functioning of 
rescue room or rescue station and al so to provide rescue equipment and 
apparatus as may be necessary for complia nce of these Rules.  The Committee 
further noted that coal subsidiaries  had well elaborated and structured rescue 
organization manned by trained personnel  and equipped with m odern state-of-
the-art equipments.  However, the past experience had shown that whenever any 
accident had taken place, the rescue operations had been delayed considerably 
leading to loss of lives of workers whic h otherwise could have been saved. It had 
been brought to the notice of the Commi ttee that the system of keeping rescue 
teams always alert was not visible an d members of the Rescue Team were 
assigned day-to-day mine work.  Further, at the time of em ergency, the rescue 
teams had failed to counter emergency, as they were ill equipped. The 
Committee expressed their displeasure over this and recommended that a totally 
dedicated work force at the site be ra ised for the purpose. The Committee also 
desired that special perks an d pre-requisite for rescue operation should be 
introduced.  At the same time, the response time for undertaking rescue 
operations be further reduced from the present level of 30 minutes. The 
Committee also recommended that for curt ailing delays in starting of rescue 
operations at emergency sites, periodi cal integrity emergency stimulation 
exercise be conducted at least twice a year and the reasons for delay identified 
and corrective action taken thereon.  The Committee further recommended that 
the rescue equipments and accessories such as high capacity dewatering 
pumps, gas masks, fire extinguisher, et c., should always rema in in readiness 
especially in underground mines and periodically checked to ensure their 
preparedness. The Rescue Team should be imparted extensive and rigorous 
training and given accommodat ion closer to rescue stat ion/rescue room so that 
they could report at the time of emergency without loss of time. 
 
61. In its Action Taken Reply, the Government has stated as under:-  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
62. When the Committee stated that “t he Rescue Team are assigned day-to-
day mine work”, it appears that the Commi ttee is referring to the Rescue Trained 
Persons (RTP) stationed at each underground mine, as re serves, in addition to 
the permanent Rescue Brigade s at the Rescue Stations  and Rescue Rooms.  
Such RTPs are permitted to perform their normal duties except when called upon 
to undertake Rescue work. The Committee w ould like to know whether there is 
any shortage of Rescue Team. 
 

63. Rescue Organisation dedicated solely to  undertake rescue work  is always 
kept on alert and kept well equipped. 
 
64. Rescue Allowance payable for each  Rescue Practice has been suitably 
enhanced. In addition Annual rescue bonus is also paid to Rescue workers. 
 
65. Rescue Trained persons are imparted four rigor ous Rescue Practices in 
mines and four under simulat ed hot and irrespirable atmo sphere in state-of-the-
art Training Galleries every year. 
 
66. Rescue Apparatus undergo rigorous per iodic tests to ensure that the 
same are always kept in readiness. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) 
 
67. As per statute, rescue trained pers onnel required to be provided are 584.  
Over and above the requirement 20% additional rescue trained personnel have 
been provided among the mines of SCCL. The enhancement of perks is being 
done on the recommendation of JBCCI.  Howe ver, in SCCL, it is proposed to 
enhance the existing allowances over and above the JBCCI recommendations by 
35% can be in the form of risk allowance. 
 
68. Emergency rescue vehicles fully l oaded with equipment are being kept in 
Air-conditioned garages to reduce the response time to 10 minutes. 
 
69. Training is being imparted in the gal leries 4 time in a year.  One new 
training gallery has been es tablished on surface at  GDK. Two more such 
galleries are proposed to be establish ed one at KGM and one at BPA region at 
rescue stations. 
 
70. All Rescue Stations are being equipped with rescue equipment as per 
statute. 
 
71. 9 Nos. of high ga llonage and low-head submersi ble  pumps are being 
procured and would be installed and kept in readiness at rescue stations. 
 
72. 30 Nos. of latest model BG4k brea thing apparatus has been obtained over 
and above 166 Nos. of BG 174 breathing apparatus. 
 
73. 100 Nos. of fire ex tinguishers are being kept in readiness at rescue 
stations to cater the needs of emergency. 
 
74. As per statute, training is bei ng imparted to all rescue trained personnel. 
 
75. There are 6 rescue service points catering to the rescue needs of 67 
mines of SCCL.  Three rescue serv ice points situated at Kothagudem, 

Godavarkhani and Bh oopalpalli have been provided with accommodation to its 
brigade members and other essential staff within the rescue station premises. 
 
76. At the other rescue service points , accommodation has been provided in 
the nearby colonies. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
77. The NLC is operating mechanized openc ast mines. More than one route is 
available to all the benches for any em ergency.  The same are known to the 
employees, workmen etc. and are being monitored regularly. 
 
78. The emergency mock drills are being c onducted at required intervals and 
if any delay is identified, the corrective action is also taken. 
 
79. The Committee are glad to note that  the Government has accepted their 
recommendation and taken necessar y steps by providing rescue 
allowance/rescue bonus, imparting re scue training, keeping the required 
equipments in readiness a nd dedicated force for rescu e operations.  However, 
the Committee note that the Ministry has not taken any measure to reduce the 
response time to 10 minutes from the exis ting 30 minutes in Coal India Ltd. The 
Committee firmly believe that it is the response time wh ich is very crucial in 
emergency situations, particularly in underground coal mi nes. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Government to re duce response time to 10 minutes as is 
being done in SCCL.  
J. SHORTAGE OF RESCUE EQUIPMENTS 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 46, Para No.9.17) 
 
80. The Committee found that there wa s a shortage of e quipment and other 
accessories/gadgets used for rescue operation. Further these were not of 
international standards. The Committ ee desired that shortage of these 
equipments and gadgets should be met and the existing equipments were 
upgraded/updated conforming to  international standar ds. The Committee also 
desired that a promotional scheme be intr oduced for further upgrading the status 
of rescue operations. 

 
81. In its  Action Taken Reply, Mini stry of Coal has stated as under:- 
 
Coal  India Limited (CIL) 
 
82. Any shortage of Rescue Equipment  is made upon priority basis. The 
company-wise status is given below:- 
 
Company   Action Taken     
1     2______________ ______________________ 
ECL There is no. shortage of rescue equipment and other 
accessories/gadgets used for Rescue operation at Sitarampur 
Rescue Station.  The equi pment provided there are of international 
standards.  Wherever necessary upgradation is being done. 
 
BCCL There is shortage of 16 nos. of  Resuscitating Apparatus, 2 nos. of 
Universal Tester, 3 nos. of Resc ue Vans, 2 nos. Ice Machines for 
BG-4 Self Contained Breathing Apparatus (S CBA), & 5 nos. of 
multi-gas detector which have been programmed to be procured. 
 
 Equipment available at Rescue St ations conform to international 
standards.  Since there spares are not indigenously made problem 
exists in their procurement. 
 
CCL There is no shortage of equ ipment and other a ccessories/gadgets 
required for use in rescue operation in CCL. 
 
WCL Modern rescue apparatus/equi pment have been provided.  
Sufficient budgetary provisions are earmarked for up-gradation of 
status of rescue services and procurement of rescue apparatus. 
  
Further, 
a) Procurement of 24 nos. of re suscitating apparatus is under 
process.  This procurement is delayed due to non-availability of 
DGMS approved apparatus.  Budget ary allocation is made for 
the purpose. 
 
b) 41 nos. of face masks in respect of Tube Apparatus are also   
being  procured. 
 
NEC  Making up of shortage of rescue apparatus in process. 
 
83. The Rescue Organisation is prov ided with international standard 
equipments.  State-of-the-ar t Self Contained Breathi ng Apparatus (SCBA) like 
BG-4 is already in use in many companies and more of such equipment are 
programmed to be procured.  BG-174 (SCBA), which was the main SCBA, is 

also of international standards.  Provisions for up-gradation of Rescue Equipment 
is made in the Rescue Budget. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) 
 
84. As per statute, requir ed equipment are provided at rescue stations.  The 
following equipment conforming to International standards have been provided at 
the rescue stations: 
 
 BG-4 breathing apparatus 
 Methanometers. 
 Oxymeters 
 Resuscitators 
 Multi-gas Detectors 
 Chemical Oxygen Self-Rescuers. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
85. As far as NLC is concerned, there is no shortage of equipments and other 
accessories/gadgets used for rescue oper ation and it is also under the 
consideration for further upgrading the status of rescue operations. 
 
86. The Committee had recommended that  shortage of the equipments and 
gadgets should be met and the existing equipm ents be upgraded/updated 
conforming to the internat ional standards. The Ministry has stated that 
equipments conforming to international standards have been provided at the 
rescue stations. However, the Committee ar e pained to note th at Bharat Coking 
Coal Ltd. (BCCL), Western Coalfields Ltd.    (WCL) and North Eastern Coalfields 
Ltd. (NECL) are still facing shorta ge of rescue equipments. The Committee 
express their concern over this state of affair jeopardizing the lives of the trapped 
workmen as in the absence of rescue eq uipments, the rescue teams are greatly 
handicapped. The Committee would like to  reiterate that shortages of rescue 
related equipments and gadgets of internat ional standards in the coal mines,  
namely  BCCL, WCL and NECL should be met urgently.  

K. VISITS OF COAL MI NES BY THE OFFICERS OF MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.60, Para No.11.33)  
 
87. It had been brought to the notice of the Committee that senior officials 
from Ministry of Coal, Chairman and M anaging Directors of coal subsidiaries 
seldom visit coal mines especially underground,  as a result, they were not aware 
of the ground realities  in coal mines.  The Commi ttee recommended that senior 
officials of the rank of Joint Secretar y and above in the Ministry of Coal should 
undertake surprise visit of underground mines at least once in a month and 
thereby keep themselves abr east with the latest mini ng status in the mine.  
Similarly, all CMDs should also conduct surprise visit of underground mines on 
safety periodically. 
 
88. The Ministry of Coal, in their Action Taken Reply, stated Coal India Limited  
CMDs and Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. are ma king visits in underground 
mines.  However the recommendation of the Committee has been circulated for 
needful action.  
 
89. As far as Neyveli Lignite Corpor ation (NLC) is concerned, the Senior 
Officials including the CMD are conducting surprise visit of the Mines periodically. 
 
90. The Committee were further informed t hat Senior Officers of the Ministry 
of Coal do visit mines as and when required.    
 
91. The Committee had noticed that since the senior officers of the Ministry of 
Coal and Chairman and Managing Directors  of Coal companie s seldom visit the 
coal mines, they were not awar e of ground realities. It is in this context,  the 
Committee had recommended that senior offi cers of the rank of Joint Secretary 
and above of the Ministry of Coal and CMDs of coal companies should undertake 
surprise visits of undergro und mines, at least once in  a month and thereby keep 
themselves abreast with the latest mi ning status in the mine. The Committee 
note with concern that periodicity of visits by senior officer of Ministry of Coal and 
CMDs of coal companies fo r overseeing the safety me asures are not properly 
being maintained.  The Commi ttee further note that the senior officers of the 

Ministry visit mines as and when required and th ere is no periodicity of visits by 
CMDs in Coal India Ltd.  though in  SCCL and NLC surprise visits are made 
periodically. The Committee depr icate their attitude of  officials of the Ministry 
and coal companies in the performance of  their duties to bring about safety 
environment in coal mines. The Committee, therefore, desire that officers of 
Ministry and CMDs of coal companies s hould not only make su rprise visits as 
and when required but to ensure that a time schedule is drawn up for such visits. 
L. VISIT OF DGMS TO VOCA TIONAL TRAINING CENTRES 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.63, Para No.12.20)  
 
92. There was also a need to develop clear-cut curriculu m for different 
trainings being imparted at VTCs  so that the level of training could be raised.  At 
the end of training some type of examination could be held so that miners took it 
seriously.  Those who pass the examinatio n could be given in crements, etc., as 
an encouragement.  The Committee also found that VTCs are not being 
inspected by DGMS due to shortage of  staff.  The Committee did not approve 
this and recommend that DGMS should inspect VTCs once in a year without fail. 
 
93. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Coal has stated that in Coal India 
Limited (CIL), there is a clear-cut curriculum for the different trainings imparted at 
VTCs under the Vocational Tr aining Rules.  Also, a clear cut detailed curriculum 
was prepared by the DGMS as Training Modules and circulated and includes 5 
modules for (1) Surface, (2) UG Workers, (3) OC workers, (4) Specific categories 
of OC workers/Supervisors, (5) Specific categories of UG workers/supervisors. 
 
94. There is a provision for feed back and test for which 1-2 days have been 
specially allocated in the Training Modules. 
 
95. In Singareni Collieries Company Lt d (SCCL), DGMS staff visits MVTCs 
occasionally. 
 
96. Gas Testing Examination, Mining Si rdar Examinations are being held at 
Training Centres.  These examinations  are conducted by DGMS, during the time 
they are overseeing MVTC activities such examinations are being  taken 
minimum 4 times in a year at each MVTC. 
 

97. Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC), as far as NLC is concerned, DGMS is 
visiting the Group Vocational Training Centres at regular intervals at least once in 
a year. 
 
98. However, the recommendation of the Committee has been circulated to 
DGMS for necessary action. 
 
99. The Committee had found that the Vo cational Training Centres (VTCs) 
were not being inspected by  the Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) 
staff due to shortage of manpow er. The Committee h ad, therefore, 
recommended that DGMS shou ld inspect VTCs once in a year without fail. The 
Committee note that there is no proper sched ule of visits by DGMS to Vocational 
Training Centres in co al companies. While such visits  in SCCL are occasional, it 
is once in a year, in NLC. T he reply of the Government is silent on such visits to 
VTCs in Coal India Ltd.  The Committee feel that when such visits can be 
arranged in one company, why it can not be done in others. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that DGMS staff should inspect the VTCs in CIL, 
SCCL and NLC atleast once a year  to ascertain whether the VTCs are being run 
as per the Mines Vocation al Training Rules, 1966  and are not lacking any 
infrastructural facilities . The Committee desire that the manpower of DGMS 
should be suitably increased to accomplish the above job.  

CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para No.2.20) 
 
The Committee note that the principal responsibility for the safety of coal 
mine workers and all those wh o are directly engaged in t he mining rests entirely 
with the management of that  mine. The Committee have  noted that safety 
system in coal mines is regularly monitored through intensive and quality 
inspection by DGMS, Internal Safety Organization (ISO) of Coal India and its 
subsidiaries and line management of c oal companies. ISO not only undertakes 
inspection for monitoring safety status  of the mines but also recommends 
precautionary measures to be taken to  avoid dangers to t he line management. 
Apart from these, there are also safety  forum both statutory and non-statutory to 
monitor safety in coal mines. The Committe e is unhappy to note that in spite of 
having a large contingent of managers and other suppor ting staff in each 
subsidiary of Coal Indi a Ltd., no positive changes in  the safety scenario are 
visible. The Committee note that one of the functions of the management is to 
ensure that mining is undertaken as per safety norms and compliance of various 
provisions of the Mines Act, 1952 Ru les, Regulations  and Orders made 
thereunder. The Committee have also been apprised that while conducting  
inspection of coal mines, the major deficiencies found by DGMS are; non-
maintainence of systematic support rules, non-provision of dust suppression and 
coal dust treatment arrangement, non-provisions of adequate ventilation 
arrangement, non-maintenance of Heavy Earth Moving Machine (HEMM) in 
opencast  mines, high benches in opencast mines and not adhering to prescribed 
method of work. The Committee have taken note of the deficien cies pointed out 
by DGMS and are not satisfi ed with the status of compli ance of the statutes by 
the management. So much so that even mine plans are not being maintained, as 
per the Statutes. The Committee is equa lly concerned to note that adequate 
provision does not exist for ventilation  and dust suppression. The deficiencies 
observed by DGMS clearly shows ca llousness on the part of the coal 
management in not adhering to the pre scribed Rules and Regulations framed 
under various statutes. The Committee, t herefore, recommend that Government 
should overhaul the safety environment in coal mines. A Study Group/Committee 
can also be constituted for the purpose, if nee be.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Action Taken: During the course of inspection by DGMS, 
deficiencies/violations are poi nted out by them. Immediate action is initiated by 
the mine management to rectify the deficienc ies and remove the violations. Mine 

plans are maintained as per CMR, 1957. DG MS officials in the course of their 
inspections check and examin e mine plans. Deficiencies if  any in this regard are 
rectified. 
 
The table below gives the safety stat istics of CIL at 10 years intervals. 
Fatalities due to accidents have come dow n from 233 in 1975 to 60 in 2003. 
Similarly, serious injuries have reduced from 1515 in 1975 to 353 in 2003. This 
shows that there is a marked improved in the standards of safety in Coal India 
Limited. 
 
Fatal Accidents Serious Accidents Fatality Rate Serious Injury Rate Year 
Accidents Fatalities Accidents Serious 
Injuries 
Per 
million 
tonnes 
Per 3 
lakh 
manshifts
Per 
million 
tonnes 
Per 3 
lakh 
manshifts
1975 177 233 1456 1515 2.62 0.52 17.03 3.41 
1985 136 152 507 524 1.15 0.31 3.97 1.07 
1995 107 115 575 612 0.50 0.27 2.65 1.14 
2000 80 100 510 540 0.37 0.25 1.99 1.36 
2003 56 60 338 353 0.20 0.17 1.18 1.00 
 
Note: Figures for 2003 are subject to reconciliation with DGMS. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) 
 
 Statutory records are being maintained at all the mines. During 
inspections by the Officers of DGMS, Sa fety Officers and ar ea Safety Officers 
accompany them. However, ISO follows up identified shortcomings for their 
rectification. All plans are being mainta ined as per Regulation No.58 to 65. 
Recently copies of mine plans pertaining to all mi nes of SCCL have been 
submitted to DGMS for their scrutiny and examination. All systematic support 
rules are being submitted to Ministry of  Mines for their approval. After getting 
approval they have been followed scrupulously. Dust suppression works are 
being taken up and contolled by prov iding water spraying arrangements at 
loading and unloading poi nts at CSPs. Loaded lorries are being covered with 
Tarpaulin cloth to reduce the dust suppr ession and Personal Dust Samplers are 
being provided to all the departments to measure dust concentration and 
necessary arrangements will be done to bring down the dust concentration below 
to 3 mg/m
3. All opencast mines are provided  with water tanker s. The above are 
being reviewed during National Dust Prev ention Committee Meetings which take 
place once in 6 months at  CIL. Ventilation cells hav e been constituted at SCCL 
one at corporate office with GM (R&D) and 3 at each region to take up and 
monitor and attend ventilation requirements at mines. This is one of the points 
taken up and reviewed at Bi-partite and Tripartite Meeting that is being held once 
in 6 months. Due care is being paid in  maintenance of all Heavy Earth Moving 
Machines as per manuals supplied by ma nufacturers. Major equipment repairs 
have been taken up by taking help of Manufacturers. The issue is being reviewed 

once in a month during Regi onal Safety Meetings (Bi-partite) in which Union 
Representatives are participat ing. Dimensions of all the benches are as per the 
approved standards laid down by  Directorate of Mines Safe ty. This is also being 
reviewed once in a month at Regional Safe ty Meeting. Due care is being taken 
as approved conditions laid down by DGMS both in  openc ast and underground 
mines. Number of awareness programmes as well as inspection programmes 
have been taken up by Internal Safety  Organization to in culcate awareness to 
adhere to the prescribed methods of work. The issue is also being taken up in 
the Regional Safety Meetings held once in a month. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
 As far as NLC is concerned the following items are maintained/adhered 
properly: 
 
(a) Maintenance of Statutory Records. 
(b) Maintenance of Mine plans. 
(c) Adherence to approved method of working for various opencast Mining 
Operations. 
(d) Provision for dust suppression. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
 
MoC is reviewing safety in coal mines periodically. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.NO.54012/1/04/-CRC Dated 12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No.2.22) 
 
The Committee also suggest that the role of ISO, Safety Committees and 
Workmen’s Inspector should be activa ted and modern management practices 
like safety management plan for occupat ional safety and health should be 
prepared with the risk assessment study and implemented.  
 
Reply of the government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Safety matters receive utmost importance in subsidiary companies of Coal 
India Ltd. with active parti cipation of ISO.  Pit sa fety committee members and 
workers’ Inspectors play an important ro le in safety matters at Mine level.  
Modern practices like Risk Assessment and preparation of safety management 
plan is being introduced in  all companies. The compan y-wise status is given 
below: 

 
Company                                           Status 
 
ECL Risk Assessment has been done in tw o mines with the help                       
of Australian experts.  In another  two mines this has been done 
with the help of DGMS officials.   Risk assessment  has been done 
in Kumardih-A.  
 
BCCL    Risk Assessment has been done in ten mines. 
 
CCL Three Workshops for Risk A ssessment have been  organized for 
training people to conduct risk a ssessment at two areas and CCL 
Hq. Ranchi.  Risk assessment has been  done in one colliery. 
 
NCL Risk Assessment of 3 mines has been done. 
 
WCL Risk Assessment has been done in three mines. 
 
MCL Workshops on Risk Assessment have been conducted.  Risk                       
Assessment has been done and Safety  Management Plans                        
have been prepared in one mine in Talcher Area, all underground 
mines of Orient Area, and four Opencast Mines. 
 
NEC  Risk assessment has been done in 4 mines. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) 
  
i) All Safety Committee Members and Workmen In spectors are                
being imparted required training  to inculcate awareness amon g               
them and promote active participation in the safety activities. 
 
ii) Safety Committee Meetings are being conducted regularly on 
monthly basis at all the mines.  Copies of minutes are being 
circulated among the participants and being submitted to Director of 
Mines Safety. 
 
iii) ISO is monitoring status of implementation of the minutes regularly. 
 
iv) Copies of the Minutes are being sent to DGMS. 
 
v) Counselling of the workmen is  taken up through the Members of 
Mines Safety Committee. 
 
vi) Workmen Inspectors are participating in the above meetings. 
 

vii) Workmen Inspectors accompany t he officers from Ministry of Mines 
during their visits. 
 
viii) Services of Workmen Inspec tors are utilized during accident 
inquiries. 
 
 Risk Management plans have been prepar ed at 16 mines and they are 
under implementation. At all these mines, the activities which are to be attended 
immediately and which need ongoing management have been clearly identified. 
  
At the remaining mines also, Risk Management Strategy will be 
implemented. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned the ro le of ISO, Safety Committees and 
Workmen’s Inspectors are activat ed and modern management practices like 
Safety Management Plan for Occupational Safety and Health are prepared with 
the Risk Assessment Study and implemented. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC        Dated :  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No.2.25) 
 
The Committee note that supervisory staff, surveyors, overman, mining 
Sirdars, etc., play very vital role in ens uring safety at the mine level and advises 
the management on all these aspects.  The Committee are perturbed to note that 
on the one hand, there is an acute shortage of these staff in some of the coal 
subsidiaries, who are crucial for enforcing safety in coal mines and on the other 
hand, there are surpluses.  The Committe e, therefore, recommend that pending 
the creating of a separate Directorate , need based adequate safety staff be 
provided and shortages be met either  by conducting open examinations or 
through inter-company and intra-company transfers etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Coal India Limited  (CIL) 
 
In the coal subsidiaries in every area , Vocational Training Centres are 
functioning and training is provided to  the employees for appearing in the 
statutory examinations c onducted by the DGMS for acquiring Overman, Mining 
Sirdars and Shot Firers Cert ificate of Competency.  On  acquiring the Certificate 
of Competency to work as Overman, Mining  Sirdar & Shot Firer the employee is 
promoted/placed to work in the sa id statutory post subject to the 
vacancy/requirement and other official formalities. 
 

In the last two years 30 inter-subsidiary transfers of statutory personnel 
have been done out of which 8 are Overman and 22 are Mining Sirdars.  The 
transfer of statutory surplus category employees to the subsidiaries where there 
is shortage is an ongoing process an d every effort is being made for 
rationalization of manpower. 
 
At  present the employ ees who have acquired the Competency certificate 
to work as Overman, Mining Sirdars & Shot Firer are being promoted to the 
vacant posts of statutory personnel by the subsidiaries. After the process of 
placing the departmental candida tes in the vacant posts the 
shortage/requirement will be assessed and the proc ess of outside recruitment 
will be initiated if required. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL ) 
 
Filling up of the vacancies is a regular  exercise.  During the year 2003-04, 
the following vacancies were filled. 
 
Under Managers -36 
Assistant Managers -34 
Surveyors  -12 
Mining Sirdars  -49 
Overman  -98 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation  (NLC ) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, there is no shortage of Supervisory staff and 
surveyors. However, NLC being a highly mechanized Mine deploying 
BWE(Bucket Wheel Excavator), Conveyor s, Tripper and Spreader for regular 
production and is being the only such Mine  in the Country, a need was felt to 
have trained Engineers in the safe operation and maintenance of these 
Equipments. Hence experienced Junior level Mechanical Engineers/Asstt. 
Engineers have been posted in  place of Mining Sardars, to overcome the 
shortfall in this category, as utility of Mining Sardar, Overman et c. is limited for 
such mechanized mines operation as that of NLC. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC        Dated:  12-1-2005] 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No.3.28) 
 
Roof and side fall accidents still continue to be major cause of fatality in 
underground coal  mines in spite of introduction of steel supports in such 
workings.  The Committee note that roo f/side falls accounts for 35% of all the 
fatal accidents in underground coal mines of CIL.  In SCCL, the rate of fatalities 
due to roof and side falls is alarming.  Du ring the last five years from 1998 to 
2002, about 51% fatalities in SCCL o ccurred due to roof and side falls.  The 
Committee feel that deficiencies in most of the accidents were avoidable.  The 
Committee note that various circulars have been issued by DGMS to prevent 
roof/side fall from time to time.  However, they are not being complied with all the 
seriousness, which they deserve. T he Committee, ther efore, strongly 
recommend that management of  the coal companies should ensure that the 
guidelines issued by DGMS  in this regard are followed in letter and spirit 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited ( CIL) 
 
These recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all 
subsidiary companies to ensure  compliance. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL ) 
 
All the guidelines issued by DGMS  are being followed scrupulously to 
bring down the number of roof fall and side fall accidents.  ISO are also 
undertaking surprise inspections on the implementation part.  Copies of the 
Circulars issued by DGMS/Company ar e being issued to the Workmen 
Representatives or Union R epresentatives.  The issues  are being discussed in 
Regional Safety Review Meetings once in a month. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation  (NLC ) 
 
This recommendation is not applicable to NLC. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC         Dated :  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No.3.29) 
 
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that roof bolting, roof 
stitching, triangular/squar e chocks, high set and steel  props, are not made 
available and where availabl e, are not of desired sta ndards.  Jacks of high set 
props run out of order frequently.  The Committee desire that these should be 
enquired into and appropriate corrective action taken in the matter. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited  (CIL) 
 
Company-wise action taken is given below: 
________________________________________________________________ 
Company  Action Taken Status 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
1    2 
 
ECL There is no deficiency in supply/quality of support material.  In the budget 
of 2004-05 this has been taken care of. 
 
BCCL Although efforts were made to provide adequate mate rials there were 
some occasions in the past when shortage of stock of torr steel for roof 
bolts or MS plates for Bearing Plat es or Sq. Hollow Tubes for making 
Steel Chocks were faced due to liquidity  cash crunch.  The situation has 
been set right by providing enough f unds in the safety budget and the 
material budget for above items. Impr ovement in quality of materials 
supplied has also been brought about by thorough inspec tion of items 
before use at the stores. 
 
CCL Sufficient roof support material such  as roof bolts, rope dowels for roof 
stitching, steel chocks, pit props, W-straps are made available. 
 
WCL Steel supports like roof bolting, roof stitching, triangular/square chocks, 
high set and steel props are used in a ll mines of WCL, except for Rajur 
Incline where the low seam thickness does not permit roof/bolting 
stitching. Sufficient good quality support material is provided. 
 
 SECL  In SECL, roof bolting roof stitch ing triangular/square chocks, High Set    
Props are made available in all mines .  High set Props are in use in 
Churcha mine and Shield Supports are in use in Longwall Faces at 
Kumda 7&8 Inclines, Balarpur UG  and Rajendra UG. Resin bolts are 
being used in Anjan Hill Mine, Pawan  Incline and  Rajgamar 
. 
MCL Steel support materials as  per SSR are being supplied. 
 
NEC There is no deficiency of suppor t materials.  Good quality of support 
materials is ensured. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited  (SCCL ) 
 
Adequate number of r oof supporting materials like roof bolts, steel props 
are being supplied to the mines. 
 

2002 -   9 lakhs roof bolts have been supplied. 
 
2003 -    19 lakhs roof bolts are being supplied. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Corporation  (NLC) 
 
This recommendation is not applicabl e to Neyveli Lign ite Corporation 
(NLC). 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/1/04-CRC         Dated:   12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No.3.30) 
 
The Committee further observe that vi bration produced due to blasting 
disturbs the existing geo-mining conditions.  The freshly exposed roof/green roof 
is most prone to the fall of  roof/side.  Handling of ex plosives/blasting is done in 
underground mine as per the provision of the regulati on as laid down in Coal 
Mines Regulations, 1957 and Indian Explosive Act/Rules.  As such every care 
should be taken to ensure that these are duly followed with all seriousness.  The 
Supervisory staff should be made accountable for every lapse in following DGMS 
guidelines.  Serious action may be taken against such officials for repetitions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited ( CIL) 
 
DGMS guidelines regarding use of explos ives are strictly followed. Action 
is taken against supervisory staff held accountable for any lapse in following 
DGMS guidelines in this regard. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited  (SCCL ) 
 
SCCL has totally switched over to r oof bolting activities for supporting 
freshly exposed roof, as approved by DGMS.  
 
Blasting is carried out as per CMR, 169.  Transit slips ar e being supplied 
and used for better management of explosives. 
 
Corporate level Safety  Committee has been constituted consisting of 
Director (Personnel, Administrative & Welfare), Director (P&P), 
Director(Operations), Chief GM(Safety)  and GM (Personnel) to review and 
recommend action against executives and supervisors.  The Committee meets 
once in six months to follow the uniform procedure. 
 

Neyveli Lignite Corporation  (NLC)  
 
This recommendation is not applicabl e to Neyveli Lign ite Corporation 
(NLC). 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC        Dated :  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10, Para No.3.31) 
 
The Committee are glad to know that i nduced blasting is in vogue in some 
mines of CIL.  Adequate pr ecautions are being taken including suspension of 
work till falling of stone parting, where induced blasting method is being practiced 
to regularize the fall overlying hard strata in case of depillaring with caving. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited  (CIL) 
 
No action is required. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited  (SCCL ) 
 
Code of practice is being establ ished and followed at each mine.  The 
Code of Practice is subm itted to DGMS for its approval and same is being 
followed systematically at all caving, depillaring operations to bring down the 
hanging roof. 
 
Induced blasting strategy is being followed scrupulously at all the mines. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation  (NLC ) 
 
This recommendation is not applicabl e to Neyveli Lignit e Corporation  
(NLC). 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC  Dated:   12-1-2005] 
    
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11, Para No. 3.32) 
 
The Committee observe that the mixt ure of some inflammable gases, 
mainly methane, along with some other hydrocarbons can explode with 
disastrous consequences and result in lo ss of lives and considerable damage to 
the mine.  Mine coal dust has also been responsible for explosion in the coal 
mines.  The coal dust clouds have also be en responsible for low visibility in the 
coal mines.  The Committee, therefore,  recommend that to flush out the gases 
from the underground coal mines, sufficient ventilation facilities with high capacity 

exhaust fans should be provided in each and every mine. To monitor the 
presence and nature of the gas es in the mines, multi gas detectors and also 
computerized gas/environment monitoring system should be established 
especially in highly gassy mines. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited  (CIL) 
 
Adequate ventilation facilities by me chanical ventilators of adequate 
capacity are provided in all underground mines.  Gas detectors are provided to 
supervisors for detecting the presence of and monitoring percentages of 
noxious/inflammable gases. Computer ized Environmental Tele-monitoring 
systems have been provided in 14 highly  gassy/fiery mines and more such 
systems will be installed in future. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited  (SCCL ) 
 
All mines have been provided with adeq uate capacity of main mechanical 
ventilators and auxiliary fans.  This is reviewed once in a month in the regional 
Safety Review Meeting.  This issue is  also being reviewed in the Bi-partite 
Meeting being conducted once in 6 months. 
 
There are no Degree-III gassy mines in SCCL. However, continuous 
monitoring instruments have been installed in blasting gallery panel and long wall 
working.  
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation  (NLC ) 
 
This recommendation is not applicabl e to Neyveli Lignit e Corporation  
(NLC). 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated  :  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para  3.32) 
 
The Committee further observe that t he highly gassy mines are identified 
through a statistical exercise based on the accident statistics for the previous five 
years of each and every mine. The Committ ee feel that identification, merely 
based on the statistics, is a very primitiv e method to identify such mines.  There 
is a need to develop some machines/equ ipments for continuous monitoring of 
degree-III gassy mines and those having acti ve underground fire in a phased 
manner.  At the same time, the Committee recommend that necessary facilities 
for monitoring the environmental paramet ers in respect of Methane and Carbon 
Monoxide should be provided at mines.  The Committee note that to make the 
underground environment more eco-friendly,  CIL has taken up a programme to 

drain out methane (CH 4) from a few working mines  under the programme called 
CMM (Coal Mine Methane) and CBM (Coal Bed Methane).  The Committee 
recommend that coal bed methane should  be extracted and commercialized in 
collaboration with Gas Authority of India Li mited (GAIL) and other 
experts/group/firms.  Sufficient funds may also be provided for this purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited  (CIL)  
 
Highly gassy mines are not identified th rough statistical exercise based on 
the accident statistics for the previous  five years of eac h and every mine.  
Probably the Committee is referring to Accident Prone Mines, which are thus 
identified. 
 
Necessary facilities for monitoring presence /percentage of methane and 
carbon monoxide are provided in all underground mines as a routine matter. 
 
Equipment for continuous monitoring of  certain environmental parameters 
like percentage of inflammable gases/methane, noxious gases, oxygen, humidity, 
temperature etc. already exist.  Such systems have already been installed in 14 
identified mines and installation of more such systems are planned. 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) has alr eady entered into the business of 
exploration and extraction of Coal Bed Me thane.  CIL has joined a consortium 
with ONGC to work two CBM blocks in Jh aria and Raniganj Co alfields.  CIL has 
also taken up a demonstrative project for extraction and use of CBM in Sudamdih 
and Moonidih mines under UNDP and GEF (Global Environmental Fund) 
funding. 
 
Coal India has big coal resources in  its command and it is worthwhile to 
explore the possibility of  extraction of methane from the workings as well 
abandoned mines in the subsidiaries.  A concept paper on the subject has been 
prepared for the purpose dwelling upon a policy on Coal Mine Methane (CMM) 
and Abandoned Mine Methane (AMM).  Coal I ndia Limited is in the process of 
signing a potential ‘Business Areas’ of co-operation with GAIL,  which include the 
areas of jointly exploring and developing Coal Bed Methane. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited  (SCCL) 
 
There are no degree-III gassy mines in SCCL.  However continuous 
monitoring equipment are installed among mechanised mines in Singareni 
Collieries Company Limited (SCCL).   Methane drainage is not taken up because 
SCCL mines are Degree-I gassy mines and there are only two Degree-II gassy 
mines in SCCL.   
 

Neyveli Lignite Corporation  (NLC) 
 
This recommendation is not applicabl e to Neyveli Lign ite Corporation 
(NLC). 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated :  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 13, Para No. 3.34) 
 
The Committee note that the coal companies at times, do not pay 
attention to the protection of the envir onment, as it deserves.  It has been 
brought to the notice of the Committee that many of the opencast mines/left the  
land degraded after completion of the mi ning operations.  Also Trucks/Dumpers 
loaded with coal pass through residential areas  causing dusty conditions.  In this 
context, the Committee desire that filling up of opencast excavation and 
reclamation of the degraded land should be made mandatory under the law.  The 
Trucks/Dumpers after loading coal should be suitably covered so as to avoid dust 
being raised in the environment. At the same time, the Committee desire that 
adequate arrangements and infrastructural fac ilities be made available to carry 
out dust surveys in the mines and corrective action taken thereon. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited ( CIL) 
 
During mining operation itself, all non-active external OB dumps are 
reclaimed and plantation is done extensiv ely with different variety of sapling 
including medicinal plants.  Voids are back filled with ov erburden simultaneously 
as the mines progresses.  After the mines is exhausted some unavoidable void is 
left out which is converted into water reservoir which becomes source of water 
for domestic use and fisheries for the habitat who continue to live after the mine 
is closed.  All the reclaimed land (fill ed with OB/ top soil) is covered with 
plantation. Recently few of the recl aimed sites are being used for growing 
paddy/vegetable crops/medicinal plants by the Project Affected People (PAP). 
The provision for reclamati on/restoration of the land degraded due to mining is 
mandatory and covered under the Envi ronmental Management Plan (EMP), 
which has been approved by MOEF bef ore a project is cleared for 
implementation. 
 
Regarding covering of the trucks, it is  to be mentioned that covering of 
coal loaded trucks is being practiced in some of the subsidia ries like WCL, NCL, 
MCL and is under process of implementation in the other subsidiaries.  
 
As regards emission of dust due to mi ning activities is concerned, several 
measures such as, (i) Fixed Sprinkle rs along the haul ro ads, (ii) Mobile 
sprinklers,  (iii) Cleaning of roads by gr aders as well as manually, are taken so 

that dust emission is kept within allo wable limits set by SPCB/CPCB. Regular 
monitoring of dust emission is underta ken by independent approved agencies as 
per Air Pollution Acts/Rules. 
 
Infrastructural facilities have been provided for carrying out dust surveys in 
mines and corrective action is taken wherever necessary. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Re-filling arrangement of the opencast mines and land re-claming of the 
degraded land is being taken up as per ap proved project reports and approved 
environmental management plan s.  At the opencast mines of SCCL, during the 
last two years back-filli ng has been done in 79.30 hecta res of land and 1,82,233 
saplings have been planted. Loaded  tr ucks/dumpers are being covered and 
position reviewed at National Dust Prevention Committee (NDPC) Meetings 
which are held once in mont hs at CIL, headquarters, Kolkata. Reports of dust-
surveys to take up corrective action ar e submitted to NDPC for review and 
recommended measures by the National Dust Prevention Committee are being 
attended. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
At NLC, after the Lignite exploitation, the excavated area is back filled with 
overburden soil.  The area t hus back filled is levelled and reclaimed by adopting 
latest techniques like Biological Reclamatio n, Soil Enrichment etc., based on the 
R&D study carried out by the Centre for Applied Research & Development, NLC. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.  54012/1/04-CRC  Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 19   of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.  14, Para No. 3.35) 
 
The Committee observe that one of t he major hazards associated with the 
coal mining is inundation from undergroun d water bodies and/or from surface 
water.  Most of the mines are old.  They  are filled with water due to which it is 
dangerous to work in the underground seam s or adjacent mines.  Moreover, 
mines are provided old maps, which are not reliable.  The Committee are of the 
view that to avoid accidents due to i nundation whether major or minor, proper 
planning of the mines is the best solution.   The Committee, therefore, desire that 
updated mine  plans should be prepared and maintained and mining should be 
carried out strictly as per plan.  Correla tion of survey, periodical check survey, 
boring/drilling to connect with exact lo cation, etc. should be carried out 
frequently.  It has been brought to the notice of the Commi ttee that if holes are 

made at regular intervals for providing parti tion, then the extent of water can be 
known.  The water can then be removed  be fore faster working.  The Committee 
feel that in order to minimize the accidents on accounts of inundation, latest geo-
physical methods of proving barriers/ partings developed and tested by CMRI, 
Dhanbad and NIRM, KGF should be made us e of in the coal mine areas 
susceptible for inundations. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Coal India Limited ( CIL) 
 
The company-wise action taken is given below: 
 
ECL: Updated mine plans are prepared and maintained and mining is carried out 
as per plan. 
 
BCCL: Mine plans are prepared and updated at all  mines.  Correlation survey 
done in 64 pits of 38 mines by exte rnal agencies (CMPDIL) by modern 
instruments.  Check Survey has been done in 65 out of 68 mines.  In 
balance 3 mines work is in progress.  Check survey has also been done 
by outside agency in five mines. 
 
CCL: Mine plans are prepared and up dated in accordance with statutory 
provision.  Check Survey of all eleven mines, identified as having potential 
for inrush of water, has been done by team of Surveyors from other mines 
of the same Area.  Also Check surv ey by outside agency (CMPDIL)  is 
proposed in two mines for additional check. 
 
NCL: Updation of mine plans are being done  at regular intervals with the help of 
SURPAC system. 
 
WCL: Mine plans are prepared, mainta ined and updated regu larly.  Periodic 
check survey by inter Sub-area t eams are also done to ensure the 
correctness of plans.  Further che ck survey by external agencies like 
MECL was done in Silewara  mine mine.  Such check survey is in process 
of  being done in Sasti UG and NMC-3. 
 
SECL: Mine plans are properly maintained and updated.  Check survey is 
completed in all the mines and work ing are connected to the National 
Grid. 
 
MCL: Check co-relation Survey & Joint Survey are conducted and mine plans are 
updated to make them more reliable.  Mines are worked as per designs 
provided by the planner s and approved by co mpetent authority.  
Boring/Drilling operations are being started by Bu rnside Boring Apparatus.  

Assessment of extent of water bodies and dewatering to minimize hazards 
from inundation are being done in consultation with CMRI, Dhanbad.   
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited  (SCCL) 
 
Mine plans are being updated as per regulation No. CMR 58 to 65.  
Survey Department is taking all requir ed survey work at the mines.  Check 
survey work is in progress.  All mine plans (169), which are updated, were 
submitted to the DGMS.  Chief Survey Officer has scrutinised all mine plans 
keeping danger of inundation in view and CGM (Safety)  also taken up similar 
work after disaster at GDK.7 LEP on 16.6.2003. 
 
Area Survey Officer has been posted under each General Manager of 
Area to take up the work of co-relation survey as well as check survey.  As on 
today 13 check survey teams have been constituted to take up; check survey 
among the mines.  The work is in progr ess and being reviewed by Chief Survey 
Officer as well as GM (Safety) Drilling of Bore holes at regular intervals to prove 
the partition and to know the extent of  water is being done as per approved 
conditions.  SCCL is having 14 underground boring machines. 
 
As regards utilization of G eo-physical methods for proving 
barrier/partitions, developed and tested by CMRI/NIRM at the coal mines 
susceptible for inundation, one project has already been taken up with the help of 
NIRM on experimental basis at GK OCP to prove this partition to avoid falling of 
men and machines while working over deve loped pillars. Help  of CMRI also 
taken to prove the partition at underground mines.  
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the updated Mine Plans are prepared and 
maintained and the mining is carried out st rictly as per the Pl an.  Moreover the 
Correlation of Survey, periodical Check Survey boring/drilling to connect with 
exact location etc., are carried out fr equently.  NLC does not have any potential 
source of danger in and aroun d the Mines and it is und er continuous operation 
round the clock throughout t he year. Hence rescue/recovery operation could be 
started immediately without loss of time. However a well laid Pre-Monsoon  
Action Plan in detail has been prepared every year for every Mine to take care of 
any emergent situation that may arise due to heavy rains owing to monsoon.  No 
accident has occurred so far in NLC Mines due to inundation. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC     Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 15, Para No. 3.36) 
 
The Committee note that mine fires were a serious and widespread 
problem and result in loss of coal reserves and add to the cost of production.  It is 

estimated that in Jharia Coalfields alone, about 1864 million  tonnes of coal might 
have been blocked and about 37 million tonnes of coal might have been 
damaged due to these fires.  The measures for controlling coal mine fires, in 
case of Jharia coalfields include bull dozing, levelling and covering with soil to 
prevent the entry of oxygen and to stabilize the land for vegetation.  Efforts made 
so far in this regard could only prevent the spreading of fires but their complete 
extinction in most of the cases was not possible.  The Committee are of the view 
that the problem of fire and subsidence control especially in Raniganj and Jharia 
coalfields should be treated a  “Nat ional Problem” and adequate funds be 
allocated by the Government to tackle this problem. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited  (CIL) 
 
Steps have been taken to generate an amount of Rs.395 crore per year 
for implementation of the action plan fo r shifting and rehabilitation, dealing with 
fire and stabilization of uns table area in ECL & BCCL.  For this a separate head 
account would be maintained and CIL will ensure that this amount is used strictly 
for implementation of the action plan. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited  (SCCL) 
 
Audit check of the mines has been taken up by a Committee headed by 
Director (Operations).  Filling arrangement s were taken up over the subsidence 
areas and things are monitored by CGM (Safety) regul arly.  Reports are being 
submitted to CMDs. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, separate Fire Stations are available inside 
the Mines with sufficient num ber of required type of Fi re Tenders with crews to 
quench the fire immediately without any loss of time after the fire cell is received 
through well Established Network Communica tion System.  Action is also being 
taken then and there to procure the la test Technology for Fire fighting 
equipments and adopt latest trends availabl e. In this regard adequate funds are 
allotted by NLC for the fire related activities. 
  
Ministry of Coal 
 
The problem of fire and s ubsidence control in Jharia & Ranigunj coalfields 
is receiving maximum attention of the Government at the highest level i.e. at the 
Cabinet Secretary level. A monitori ng Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Coal) with representatives fr om the State Governments, CIL, BCCL, 
ECL and related Ministries/Departments of the Central Government has been 
constituted and is reviewing the progress of work periodically. 

 
[Ministry of Coal’ O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC  Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see  Para 25  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 18, Para No. 3.39) 
 
The Committee note that like any industry, the use of machines cause 
many accidents in mines.  In opencast mining, accidents associated with Heavy 
Earth Moving Machines (HEMM) and trucks, are on the rise.  The Committee feel 
that accidents on accounts of vehicular traffic of men and machines are purely 
due to gross negligence.  The Committee desire that coal companies should take 
preventive measures such as separate lane properly fenced off from haul roads 
for pedestrians and vehicular traffic, banning  of plying of trucks and other heavy 
vehicles in the mine premises without  valid passes issued by competent 
authority, checking of road worthiness of vehicles, observance of traffic rules and 
regulations meticulously.  The Committee find that in underground mines 
incidents of men being tr apped in fly wheels and by  moving parts on Cornish 
pumps are common. As in clines and underground haula ges are developed, men 
are runover, crushed and entangled.  The Committee find that the major earth 
moving machines and transport equipments though meet the requisite standards, 
at the time of their procurement/insta llation but degrade du e to lack of proper 
maintenance, during their use.  The Committee, therefor e, recommend that 
Heavy Earth Moving Machines (HEMM) shoul d be used only when they are in 
perfect working condition.  Only tr ained persons should be allowed to operate 
such machines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Separate lanes for pedestr ian and light vehicles have been provided in 
some mines.  However, this is difficult to comply with in small patch Open Cast 
Mines as in case of ECL/BCCL, where most of the OCMs(Opencast mines) are 
small patches.  Plying of unauthorized vehicles in the mine premises without 
permission is banned.  Operat ors of vehicles are cons tantly being reminded to 
observe Traffic Rules by slogans displaye d along the routes taken by them as 
well as in safety campaigns, training, slogans, discussions in Safety Committee 
etc.  Road–worthiness of vehicles is checked by competent persons before being 
put into operation.  Vehicles are operat ed by trained operators.  However, the 
above recommendations of the Committee have also been circulated to all 
companies for strict compliance. 
 

Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Separate lanes have been prov ided at all open cast mines.  The matter is 
being reviewed periodically during Tripartite meetings.  Percentage of satisfaction 
is 100.  
 
Valid passes are being given for the deployment of trucks, only those 
vehicles are permitted to enter into mine premises which have valid permit. 
 
Checking of the vehicles for road-wor thiness is being taken up once in a 
month. The company vehicles are tested at Base Workshops and the 
contractors’ vehicles are being examined by authorized engineers at the mines.  
Proper record is maintained in a bound paged book.   
 
Code of Practice of Traffic Rules has been established after being duly 
approved by DGMS.  Copy of  the approved Traffic Rules has been given to all 
concerned including Contractor Workmen for strict compliance. 
 
Maintenance of HEMM is being ta ken up as per t he guidelines/manuals 
supplied by the Manufacturers. 
 
All the Operators have been given basic  training at Technical Training 
Centre, Manuguru. Only after giving su ch training, operators are allowed to 
operate Heavy Earth Moving Machinery (HE MM).  Refresher Training is given 
once in 5 years. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
In NLC, the following preventive measures are taken: 
 
1. Separate lane properly fenced-off fr om haul road for pedestrians and 
vehicular traffic.  
 
2 Banning of plying of trucks and other heavy vehicles in the Mines 
premises without valid passes issued by competent authority. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 19, Para No. 3.40) 
 
The Committee, further note that a pot ential hazard also exists on roof 
bolting machines with machine controls that are not protected against 
unintentional activation.  The Committ ee recommend that to prevent accidents 
due to roof bolting machines, the Automated Temporary Roof Support (ATRS) 
and other machine controls should be prot ected from accidental activation that 

may result in the machine or machi ne component coming in contract with the 
operator. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Drilling for roof bolting is done by conv entional drilling machines in most 
mines.  However, roof-bolting mach ines have been intr oduced in some 
companies like WCL and SECL and more such machines will be introduced. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Code of practice has been established while using roof bolting machines 
and the same is being followed scrup ulously for their maintenance and 
operational activity. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation 
   
This recommendation is not applicabl e to Neyveli Lign ite Corporation 
(NLC). 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M. No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated :  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation  (Sl.No. 20, Para No. 4.12) 
 
The Committee have observed that ther e exists an elaborate system for 
preparation and updating of mine maps and plans. Detailed directions have been 
given in this regard in the Coal Mines Regulations, 1957.  Besides, DGMS issued 
circulars from time to ti me for preparing and updating the mine maps for working 
under some specific conditions. The Committee have been apprised that modern 
surveying instruments are being introduced for acquiring survey data and for 
preparing Mine Models with the help of information tec hnology.  Further, Mines 
Act, 1952 empowers the DGMS to examin e and take possession of any plan, 
section, register, other records etc.  If t he DGMS  or Chief Inspector of Mines or 
inspector feels that the plan/map is ina ccurate, he is empowered to get the plan 
or section prepared correctly by any other agency.  The Committee are perturbed 
to note that despite all these initiatives, the ground reality has  not changed.  At 
times, the maps and plans  are prepared using unscient ific and unreliable old 
methods.  Moreover, where such maps and plans are prepared, their updation, 
as required under Coal, Mines Regulations , is not undertaken regularly.  The 
Committee take a serious view of this.  The Committee are of the opinion that 
accurate and scientific survey of mine ma ps are pre-requisite for mining coal 
safety.  Unscientific and wrong mapping can lead to disasters.  Bagdigi tragedy is 
a glaring example in this regard.  The Committee, ther efore, desire that mine 
maps and plans should be prepared scientif ically and updated as required under 

the statute using modern techniques like  satellite imageries, global positioning 
system etc., and also with the help of trained manpower/surveyors to  ensure the 
correctness of such maps and plans. At the same time, check and recheck 
survey be undertaken to ensure correctness of maps and plans.  The Committee 
also desire that Government  should fix personal responsibilities of top 
management in the even of failure to en sure correctness of maps and their 
updation.  The Committee ar e of the view that unt il and unless the plans are 
approved by DGMS, no mining activities should be carried out. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Ltd (CIL) 
 
Mine plans are prepared and updated as required under the statute using 
proper survey equipment by Mine Surveyors possessing mine surveyor’s 
certificate issued by DGMS.  Subsidiary companies like BCCL, CCL, NCL & WCL  
have introduced modern instruments lik e Total Stations, EDMs, Electronic 
Theodilites, etc .  At the same time, check and recheck surveys are undertaken 
to ensure correctness of maps and plans as  required by the statutes.  External 
agencies like CMPDIL/MECL are also be ing engaged to conduct check surveys 
in some cases. 
 
Coal mining activities are carried in accordance with the Mines Act and 
Rules & Regulations fr amed thereunder and DGMS approval is obtained 
wherever required under the above statutes.  
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) 
 
As per Reg. No. 58 to 65 of CMR,  1957, mine plans are being prepared 
and submitted to the DGMS.  It is proposed  to procure one GPS for SCCL within 
four months. 
 
Population of modern survey equipment 
 
Electronic Total Stations-    25 
Microptic theodolites-    119 
Digital Theodolites-        6 
Autoset levels-      88 
Presice levels-        5 
Computers-       20 
Auto CAD software-      10 
‘AO’ size Plotters-      18 
 
 Trained manpower and Surveyors are being provided to prepare plans. 
 
 

 
                                                                                Population of Surveyors 
Required                                   217 
Existing                                 198 
Shortage                                   19 
 
Area Survey Officer is posted in each Area under the Area General 
Manager to take up check surveys at area level. 
 
Following measures are being taken up to ensure correctness of plans. 
 
(a) Check survey of underground workings in relation to surface and 
neighbouring. 
  
(b) Mines is under progress. 
 
(c) Check list is being followed to verify  the mine plans periodically to ensure 
the accuracy of plans prepared under different Regulations of CMR, 1957. 
 
(d) It is being ensured that all the surv ey and levelling networks are closed to 
ascertain the accuracy. 
 
Dy. GM (Survey) is In-charge of Survey department. He conducts 
meetings with all Area Survey Officers  and monitors the check survey works 
during such meetings.  CGM (Safety) oversees the works.   
 
During general inspections undertaken by DGMS staff, the mine plans and 
records are being scrutinized by them.  Shortcomings point ed out by them and 
deviations if any are rectified. 
 
Independent survey work is taken up by  Area Surveyors for verification of 
the survey work.  Updated plans of ever y mine are being submitted to the DGMS 
before 31st October every year. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the Mine maps and Pl ans are prepared 
scientifically and updated as  and when requir ed under the Statute using modern 
technique, and also with the help of tr ained manpower/Surveyors ensure the 
correctness of such maps and Plans.  At the same time, check and recheck 
surveys are also undertaken to ensure correctness of maps and plans. 
 

Apart from the above, the Informat ion Technology like GIS (Geographical 
Information System) is bei ng used in Mining, Survey and Geological fields and 
got good results.  Moreover the mining activities are carried out as per the Plans 
approved by the DGMS. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC      Dated:        12-1-2005 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 49 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 21, Para No. 4.13) 
 
The Committee find that in order  to ensure correctness of maps, 
digitisation of maps has been taken up, re cently as a part of new plan scheme.  
The Committee welcome this and recomm end that all the mine maps and plans 
be digitised in a phased manner, during the 10 th Plan itself.  The Committee also 
recommend that adequate funds be made available for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to subsidiary 
companies of CIL for the needful. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
All mine plans have been digitized in SCCL. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the Mi ne maps are being prepared only by 
conventional methods using Latest Technology.  However, all the Mine maps and 
Plans will be digitalized in a phased m anner and adequate fund s are also made 
available for the purpose. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC     Dated :          12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 27, Para No. 5.24) 
 
The Committee note that at present the Directorate General of Mines 
Safety’s role is limited to investigations  into fatal mines accidents only.  Serious 
accidents are not being enquired into by DGMS.  The Committee desires that  
DGMS should not only investigate the fatal accidents but also serious ones.  

They should then analyze them in detail and issue guidelines and develop 
appropriate legislation to keep pace with time. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 
 
Role of DGMS  is not limited  to inve stigation of Fatal Accidents only.  The 
Government agree with the recommendation that all serious accidents should 
also be enquired to help in analysis of  accidents, issue of guidelines and 
development of appropriate l egislation.  Logi cally this would require additional 
manpower or offload the DGMS from routine/check inspection. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:   12-1-2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para  59   of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 29, Para No. 6.14) 
 
The Committee note that miners are required to wear equipments, which 
help them to be safe, whether they wo rk in an opencast or in an underground 
mine.  The surface miners wear hard hat s, steel-toed boots and safety glasses.  
Underground miners are equipped with self-rescuers, which allow them to breath 
in the event of a mine fire.  Undergr ound miners also carry gas detectors, which 
is used to measure gases in the air.  Surface miner s are also required to use 
hearing protection when working in high noise areas.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that the equipment, machineries, to ols and materials used in mines need 
to be safe, robust, reliable and capabl e of working safely under hostile 
environment. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Only DGMS approved personal protec tive equipment, self rescuers and 
gas detectors are used in mines.  DGMS  approval is accorded after rigorous 
tests by CMRI or other  Government laboratorie s like the National Test 
Laboratory, etc. 
 
In underground mines only DGMS appr oved equipment and machinery 
are used. 
 

Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Initially any safety equipment will be procured on trial basis only.  After 
obtaining satisfactory performance report of  protective equipment, bulk order is 
placed for procurement.  Thus supply of  reliable equipment to the miners is 
ensured. 
 
Shoes, belt, helmet are being provided to  all workmen.  Safety goggles 
have been provided for welders and Bit Grinders.  Self Rescuers are being 
provided to all workmen working at ident ified fiery mines and  at other mines 
during fire situation. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the equipments, machines, tools and material 
used in mines are checked periodically for its worthiness before its use and 
hence are safe, robust, reliable and capabl e of working safely under hazardous 
environment. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 30, Para No. 6.15) 
 
The Committee note that although su fficient arrangements are there to 
procure and use latest equipments such as audio-visual alarms in dumpers and 
tippers to give alarm while reversing, manual/automatic fire suppression systems 
in heavy earth moving machinery, emergen cy steering   used in case of engine 
failure, parking and emergency brakes for preventing accidents, safety belt, etc., 
yet the number of accidents due to fall of machines, fall of persons  from 
machines and failure of machines are on th e increase.  The Committee feel that 
major machines and equipments used by the various subsidiaries of CIL do meet 
requisite standards at the time of commissioning, but due to lack of proper 
service and maintenance, their standar ds degrade.  Further at times, sub-
standard spares are used to repair the equipments.  T he Committee, therefore, 
recommend that while placing the order s for supply of equipment especially 
those which are to be imported, a clause may be entered into the agreement, for 
supply of spares by the same manufacturer for a minimum period of five years so 
as to ensure the requisite qual ity of spares and their availability at all the times.  
The management of coal companies should also ensure that Annual 
Maintenance Contracts (AMCs) in respec t of all the machines, whether imported 
or indigenous, be entered into with the manu facturer or its authorized distributor 
for rendering timely service for the smooth and fault-free functioning of the 
equipment. 
 

Reply of the Government  
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Subsidiary companies of CIL are procur ing most of vital and critical spare 
parts only from original equipment manufacturer who have set up spare parts 
depots nearer to subsidiary coal companies and are having Depot agreements 
with major OEM for supply of spare parts. 
 
Regarding AMCs (Annual Maintenance Contracts), the recommendation 
of the Committee has been conveyed to the subsidiary companies. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Most of the spares are being purchased from original manufacturers only.  
Especially all spares of Rescue items are being procured  from original 
manufacturers.  Annual contracts are being established both with original 
manufacturers as well as authorized dealers. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, while placing the orders for the supply of 
equipments especially those which are to be imported, a clause is being included 
in the agreement to supply of the spares  by the same manufacturer so as to 
ensure requisite quality of spares and their availability at all the time, if the spares 
are not indigenously available.  Normally the Annual Maintenance works are 
being carried out through the local experienced contractors under the supervision 
of the NLC engineers.  In case the work is specialized in nat ure, then the work 
will be carried out either through the m anufacturer or through the authorized 
distributor for the smooth and fault-free functioning of the equipments. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated :        12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 31, Para No. 6.16) 
 
The Committee is unhappy to note that sometimes inordinate delay takes 
place while procuring the equipment.  T he reasons furnished for such delay are 
(i) non-supply of the ordered equipments within the financia l year, (ii) floating of 
global tenders for the equipment required to  be imported, (iii)  late approval of 
DGMS to procure these equipments.  The Committee, are not convinced with the 
reasoning adduced by the Government. Th e Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the management should st reamline and simplify the procurement process in 
such a way so that the delivery of equipment/machiner ies is not delayed by the 
manufacturer so much that DGMS approval expire. 
 

Reply of the Government  
 
Purchase Manual of Coal India is bei ng updated.  The recommendation of 
the Committee to streamline and simplify the procure process shall be taken care 
of in the revised and updated Manual. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
All out efforts have been put in to procure the equipment before expiry of 
DGMS approval. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is conc erned, there was no such delay in procuring the 
equipments/machineries and now all th e procedures are streamlined and 
simplified for the procurement  of the equipments/machiner ies in such a way that 
the delivery is not delayed by the manufacturer. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.32, Para No. 6.17) 
 
The Committee find that many of the ac tivities have been outsourced. For 
instance, over burden removal, coal/sand transportation activities are outsourced 
by hiring of equipment.  The Committee desir e that for any lapse in safety of the 
persons deployed by the age ncies engaged for hiring of  equipments, a suitable 
penal provision against such agencies should be provided in the agreement. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Tender documents for coal/OB/sand transportation contract incorporate 
provisions that the contractor has to take full precautions and work in accordance 
with the Mines Act, Coal Mines Regulat ions and other Rules and regulations 
framed under the Mine Act.  Section 2(I) (I ) of the Mines Act states that “any 
contractor or sub-lessee for the working of a mine or any par t thereof shall be 
subject to this Act in like manner as if he was an owner, but not so as to exempt 
the owner from any liability.” 
 
Therefore, the contractor is liable to  penal action for lapses in compliance 
with the Mines Act and rules, regulations made thereunder. 
 

Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
The practice is existing in SCCL for imposing said clause for contractual 
work. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the over burden removal is not outsourced by 
hiring of equipments.  But only the Li gnite transportation is outsourced by 
entering into agreement with the private parties tempor arily.  However, suitable 
penal provision is made available in the agr eement for any lapse in the safety of 
the persons deployed by the agencies engaged for hiring of lorries/trippers. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.33, Para No. 6.18) 
 
The Committee are also not satisf ied with the standard/quality of 
machines /equipments used by contractors.   They are not up to the mark and 
lack safety devices.  The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat a panel at CIL 
level may be established to study/review afresh the norms for the safety 
requirements to hire equipments and mach ines and deployment of contractor 
labour in coal mining activities.  This  will avoid procurement of sub-standard 
quality of machines and safety equipments by contractors. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Action is being taken at CIL level in this regard. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Purchase department while awarding contract will obtain the list of 
equipment that will be deployed by Contractor only a fter satisfying the conditions 
of reliable equipment, work is awarded to Contractor. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the tr ippers engaged by the contractors for 
transporting the lignite is checked by the NLC Engineers for its worthiness for the 
safety point of view before use at site and reviewed by the Competent authorities 
to adhere strictly over the Safety Norms in all respect. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12-1-2005] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 34, Para No. 6.19) 
 
Whereas it is mandatory to wear helmet in coal mines whether opencast 
or underground, it has been observed that in many of  the coalfields, miners do 
not use the protective gadgets and ot her equipments during duty.  The 
Committee take serious view of it and des ire that nobody should be allowed to 
enter into mining areas wi thout having protective wears such as helmet, safety 
shoes, safety belt, dust mask (wherever nec essary) etc.  Failure to use such 
safety items should be dealt with severely. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Action is taken against persons found without protective gear.  However, 
subsidiary companies have been advised to ensure strict compliance with the 
recommendations of the Committee. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Every worker is being given helmet, sa fety shoes and safety belts.  Dust 
masks are being provided to the needy workmen. 
 
During inspection Supervisors will ensur e wearing of safety equipment, if 
they found a workman not wearing them, respective workmen would not be 
allowed for duty.  On the repetition severe di sciplinary action would be initiated 
by the department. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, no body is  allowed to enter into the mining 
areas without having protective wears like helmet, sa fety shoes, safety belt, dust 
mask (wherever necessary) etc., and necessary action is being taken against the 
persons who are not wearing the safety appliances. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 545012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. 35, Para No. 6.20) 
 
The Committee is glad to know t hat the equipments procured/used have 
DGMS approval and conform to European/ US standards.  The Committee hope 
and trust that the present standard would not fall below the in ternational safety 
norms.  It has been brought to  the notice of the Committee that of late poor 
quality gumboots/shoes and helmets are being supplied to the miners.  These 
are uncomfortable to wear.  The wear and tear of the equipments is also very 
high.  The Committee desire that coal co mpanies should review the procurement 

of these items. The Committ ee are of the view that th e lowest price should not 
always be the criteria for procurement  of safety wears.  Appropriate 
quality/standards have to be ensured for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Only DGMS approved and BIS marked safety shoes/helmets are provided 
to workers/miners. Shoes and helmets are procured from proven sources.  
Appropriate quality/standards are ensured before procurement. 
 
The procurement of materials including safety materials is done as per 
purchase manual and Govt. guidelines. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
The third party inspection is being insi sted for safety wear. Inferior quality 
material is being rejected. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the requirements of Safety 
gadgets/equipments are cons olidated by the Centralised Material Management 
Wing. The Press tenders are called for bas ed on the value of the items.  The 
supply order is placed on the Firm who can supply the required Safety 
gadgets/equipments with ISI s pecification and as per t he norms fixed by the 
DGMS in order to ensure t he International Safety Sta ndards/quality.  Hence the 
lowest price is not always the criterion for the procurement of safety wears. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated : 12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.36, Para NO.6.21) 
 
 The Committee find that the quality of equipment and mach inery supplied 
in coal subsidiaries do not conform to the desired standards. In this context, the 
Committee recommend that the coal com panies should set up quality control 
cells, identify critical items which require testing for quality assurance at the time 
of procurement and during use and arrange testing of the same. Testing facilities 
should be set up wherever, it is techno-economically feasible. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (Coal India Limited) 
 
The equipment presently procured ar e of standard qualit y. There is a 
system prevalent in CIL/subsidiary com panies for pre-dispatch inspection of 
equipment by the repres entative of CIL/Subsidiary Co s., at the works of various 
manufacturers to check the quality of the product/equipment being supplied by 
them agsinst CIL  orders. The original equipment manufacturers are having 
testing facility at their works and the representative of CIL /Subsidiary Cos. are 
taking help of these testing apparatus at t he time of pre-dispatch inspections of 
the equipment. 
 
The Committee’s recommendation to se t up testing facilities at the 
Subsidiary Cos. will be explored if it is found tech-commercial feasible. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
 Quality control cells have been es tablished at all Area Stores. 
 
 Help of following institutions  utilized for testing of equipment: 
 
(a) Central Workshop, SCCL. 
(b) Regional Engineer ing College, Warangal. 
(c) Central Mining & Research Institute. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
 As far as NLC is concerned, one center for Applied Research and 
Development Department is available where all the testing facilit y is available to 
conform whether the material supplied by the supplier is as per  the specification 
given in the supply order apart from the Experts from the field. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.54012/1/04 -CRC  Dated: 12-1-2-005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.37, Para No. 7.24) 
 
The Committee have taken note of the State-of- the-Art Technology being 
used in coal sector.  These include scientific support system in underground 
mines based on Rock Mass Rating (RMR) st udies, roof bolting/roof stitching, 
introduction of modern drills like Univer sal Drilling Machine (UDM), reduced 
exposure of workers to mi ning hazards by use of SDLs & LHDs, Power Support 
Long Wall (PSLW), multi-gas detector, vibration analyzer, Ground Penetrating 
Radar (GPR) to determine the thickness st ate, etc.  The Committee are satisfied 
with the level of new technologies employed.  Almost all the coal subsidiaries are 

in the process of up gradation of their technologies for improving production 
under safer environment.  In this cont ext, ECL have pleaded for upgradation of 
technology like proving of barrier with cert ainty, provision of forewarning before 
impending roof fall etc., and continuous monitoring system for mine gases.  
Similarly, BCCL, have desired furt her upgradation in their technologies, 
especially for underground mines and asked for (i) introduction of more long wall 
faces, (ii) introduction of continuous  miners for more production and less 
exposure of persons, (iii) introduction of more SDLs, LHDs and roof bolter 
machines, and (iv) introduction  of remote control SDLs.  SECL and MCL wanted 
more continuous mining technology.  In this context, the Committee recommend 
that Ministry of Coal should play a proactive ro le in inducing appropriate 
technologies for these coal subsidiaries.  One time need based Grants should be 
given to them for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Coal 
 
Ministry of Coal has given thrust for mechanization of underground coal 
mines. Coal production from  mechanized long wall wh ich was about two million 
tonnes in 2003 is expected to reach at a level of about five million tonnes by 
2006-07.  Similarly, production from conti nuous miner is projected to increase 
from a level of 0.4 million tonnes to 2.3 million tonnes in the same period. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.54012/1/04 -CRC  Dated: 12-1-2-005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 38, Para No. 7.25) 
 
The Committee are also perturbed to no te that despite introduction of all 
these latest technologies/techniques in  mining operation, a ccidents like Bagdigi 
in BCCL, Ramagundam in SCCL, both due to inundation and Godavarikhani 
(SCCL) due to roof fall are still happeni ng.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that latest technology like se ismic/radar-based techniques may be 
developed for location of the actual par ting/separation between the workings and 
the water bodies to further bring down the rate of accidents and fatalities.  The 
Committee feel that zero level accident  can be reached apart from increase in 
production and productivity with the use of  latest technology and mechanization. 
The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the workers’ exposure to mining 
hazards  should be restricted as much as  it can be by maximum use of improved 
technology and mechanization. 
 

Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Regarding application of Gr ound Penetrating Radar technology so far, as 
per a S&T Project funded by Ministry of Coal, it has been found that the 
technology has a limited applicability, of  accuracy 90-95% a depth of 30 m for 
proving barriers against waterlogged workin gs.  As per the CMR mine workings 
have to be stopped 60m ahead of any waterlogged workings. 
 
Electrical Resistivity Survey methods have not shown encouraging results.  
For testing potential for detection of  abandoned u/g coal mine workings by 
Seismic methods a study indicated that different combination of studies proved to 
be useful in different test sites. 
 
CMPDI in consultation with subsidiary  companies has submitted a report 
on “Mechanisation and Modernisation” of underground mines of CIL. The report 
envisages an investment of about Rs .680 crore during Xth plan period.  
Subsidiary companies have taken up implem entation of the prop osals.  CIL has 
assured that fund constraint  will not come into way of implementation of the 
programme. 
 
Mechanisation and modernization is aimed at (manual) loader-less mining 
which will result in exposure of less number of persons in hazardous conditions. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
So far seismic survey has not been utilised in determining the water 
bodies and partition. It is proposed to take the help of NIRM  in this regard. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, improv ed technology and mechanization are 
in maximum use in all the mines so  to  restrict workers’ exposure to mining 
hazards. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 39, Para No. 7.26) 
 
The Committee observe that the level of technology being implemented in 
the Indian Coal Industry seems to be adequ ate since the equipments are of high 
capacity and safety features are incor porated in the equipment.  However, the 
Committee feel that the process of technology upgradation shou ld continue. The 
Committee further desire that coal companies should identify the thrust areas for 
mechanization.   

 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
One of the areas where thrust is identified and implemented is reduction of 
exposure to workers through mechanizati on of loading operations through the 
use of SDLs/LHDs, Continuous Miner  technology, Powered Support Longwall 
technology, etc. 
 
Another thrust area is mechanizat ion of roof drilling which is being 
introduced through Universal Dr illing Machines/Roof Drilling Machines converted 
from SDLs etc. This will enable reduced exposure to roof bolting crew as well as 
allow better and easier drilling of hard roof strata. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
After introducing SDLs and Road Header  in SCCL, now it is proposed to 
introduce continuous miner technology in SCCL.  Upgradation of technology is a 
continuous process  in  SCCL.  
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the pr ocess of Technology upgradation is 
continued by identifying the thrust areas for mechaniza tion and Safety Features 
are incorporated through “Fail Safe System” in the equipments. 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated :  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.40, Para No. 7.27) 
 
The Committee, however, feel that there is a need for more R&D efforts to 
deal with the local geo-physical condition s of mining so that appropriate type of 
technologies can be introduced. The Government should, therefore, earmark and 
spend more money on R&D efforts. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
For R&D work related to coal mines, disbursement of Government funds 
under Coal S&T Grant has been stepped up from an average annual level of  
Rs.4.00 crore during IX Plan to Rs.7 .00 crore in 2002-03 and Rs.6.75 crore 
(provisional) during 2003-04. 
 

A total of 60 research projects were underway in 2003-04 on various 
topics, out of which 28 were directly  concerned with application of appropriate 
technology for improvement in production, productivity and safety in mines.  In 
2003-04, a significantly high number of 16 new projects were approved for 
funding by the government. 
 
Some of major research projects re lated to safety concluded since the 
beginning of X Plan included (i) Applicat ion of ground probing radar for detection 
of old water logged working; (ii) Develo pment of lightweight  steel props for 
underground coal working; (iii) application of micro-seismic technique for study of 
roof falls in underground mines during extr action; and (iv)  Establishment of mine 
fire gallery for simulation of mine fires and study of protective measures. The 
Govt. has earmarked  Rs.9.88 crores under S&T programme for the year 2004-
05. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL)  
 
Adequate funds have been provided for S&T.   
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.41, Para No. 7.28) 
 
The Committee are unhappy to  note that the coal producing subsidiaries 
of CIL especially loss making companies are facing constraints to have latest 
technology in underground mines like hiring  of technical know-how, procurement 
of equipments, training of personnel in latest technology, development of 
infrastructure, adequate spares and thei r maintenance. The Committee observe 
that the two companies i.e ., BCCL & ECL  of CIL are still incurring heavy losses.  
The reasons attributed for such losses are old underground mines, deployment 
of large  workforce etc.  There is, t hus a need for mechanization of mines for 
which heavy investment is required.  Ta king into consideration, the pruning of 
manpower, the Committee recommend that  Power Support Long Wall (PSLW) 
technology should be introduced in the underground mines wherever it is 
technically feasible. The Committee further observe that since coal reserves from 
the upper seams in opencast mines are deplet ing fast, coal companies would be 
required to extract the coal from the deeper seams to  meet the growing demand. 
As such, coal for the future needs, will have to come from underground mines.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the underground mines should be 
mechanized at the earliest and Ministry of Coal/Coal India Ltd. should provide 
adequate financial assistance fo r the purpose.  The Commi ttee are of the view 
that the administrative/procedural rigmar ole should not come in the way of coal 
companies in introducing latest technology and its upgradation. 
 

Reply of the Government  
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Coal India has initiated long terms and short terms action to 
modernize/mechanized its mines. 
 
CMPDIL in consultation with subsid iary companies has prepared a report 
on mechanisation/modernization which has been accepted for implementation 
during Xth  plan period.  Subsidiary companies have ta ken up implementation of 
the proposals.  CIL has assured that fund constraint will not come into way of 
implementation of the programme. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
More no. of power supported long walls are proposed as given under:   
  
------------------------------------------------------ 
Year        Proposed 
------------------------------------------------------ 
2005-06         - 
 2006-07         - 
 2007-08        4 
 2008-09        2 
 2009-10        1 
 2010-11        1 
 ------------------ ------------------------------------- 
 
To exploit the deeper deposits the under ground mine will be  mechanized.  
Longwall  method of work is proposed to exploit deeper deposits.  
 
Streamlining administrativ e formalities, procur ement formalities, in 
introducing latest technology and its upgradation. New technology-Continuous 
miner, longwall, BG panel already co mmissioned Planning depar tment of SCCL 
has already taken up introduction of mec hanization.  Board of Directors is 
streamlining Purchase formalities for procurement of equipment. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
This recommendation is not applicable to NLC. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012//1/04-CRC   Dated: 12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.42, Para No. 7.29) 
 
The Committee express their deep concern over disasters, which continue 
to take place, particularly in underground  coal mines. A glance over safety 

statistics reveals that fatality rate per thousand persons employed is practically 
constant for the last tw o decades i.e. 0.3 & 0.33 fo r the period 1981-1990 and 
1991-2000 respectively.  Although opencast mining operations are considered 
safe all over the world, accident rates in  opencast coal mines, in our country, is 
as high as in the underground mines, inspite of the fact that only 17% of coal is 
extracted  from underground mines and 83% from opencast.  The Committee are 
of the considered view that contract oper ations are causing more accidents due 
to various reasons like ill trained m anpower, frequent change of work force, 
longer working hours, use of smaller  machineries, equipments and vehicles, 
which are not compatible to the size of opencast operations.  In fact, the rate of 
accidents of contract workers have been reported to be much higher than regular 
workers.  It is in this context, the Committee recommend that new  initiatives like 
“Risk Assessment” and “Safet y Management Plans” need to be introduced in all 
the coal mines on priority basis, in or der to reduce  accidents and disasters.  
Besides, intensive training of the contract workers, irregular and unsafe practices 
in contract operations, need to be strictly curbed. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
The status of conducting ‘Risk Asse ssment and preparation of ‘Safety 
Management Plan’ has already been given in detail herein earlier 
(recommendation No. 3.29).  These re commendations of the Committee have 
been circulated to all companies for compliance. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Risk assessment plans are implemented in 5 accident prone mines.  11 
more mines are identified for implem entation of risk m anagement plan.  Risk 
identification and assessment  is being done by the Committee specially formed 
for the purpose. Initial training is impar ted to all the Cont ractor workmen, 
additionally (Booster Training) is given to  all contractor workmen to eliminate 
accidents at open cast mines. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the new  initiative like Risk Assessment and 
Safety Audit in Mines were carried out th rough the External Agency, M/s Society 
for Mining Research, Sustainable De velopment and Environment, Calcutta, 
headed by Dr. S.K.Sarkar, Secretary General. The recommendations given in the 
report submitted by them, is being implemented wherever it is possible in order to 
reduce the accidents and disasters. Simila rly intensive training is also being 
given to the contract work ers about the irregular and unsafe practices in contract 
operations to make them aware of the unsafe practice s and the Contractors are 

also instructed to deploy only trained labours who are well  versed in mining 
operations. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O M .No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.43, Para No. 7.30) 
 
The Committee note that long and ard uous journey is required to be 
undertaken by the miners, before they ac tually start extracting coal. The 
Committee are of the view t hat this not only causes undes irable fatigue, but also 
retards productivity of t he coal miners.  The Committ ee, therefore, recommend 
that where long and arduous journey is involved and working faces exist at long 
distances in underground mines, man ridi ng system or any other appropriate 
arrangements, for transport of miners, s hould be introduced.  This will not only 
improve output per man shift (OMS) but also relieve a miner from unavoidable 
fatigue. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Man riding system are func tioning in Khottadih & Ch inakuri III collieries of 
ECL.  Further CMPDIL has prepared feas ibility report for installation of man 
riding system in three more mines viz.  Parbelia, Bhanora West & Chinkuri 
Extension block which is under  scrutiny at ECL.  Part of a man riding system 
(750 mts ) at Tandsi Project of WCL is  under commissioning which will be further 
extended after the trial is successful. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., (SCCL)  
 
Man riding system has already been inst alled in 14 mines.  In 5 more 
mines it is under process of installation. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
This recommendation is no applicable to NLC. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 44, Para No. 8.18) 
 
The Committee have taken note of various communication system 
installed in opencast and und erground mines.  The Commi ttee are of the view 
that elaborate communication systems do ex ist but there is need to augment it 
further. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee by some of the Trade 
Unions that the communicati on system which exists in mines is not satisfactory 
and proves to be almost ineffective in case of emergency due to shortage of 
equipments with supervisors. In this context, the Committee desire that system of 
communication should be further upgr aded and latest equipment be made 

available with every supervisor and line manager.  The Committee also desire 
that use of V-SAT should also be considered for introduction in underground 
mines at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Telecommunication infrastructure fac ilities have been provided to all the 
underground (UG) and opencast (OC) collieries of subsidiary companies of CIL. 
 
The UG mines are having point to poi nt telephone, loudhailer, Central 
Dispatcher System (CDS) and Auto-m anual exchange type of communication 
system for communicating within the mines as well as to the pit-top office.  Out of 
the above, Sound Power point to point  and loudhailer type of communication 
systems are very old type and are being gra dually replaced by CDS (with dialing 
facility) and Auto cum Auto Manual type of communication systems. 
 
Opencast mines have been provided with various types of radio based 
communication systems like VH F Radio (Simplex and Duplex), UHF Radio (10 
channel system), Trunking Radio, etc. for communicating within the projects as 
well as to the Area Offices under the re spective subsidiary companies.  In 
addition to the above, there are Electr onic Exchanges (EPA X and EPABX) with 
BSNL’s telephone lines for communicating with the projects/ mines and pit-top 
officers as and when required.  Under the COALNET Plan (ph II and ph III), voice 
and high speed date communication facilities are being extended in an integrated 
manner for which the respective subsidia ry companies are drawing and finalizing 
their schemes.  
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) 
Mine Managers of all mines have been  provided with Cell Phones.  
Supervisors and officials working at open cast mines have been provided with 
walkie-talkie.  It is proposed to prov ide communication facility to all working 
districts in underground mines of SCCL.  V-SAT communication is not feasible 
for use in underground mines and can be utilized only for surface 
communication. 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
As far as NLC is concerned, well established network system is available 
and only upgraded system and latest tec hniques are used in the communication 
system. The present system is adequate to meet any eventuality in an effective 
manner. 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.54012/1/04-CRC   Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.46, Para No. 9.17) 
 
The Committee find that there is a shortage of equipment and other 
accessories/gadgets used for rescue operat ion.  Further these are not of 
international standards.  The Commi ttee desire that shortage of these 
equipments and gadgets should be met and the existing equipments are 
upgraded/updated conforming to  international standar ds. The Committee also 
desire that a promot ional scheme be introduced for further upgrading the status 
of rescue operations. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Any shortage of Rescue Equipment is  made upon priority basis.  The 
company-wise status is given below: 
 
Company Action Taken    
 
ECL There is no shortage of  rescue equipment and other 
accessories/gadgets used for Rescue operation at Sitarampur 
Rescue Station.  The equi pment provided there are of international 
standards.  Wherever necessary upgradation is being done. 
 
BCCL There is shortage of 16 nos. of Resuscitating Apparatus, 2 nos. of 
Universal Tester, 3 nos. of Resc ue Vans, 2 nos. Ice Machines for 
BG-4 Self Contained Breathing Apparatus (S CBA), & 5 nos. of 
multi-gas detector which have been programmed to be procured. 
 
 Equipment available at Rescue St ations conform to international 
standards.  Since their spares  are not indigenous ly made problem 
exists in their procurement. 
 
CCL There is no shortage of equ ipment and other a ccessories/gadgets 
required for use in rescue operation in CCL. 
 
WCL Modern rescue apparatus/equi pment have been provided.  
Sufficient budgetary provisions ar e earmarked for upgradation of 
status of rescue services and procurement of rescue apparatus. 
  
Further, 
 
a) Procurement of 24 nos. of re suscitating apparatus is under 
process.  This procurement is delayed due to non-availability of 
DGMS approved apparatus.  Budget ary allocation is made for 
the purpose. 

 
b) 41 nos. of face masks in respect of Tube Apparatus are also 
being   procured. 
 
NEC  Making up of shortage of rescue apparatus in process. 
 
The Rescue Organisation is provi ded with international standard 
equipments.  State-of-the-ar t Self Contained Breathi ng Apparatus (SCBA) like 
BG-4 is already in use in many companies and more of such equipment are 
programmed to be procured.  BG-174 (SCBA), which was the main SCBA, is 
also of international standards.  Provisions for upgradation of Rescue Equipment 
is made in the Rescue Budget. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
As per statute, required equipment are provided at  rescue stations.  The 
following equipment conforming to International standards have been provided at 
the rescue stations: 
 
 BG-4 breathing apparatus 
 Methanometers. 
 Oxymeters 
 Resuscitators 
 Multi-gas Detectors 
 Chemical Oxygen Self-Rescuers. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, there is  no shortage of equipments and other 
accessories/gadgets used for rescue oper ation and it is also under the 
consideration for further upgrading the status of rescue operations. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M .No.  54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 47, Para No. 9.18) 
 
The Committee note that there is c onsensus that disorientation and low 
visibility in the aftermath of fires and ex plosions are major considerations in 
underground  escape and rescue strategi es.  But the practical and proven 
solution of these problems, with the r equisite degree of flexibility to permit 
general application, are not  readily available with th e coal companies.  The 
Committee feel that escape routes could help the trapped persons to save their 
life. The Committee, ther efore, recommend that e scape routes in all the 
underground mines be prov ided and demarcated proper ly and mock rehearsals 
conducted periodically, at least twice a year, to familiarize workmen with the 
same.  

 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Escape Routes have been demarcated on plans as well as below ground 
and mock rehearsals are conducted per iodically. However, these 
recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all companies for 
strict compliance.  
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
In all 55 mines, escape routes have been  established.  A video cassette  
on escape routes was also developed and displayed at all the mines and SITI 
CABLE to inculcate awareness among the workmen. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
This recommendation is not applicable to NLC. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.48, Para No. 9.19) 
 
It has been brought to the not ice of the Committee that the escape routes, 
wherever provided, are ill maintained.  In most of the cases, jungle crop have 
grown and it is not possible for the tr apped persons to come out through this 
route. The Committee take strong note of this and recommend that escape 
routes should be well maintained, pai nted with fluorescent  paint and properly 
cleaned so as to make it fi t for use by the workers at  the time of emergency.  
Wide publicity through sign bills, banners, posters etc., should be made of the 
escape routes, so as to familiarize the workmen with such exit routes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Escape routes are appropr iately demarcated bel owground by painted 
signs/whitewashing/white-washed bands/fluorescent bands on pillars etc.  They 
are also displayed at entry to the mine.   Mock rehearsals are also conducted for 
familiarizing workmen with such routes.  However, these recommendations of the 
Committee have been circulated  to all companies for strict compliance. 
 

Singareni Colliery Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
Escape routes are kept in readine ss for use during emergencies.  Escape 
route is well demarcated in  underground marking with fl uorescent paint for easy 
identification of route during emergencies. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the Mines are operating on mechanized 
Opencast Mines.  More than one route is available to all the benches for any 
emergency.  The same are known to the Employees, Workmen etc. and are 
being monitored regularly. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated:   12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.50, Para No. 11.23) 
 
The Committee note that adequate provision has been made for 
participation of workers in the m anagement of safety through Workmen’s 
Inspectors, Safety Committees at Mine leve l, Bipartite, Tripartite Safety Review 
Committees, Coal India Safety Board and  Standing Committee on Safety in Coal 
Mines etc.  The meetings of these Committees are required to be held from time 
to time to discuss various  issues concerning occupational health and safety of 
workmen and also to increase production of  coal safely.  The Committee note 
that the meetings of Pit Safety Committ ees are required to be conducted once in 
a month at each Mine. Further, the meetings of the Bipartite and Tripartite Safety 
Review Committees are to be conducted once  in six months on regular basis.  It 
has been brought to the notice of the Committee by some of the Trade Unions 
that the meetings of Pit Safety Committee, Bipartite and Tripartite Safety Review 
Committees are not conducted regularly as required and where such meeting are 
conducted, the recommendations of thes e Committees are not implemented in 
letter and spirit.  The Commi ttee acknowledge the role of Pit Safety Committee 
and Bipartite and Tripartite Safety Review  Committee in ensurin g safety in Coal 
Mines.  The Committee do not approve of  this action on the part of coal 
subsidiaries in not conducting meetings at regular intervals and also showing 
scant respect to the recommendations of these Committees.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that regular meetings of th ese Committees should be 
conducted and their recommendations impl emented in letter and spirit. At the 
same time, the Committee would like to be apprised of the details of meetings of 
Pit Safety, Bipartite and Tri partite Safety Review Committees and the extent to 
which the recommendations made by the Committees were accepted by each of 
the coal subsidiary and SCCL during the la st 5 years.  The reasons for delay in 
conducting such meetings may also be furnished for the consideration of the 
Committee. 

Reply of the Government 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
The details of Pit Safety Committees  meetings during last 5 years and 
their recommendations will be too volumi nous to be given here. However, the 
recommendations of pit safety committees  relate to shafts, inclines, mine 
roadways, workplaces, mine support, mine environment, dust suppression 
measures, equipments and machinerie s in underground a nd opencast mines, 
operation of HEMM in opencast mines, bl asting in underground/opencast mines, 
prevention of accidents, safe practices in mines, etc. 
 
The observations/recommendations of  Committees and action taken to 
rectify the contravention ar e discussed in Pit Safety Committee meetings in the 
colliery.  The manager of the colliery, in turn, issues necessary instructions for 
rectification/implementation. 
 
However, subsidiary companies hav e been advised for strict compliance 
of this recommendation of the committees. 
 
Singareni Colliery Company Ltd. (SCCL)  
 
Tripartite and Bi-partite Safety Review Meetings are being conducted 
twice in a year.  The 28th Tripartite Sa fety Review Meeting was held in Jan, 
2004.  The Bi-partite Meetings held on: 
 
23.01.2004 Morning Tri partite(Area) at MM 
23.01.2004 Evening Bi partite at MM 
24.01.2004 Morning Tripartite at SRP 
24.01.2004 Evening Bi-partite at SRP 
23.1.2004 RG(Regional) Tr ipartite Meeting. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the Pit safety committee meetings at Unit 
level, Central Safety Committee meetings  at Corporate leve l and the Bipartite 
Safety meetings at management level are being conducted once in a month 
regularly.  But the Tripartite Safety Re view meeting is being conducted once in 2 
years at the convenience of DGMS.  However, the recommendations suggested 
in the above meetings are implemented in letter and spirit wherever it is possible. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No.  54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12-1-2005] 

Recommendation (Sl.No.51, Para No. 11.24) 
 
The Committee note that the instituti on of workmen’s inspectors has been 
create to promote participative management of  safety in mines.  The Workmen’s 
Inspectors point out the deficienc ies to the mine management and suggest 
remedial measures necessary to avoi d the danger.  The Workmen’s  Inspector 
reports about the safety status of the mine to the Manager who is responsible for 
production as well as safety aspects.  The Committee feel that the Workmen’s 
Inspector plays a pivotal role between the workers and the management.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the services of Work men’s Inspector should be 
utilized adequately.  The violations poi nted out by him should be given due 
attention and rectified without any delay by the management. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Violations pointed out by the Workmen’s Inspectors are being given due 
attention and rectified without delay.  However, subsid iary companies have been 
requested to ensure strict compliance with the above recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
The Workmen Inspectors submit t heir reports to the Managers on  the 
violations pointed out by them are being attended immediately at mine level.  In 
each week he will make two inspections  as Workmen Inspector. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the viol ations pointed out by the Workmen’s 
Inspector are given due attention and rectified without any delay by the 
Management. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.52, Para No. 11.25) 
 
The Committee find that at present Workmen’s Inspector, is appointed in a 
mine wherein 500 or more miners are employed. The Committee feel that in view 
of heavy mechanization of mine, there is a need to revise this ceiling of 500.  At 
times, there are many mechanized mines particularly opencast operations, where 
the total employment is not more than 500.  Further, the safety committees are 
constituted, wherein more than 100 miners are employed.  The Committee do not 
find any rationale/justification, in not revi sing the ceiling to 100.  The Committee, 

therefore, recommend that any mine, with 100 or more miners, should appoint a 
Workmen Inspector. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 
 
The Scale of appointment of Workmen’s Inspector, as required under Rule 
29(Q) of Mine Rules 1955, presently stipulated that  such appointment is 
mandatory for miners having an employment size of 500 or more. 
 
However, in view of growing mechanization, especially in opencast sector, 
Workmen’s Inspector is appointed in all mechanized Coal & Lignite opencast 
mines even though the employment size is less than 500. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M .No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12-1-2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.53, Para No.11.26) 
 
 The Committee note that Workmen Inspectors have been charged with 
the inspections of mines from workers side. They are a link between workmen 
and management as far as safety is conc erned. Recognizing their vital role the 
Government made a provision for Work men Inspector in the year 1986 and 
accordingly, the Mines Rules were amended. As per st atute, Workmen 
Inspectors are require  to be appointed in  all the mines and inspect all shafts, 
inclines, roads, workplace and the equipments and threat including the 
equipment for conveyance and transport of  workers. They have also been 
assigned the duty of informing the Manager and Inspec tor of any urgent and 
immediate danger that comes to their not ice and suggest the remedial measures 
therefore. Workmen Inspector is also r equired to accompany the inspector in the 
course of complete inspection of mine and  also during such other inspections as 
may be considered necessary by the inspec tor. It has been broug ht to the notice 
of the Committee that al though Workmen Inspector in spect the Mines and send 
his report to the Management yet DGMS is nto associated in this task. The 
Committee also recommend that in order to inculcate a sense of belongingness 
in Workmen Inspector, an award may be instituted for best Workmen Inspector at 
company level and a National level. This will recognize the service rendered by 
Workmen Inspector and motivate him to  give his best for the safety. The 
Committee also recommend that the Work men Inspector should be exposed to 
various mining methods and fields to keep him abreast with the latest 
development. It is in this context, t he Committee recommend that the Workmen 
Inspector should be trained and given extens ive trainings in and out side the 
country for different mining methods etc. The Committee feel that the  Workmen 
Inspector should also give a copy of his report to the recognized union in the 
mine/area so that the work ers are aware of the im pending dangers and can take 
suitable steps to protect themselves. 

Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
 Institution of an award for best Wo rkmen’s Inspector may be considered 
by the Ministry of Labour in the lines of the National Aw ard. Regarding institution 
of award at Company level, the matter is beng taken up with the subsidiary 
companies. 
 
 Workmen’s Inspectors have been and are exposed to trainings/seminars 
etc. Workmen’s Inspectors trained in-hous e by subsidiary company HRD Deptt., 
by DGMS officers/senior mining enginee rs, through external agencies like 
Institute for Indian Mine Metal Workers’ Education etc. In addition DGMS also 
have been conducting special seminars for roof bolting techniques where 
Workmen’s Inspectors have been nominated for training. 
 
 As per Mines Rule, 1955 the Workmen’s Inspector after making inspection 
of the mine records his observations /recommendations in a bound paged book 
kept as Form “U”. The Manager, in turn, records his remarks in the register 
showing remedial measures taken by him. The Workers Inspector keeps one 
copy of his report recorded in the bound paged book. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) 
 
 Workmen Inspectors are being encourage d to visit mines where different 
tecknologies are available. Workmen In spector have been imparted training at 
MVTCs, but they are not being sent to foreign countries. 
 
 Copy of Workmen Inspector report is  not being given to recognized union. 
Suggestions will be impl emented in future. Necessary guidelines in this regard 
will be given to all GMs and Mine Manager. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
 As far as NLC is concerned, the Workmen Inspectors  are given extensive 
training for different Mining methods and the copy of his report is also given to 
the Recognized Trade Union in the Mines so that the workers are aware of the 
impending danger and can take suitable steps to protect themselves. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.54012/1/04-CRC, Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.54, Para No.11.27) 
 
 The Committee find that as per Rule  29-T of the Mines  Rules 1955, the 
Safety Committees are set up in a mi ne wherein more than 100 persons are 
employed. In the opinion of the Committee, the Safety Committee can play a very 

constructive and useful role in shaping sa fety performance of the mine. At times,  
it has been observed that the Safety Committees are functional only for a year 
and then disband. The Committee are of the view that this practice limits the 
effectiveness of the Safety Committees. Therefore, there is need to ensure a 
fixed tenure for such Committee for obt aining better results. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that tenure of 2 to 3 years may be prescribed  for any duly 
appointed Safety Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 
 
 The tenure of Safety Committee is not directly specified in the Mines 
Rules. However, since Workmen’s Inspector, being a member [(Rule (U)(d)] of 
Safety Committee, has a minimum tenure of threee years [(Rule 29 (Q)(8)]. 
Under normal circumstances, the tenure of Safety Committee indirectly works out 
to be minimum three years.  
 
 The present law has, therefore, indi rectly fixed the tenure as minimum 
three years under normal circumstances. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.54012/1/04-CRC, Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.56, Para No. 11.29) 
 
The Committee feel that the effectiveness of any operation increase 
manifold with proper monito ring.  It has been seen that  at times the schemes do 
not yield better result due to inadequate monitoring.  In order to make the 
institution of Safety Committ ee more effective, strong m onitoring of its function, 
activities and follow up measures will go a long way in improving the safety 
status of mines. The Committee, th erefore, recommend that necessary 
mechanism for monitoring at various levels should be put in place by the coal 
companies. The Committee further desire that  to improve the safety status in 
various Coal companies, one of the agenda for periodical Board Meetings should 
be “Safety Performance Appraisal” of the company concerned. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Subsidiary companies have been advis ed to monitor the functioning and 
the status of compliance of the reco mmendations of the Safety Committees, 
‘Safety Performance Revi ew’ is kept as an agenda items in some Board 
meetings of some companies. Other companies have been requested to do so. 
 

Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) 
 
Activities of the Committees are bei ng monitored by Safety Officers and 
Area Safety Officers to function effect ively on monthly basis. In every Board 
Meeting, safety performance is being monitored by the Board Members. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the “Safety Performance Appraisal” is 
submitted for the Board Meetings every quarter and the same is being 
considered as one of the agenda items in the Board Meetings and suggestions 
thereby are implemented then and there. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/1/04-CRC,   Dated:   12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.57, Para No.11.30) 
 
 The Committee find that a Workm en Inspector is required to undergo 
orientation training before he is appointed  for such a post. However, such a 
stipulation is not made appl icable to the Members of the Safety Committee. The 
Committee are of the view t hat since the twin statutor y institutions of Workmen 
Inspector and Safety Committees have ens ured reasonable standards of safety 
in coal mines, there is a need to provide not only orientation training to Workmen 
Inspector and members of the safety committee but also refresher training 
programme beside need based short term tr aining. There is also a need to 
develop awareness among the coal miners about the latent force of these two 
institutions for their great er involvement in improving safety in mines. The 
Committee desire that appropriate action should be taken for training of workmen 
inspector/members of the safety committee and awareness of workmen about 
the role of Workmen Inspector/Safety Committees. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
 Regular training programmes for Wo rkmen’s Inspectors/Members of 
Safety Committee are being conducted to br ing awareness about their role in the 
mine safety. Regular courses are conducte d for Safety Committee Members at 
Supervisory Training Instit ute, Chhindware for all WCL. In 2003-04, 12 courses 
were conducted and 205 Safety Committees  members were provided structured 
training. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) 
 
 Workmen Inspector and Safety Committee members ar e being imparted 
training and exposed to short-term training programmes. 

 
Neyveli Lignite Coporation (NLC) 
 
 As far as NLC is concerned, appropr iate training is being given to the 
Workmen Inspectors/Members of the Safety Committee and awarenss of 
workmen about the role of Workmen Inspector/Safety Committees. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.54012/1/04-CRC, Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.58, Para No. 11.31) 
 
The Committee observe that in order to motivate the workers for achieving 
best safety standards and practices, the management has already initiated 
various promotional schemes.  Annual Safe ty Week is held at each subsidiary 
company level every year. Inter-company  competitions ar e also conducted 
annually on safety & rescue operati ons and the best teams are awarded 
shields/prizes/mementoes.  Safe workers ar e suitably rewarded, best overmen’s  
award is given, safest area and safest mine is suitably rewarded, etc.  The 
Committee appreciate the efforts made in this  direction by CIL with the result of 
which CIL and its subsidiaries  have been the recipient of several National Safety 
Awards, for best performance in the field of safety.  The Committee recommend 
that for further improving safety in coal mines, safety incentive be enhanced 
suitably and implemented by the management for motivating the workers towards 
occupational safety and health. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Subsidiary companies of CIL have been advised to comply with this 
recommendation of the Committee. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
Annual Safety Weeks are being conducted regularly on yearly basis and 
Awards are issued to the best mines. 
 
The mines rescue competit ions are conducted once in  a year and awards 
also being given to best members and best teams once in a year. 
 
Safe workers are awarded/honoured twice in a year, that is, on 26 th 
January and 15 th August. In the mines where ther e are no fatalities, during that 
calendar year are awarded Safety Inc entives, which has been enhanced during 
the last year. 
 
 

Neyveli Lignite Corporation on ( NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the sa fety incentive is already enhanced 
suitably and implemented by the management for motivating the workers towards 
occupational safety and health. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:   12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.59, Para No. 11.32) 
 
The Committee observe that code of  practices for different mining 
operations have already been laid down by  the coal companies.  The Committee 
recommend that the workmen should observe and follow various safety practices 
both in letter and spirit.  Surprise inspections, thus should be conducted at 
regular intervals and erring employees be penalized. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Thrust is being maintained on surprise inspections and surprise 
inspections are carried out at various level and erring employees are penalized. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
Senior Officers in the rank of Ge neral Managers are undertaking surprise 
inspections to promote discipline in sa fety. These visits are monitored by 
Corporate Office.  Action is initiated against the defaulting employees. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, surpri se inspections are being made at 
regular intervals and necessary penal action is being taken against the erring 
employees if any. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.61, Para No. 12.18) 
 
The Committee note that mines Vocati onal Training Rules, 1966 (MVTR) 
amply provide for the training and retrai ning of the workers and executives of 
coal companies.  At the time of entry to the industry, the executive and Workmen 
including the contractual workers are imparted basic introductory training. 
Refresher training is also provided as per requirement of MVT Rules.  The faculty 
imparting training at VTCs/Area Traini ng Centres are basically Area Safety 
Officers or Area Training Officers, who ar e Mine Engineers and also are trained 

under trainers’ programmes.  External faculty members like experienced DGMS 
officers are also inducted for im parting safety-oriented training to 
workers/supervisors/field officers.  There are three categories of training that is 
being imparted at VTCs; namely basic  training, refresher training and 
special/other types of training.  To make the training more interesting and fruitful, 
facilities for audio-visual training are being provided and standardized training 
films are being circulated to all coal  companies. The Committee are, however, 
sad to note that the workers and the ex ecutives are still deprived of quality 
training imparted in coal i ndustry.  At times there is  no proper planning for 
training of mine workers as required under Vocational Training Rules, 1966. The 
Committee have been apprised that the proper infrastructural facilities do no exist 
in many of the vocational tr aining centres. What is mo re disheartening to note is 
that the training to contractor’s labour  is just an eyewash.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that quality of training should be improved.  Adequate 
infrastructure facility should be made available to vocational training centres 
(VTCs).  At the same time, the Co mmittee recommend that training for 
contractual workers; need to be reoriented,  so that the skill of  the coal workers 
can be upgraded. Further, training programmes should also be drawn in a 
planned manner for the workmen and executiv es. It should not be merely for the 
sake of completing formalities.  The training ought to be broad based which 
should permit substantial exposure to mine safety practices and technology and 
facilitate the development of enhanced occ upational health and safety standards 
and procedure, codes of practices, l egislative standards and mine safety 
information system.  The Committee, th erefore, recommend the deficiencies 
pointed out by them be rectified immediately, as to make the training programme, 
a meaningful and purposeful vehicle of change. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Necessary infrastructure facilities hav e been provided at all the VTCs for 
imparting quality training.  Attempts  are being made to provide further 
infrastructure as are needed.  
 
Efforts have been made to impart need based training to the contractors 
workers also in our Vocational Training Centres. 
 
Statutory training is imparted as per the new training module.  Need based 
training programmes are also conducted for workers and officers. The entire 
statutory training  programme has been di vided into different  modules and films 
thereon are being prepared by CIL.  Some films have already been prepared on 
basics of safety  and being shown to the trainees at the VTCs. 
 

Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
(i) Training is imparted as per revised training modules approved by the 
DGMS during the year 1998. 
 
(ii)  Monitoring is done by each MVTC to conduct refresher training as per the 
Rule   No. 9 of MVTC Rules 1966 for 20% employees every year. 
 
(iii) The full day release system of trai ning as per DGMS (Legis) Circular No. 2 
of 1976 is implemented from Sept, 2003. 
 
(iv) Upgradation of MVTCs has been taken up with the following equipment  to 
impart better training. 
 
- Latest model overhead projector. 
- One TV for each MVTC ( for multi media learning) 
- LCD projector provided to five (5 ) MVTCs.  For t he remaining three 
MVTCs it will be provided by during 2004. 
- Addition of Furniture & Fixtures.  Discontinuing the benches without  
backrest. 
 
(v) Officers are posted at MVTCs on rotation basis. 
 
Quality of training is provided as per revised schedules.  Senior Officer like 
General Managers, Head of  Departments are being ca lled during interactive 
session to assess and suggest the quality of training. 
 
In addition to the initial training, contractor workers are imparted booster 
training.  Special care is being taken in SC CL to impart better training to improve 
their skills. All efforts are being put to impart better training to the workmen. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, full fledged Training Complex is available with 
experienced faculty members and hence qualit y training is imparted for all the 
Workers and Executives. Similarly the in tensive and upgraded safety training is 
also given to the contract workers. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.64, Para No. 12.21) 
 
The Committee feel that it is im portant to keep abreast of current 
international developments in relevant specialist fields to ensure that standards 
guidelines and legislation are appropriate and represent the best current practice. 
To achieve these goal, Committee believe that it is essential to expose the 
Executives and Workmen to the new te chnologies, modern developments in 
mining practices and the app lication of computers and  overall mine safety 
management systems  employed in advanced mining environments. With the 
introduction of state-of-t he-art technology and an in crease in the level of 
mechanization in coal mining, the Co mmittee recommend that CIL should focus 
training of Executives and Workmen in th ese fields and espec ially in the areas 
like long wall face support; equipme nt testing standards and approved 
procedure; underground coal mine roadway support; pillar extraction; new 
technology in hard rock mining; mi ne safety management systems and 
environment management. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Ltd. (CIL)  
 
To keep abreast of the current international developments relevant to Coal 
Mining Industry, regular special traini ng programmes are conducted  to expose 
the Executives and Workmen to the new Technology and to the Modern 
development and mining practices. Special training on longwall face, Support 
Equipment Testing Standards and approved procedures, underground coal mine 
roadway support, pillar extraction, new technology and related topics are being 
covered at all the Area Training Centre .  Special Training programme on the 
above topics is conducted at all the Management Development Institutes. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
Computerization Training Programme  is not being taken up at MVTCs. 
 
However there is a separate scheme to impart computer education.  
During 2003-04, 759 persons have completed basic training in computers. Till 
now more than 3,000 persons are trained in basic computer skills.  SCCL is 
taking help of NIRM, EPTRI, NEERI, CMRI , IIT, Kharagpur and ISM, Dhanbad to 
impart training on new methods of mine mechanization, environmental 
management and safety system.  Their exec utives are attending courses at ISM 
and other reputed training institutions.  
 
Every mine is provided with a surveyor well versed in Auto CAD.  Already 
some mines are submitting their plans on CD to DGMS.  In each OC mine at 
least three executives are trained in  environmental management.  All the 
executives of Environment Department  have undergone training and visited 

some reputed companies/institutions to know best practices in environment 
management.  A total of 241 executives had been sent abroad  during last ten 
years for training in Long wall and other technologies. 
 
Wherever new technology introduci ng in SCCL under  package tour 
Executives and workmen are exposed tr aining abroad at their manufacturing 
units.  Some times a team of suppliers impart one-month training to Executives 
and workmen within India even if workmen are familiar with this technology. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, training is given to expose the Executives 
and Workmen to the new technologie s, modern developments in Mining 
practices and the applicat ion computers and overall Mine safety management 
systems employed in advanced Mining environments. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.66, Para No. 12.23) 
 
It has been brought to the notice of t he Committee by some of the Trade 
Unions that the Mining Sirdars, Overm an and Safety Officers who are statutorily 
concerned with the safety of mines, are required to be trained on the subject of 
geological changes/disturbances by experts, at regular intervals. The Committee 
see merit, in their contention and desire that such training should be organized 
for them.  Further, they should continue to be imparted Refresher Training at 
MVTCs. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Mining Sirdars, Overman and Safety  Officers are being exposed to 
subjects like Geological changes/dist urbances in VTCs.  Special training 
programmes are being conducted by CMRI, Dhanbad to educate employees 
regarding Geological Changes in Underground Mines. 
 
CMRI experts are regular ly interacting with officers and supervisors in 
Areas where Mass Production Techno logy (MPT) has been introduced to 
educate, develop as well as up-date their technology and skill to perform better. 
 
Singareni Sollieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
Scheme is formulated to inspect traini ng to  Safety Officers and Overmen 
on geological changes by the end of this year. 
 

Neyveli Lignite Corporation(NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the Re fresher Training are imparted at 
regular intervals for the Mining Sirdars, Overman and Safety Officers at MVTCs. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.68, Para No. 13.20) 
 
The Committee also desire that CIL should set up a Occupational Disease 
Board/Authority/Council, consisting of Health Phys icians, Radiologist and 
General Physician, which can deal with the cases from all subsidiaries.  Such a 
board should detect Occupational Disea se (OD) at an early stage.  The 
Occupational Disease Board is also nee ded for formulating guidelines for 
referral, re-evaluation, and classificati on of cases of Occupational Disease and 
necessary remedial action at work place as well as rehabilitation of affected 
persons.  The medical Officers at each Periodical Medical Ex amination Centre 
should also be trained in occupational health.  The Committee also recommend 
that Occupational Health Surveillance – medical and Environment be set up for 
containing Occupational Disease in the coal mines. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
There is an Occupational Disease Board at each subsidiary company of 
CIL.  The Board consists of General Physician, Radiologi st and Occupational 
Health Doctor.  The objective of the Board is early detec tion of Occupational 
Diseases in the company’s employees.  It al so suggests remedial action at the 
work site, if necessary. 
 
Medical officers involved in Periodical  Medical Examinatio n are trained in 
detection of occupational disease specia lly “Coal Workers Pneumoconiosis”.  
National Dust Prevention Committee has been functioning to monitor control of 
dust at the work site.  All these efforts have yielded good results.  During past 3 
years only 8 cases of Pneumoconiosis have been detected in Coal India. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)   
 
Pneumoconiosis Medical B oard was constituted as per the Notification of 
the Government of Andhr a Pradesh vide G.O.Ms. No. 197, dated 1.2.1967 of 
Home (Labour IV) and under the provision to rule 4 of the Workmen’s 
Compensation (Occupational Diseases Pneumoconiosis) Rules 1965. 
 
SCCL has one Occupational Disease B oard (Apex Medical Board) in 
existence since 1965.  Chief Medical Officer, Radiologist and a Specialist 

constitute the Occupational Diseases Board. Doctors are trained in use of ILO 
classification of Pneumoconiosis.  A tota l of 123 Doctors were trained in reading 
the X-rays as per the ILO guidelines in classification of Pneumoconiosis. 
 
Doctors undergone PG Certificate Course in Associate fellow of Industrial 
Health at CLI, Mumbai and RLI, Kolkata. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, “ D epartment of Industrial Hygiene and 
Occupational Diseases” (DIHOD) is headed by Deputy General 
Superintendent/Medical, who is highly qu alified and experienc ed in Industrial 
Safety, Occupational Health and Hygiene. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.69, Para No. 13.21) 
 
The Committee are not satisfied with the present facilities for treating 
occupational diseases in hospitals run by  CIL and subsidiaries.  The Committee 
recommend that these facilities should be augmented and hospitals which need 
the modern and other state- of-the-art equipments for better patient care should 
be identified and such  items be procured in a p hased manner.  Adequate funds 
should be made available to the coal companies for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
The main notifiable disease in coal mines is Coal Miner’s Pneumoconiosis 
for which all efforts are being made for prev ention of the disease.  The facilities 
for treatment and providing better care in  company’s hospital are reviewed and 
gradually augmented. 
 
A committee has been formed to examine the existing medical facilities in 
different subsidiary companies and to suggest further augmentation including 
equipment in each.  Further action will be taken after receiving the report. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) 
 
As per guidelines of DGMS, the following state-of -the-art medical 
equipment are provided at all the PME Centres. 
 
- Medispiror – a PC based by function test equipment. 
- Pure Tone Eudiometry. 

- Sound proof room for the audiometric examination. 
- Schiller ECG machine. 
- An X-ray machine with a minimum of 300 MA is provided for the PME work. 
 
State-of-the-art equipment will be procured from time to time as per the 
recommendation. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, a well established “Department of Industrial 
Hygiene and Occupational Diseases (DIH OD)” is functioning effectively and 
adequate fund is also allocated for the same. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 71, Para No. 14.12) 
 
The Committee are constrained to not e that during the year 2000-2001, 
the budget allocation for safety and rescue activities was Rs.53.4 crore whereas 
the expenditure was Rs.30.72 crore.  Similarly, during the couple of the last years 
i.e. 2001-2002 and 2002-2003, the allocati on for the same activities was  
Rs.69.02 crore and Rs.79.68 crore respectively whereas the corresponding 
expenditure was Rs.40.21 crore and Rs.41.29 crore.  Likewise, CIL’s subsidiaries 
namely, NLC, WCL, BCCL and  CCL have also failed to fully utilize the capital 
budget allocation during the aforesaid period.  It is pe rtinent to mention here that 
although the percentage of safety budget in  the Capital Head of total budget 
allocation during the above mentioned thre e years has been Rs .3.00, 4.48 and 
4.53 crore respectively, yet CIL has been unable to expend it.  As a result, CIL 
and its subsidiaries are unable to procure many of the safety related equipments 
and machineries, in spite of  the fact that these are required for safe working, 
simply due to under utilization of safety  budget.  The reasons advanced by CIL 
for under utilization of safety budget i.e. non-availability of indigenous equipment, 
cumbersome DGMS approval procedure, non-supply of the equipment in time, 
are not acceptable to the Committee in view of the fact that su ch rigmaroles can 
easily be overcome with simplification of the approval procedure and timely 
placement of orders.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry and 
CIL’s to take measures for full utilizat ion of budget by the management so that 
the very purpose of safety budget is not defeated.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken ink this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Coal 
 
CIL has been advised to take measures for full utilization of Safety 
Budget. 

[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.72, Para No. 14.13) 
 
The Committee found that in ECL, MCL, NCL and SECL, there is separate 
Head of Account for Safety whereas in BCCL and SECL, it does not exist. The 
Committee also observe that due to non- provision of separat e budget provision 
in some of subsidiaries of CIL, safety  related equipment are not supplied on time 
which is a matter of regret.  However, the Committee is happy to note that of late, 
CIL is formulating a Uniform Accounting Code for this, which will take care of the 
head off account for safety in all the subsidiaries.  The Committee hope that it will 
be implemented in all subsidiaries within a year without fail as assured by CIL. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
CIL has given due consideration to safety codes while formulating the 
Uniform Code of Accounting and about 100 separate c odes have been allotted 
for various expenditure concerning safe ty measurement and equipments.  The 
Uniform Accounting Codes are already being  used and are further in process of 
being implemented by the s ubsidiaries under the Coal  Net System Application 
Project.   
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.73, Para No. 14.14) 
 
The Committee note that all aspects of  mining operations have a safety 
component.  Coal India Limited had under taken a detailed exercise under which 
they have identified and codified the safety components of an item to be featured 
in Safety Budget. The Committee note that Safety Budget plan in CIL is drawn up 
based on the requirement of  the Annual Operation Pl an and finalized when 
Annual Plans of subsidiary companies have been drawn up.  The Committee 
have further found that almost all the su bsidiaries of Coal  India Limited have 
separate Budget for Safety related activiti es.  However, there is no uniformity 
over booking of expenditure under this hea d. The Committee are of the view that 
when Safety Components have been separated and codified in CIL, there is a 
need to have uniformity in this regard in  various Coal PSUs.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that  Coal India Limited should impress upon their 
subsidiaries to adhere to the codified Sa fety Component featuring in a Safety 
Budget.  The Committee further find that t here is no separate Safety Head in 
SCCL and NLC.  It has been brought to t he notice of the Committee that SCCL 
do not operate separate Head for safety on  the grounds that the requirement of 
safety related items are being procured/ obtained on priority basis.  On the other 
hand, NCL have informed that as all the major equipments have in-built safety 

devices/mechanism and the cost ther eon form part of the equipment, separate 
head for safety has not been earmarked.   NLC has further informed the 
Committee that operation and maintenance form part of the overall revenue 
expenses of the company.  The Committe e do not concur with the views of NLC 
and SCCL in regard to not having s eparate Safety Budget. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that  NLC and SCCL should undertake an extensive 
exercise in order to identify and codify  the Safety Component of an item which 
can be featured in Safety Budget and have a separate budget for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
The subsidiaries have been advised to adhere to uniform safety codes.   
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) 
 
SCCL will follow the recomm endation and separate capital budget 
pertaining to safety has been made for the year 2004-05. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
Action is being taken now to identif y and codify safety component of an 
item which can be featured in Safety Budget.  
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:   12.1.2005] 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para No.220)  
 
The Committee also find that where there is lapse in respect of safety, the 
worker(s) and at the most, mi ne level officials are inivariably held responsible for 
the same and the top management left scot-free. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the top management is equally re sponsible for such incidents. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recomm end that top executives of coal 
companies, who are solely  responsible for formula tion an implementation of 
safety policy, should also be held accountab le for failure to ensure safety in coal 
mines. Such an action will undoubtedly impr ove the safety environment in the 
mines. 
Reply of the Government 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
 The statutory authority for fixing res ponsibility for fatal accidents is the 
DGMS. Responsibilty for accidents are fixed based on lapses in specific duties to 
be performed by officials, as laid down in the Mines Act, 1952 and the rules and 
regulations framed thereunder. Where there is a lapse by  the ‘Owner or Agent’, 
for omissions in the matters for which he is specifically responsible as per the 
Mines Act, action is liable to be taken against him as laid down in the Mines Act. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
 In case of system failure, action is being initiated even against top officials 
in case of GDK-7 LEP inundation disa ster on 16.6.2003, 4 officers were 
suspended from 20.6.2003 for a period of 11 months. In case of GDK-8. A roof 
fall disaster on 16.10.2003 three officers have been placed under suspension. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
  
 The accountability and responsibility on every accident will be decided 
after the accident investigation/e nquiry findings and also depending upon the 
contraventions made by the employees. It is very clear under section 18(5) of the 
Mines Act, 1952 that the person who cont ravenes will be held responsible and 
guilty. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.54012/1/04-CRC Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 2.24) 
 
The Committee feel that the Coal  India Limited should explore the 
possibility of creating a separate Directorate for conducting Safety Audit in all the 
subsidiaries and a separate cadre of trained personnel should man such a 
Directorate.  It can then directly report to the Chairman, Coal India Limited. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
CIL has already established a structured multi disciplinary ISO comprising 
well qualified and well tr ained personnel who conduct inspections and monitor 
the implementation of safety measures in mines. The ISO is headed by an 
Executive Director reporting to the CM D of the company through the Director 
(Tech.).  The Executive Director (Safety & Rescue) in CIL r eports to Chairman, 
CIL through Director (Tech.). 
 
The present system of conducting Safety  Audits is by engaging external 
experts like retired DGMS officers/emi nent retired mining engineers from the 
industry.  However, in NCL, where there are no underground mines, a committee 
consisting of trade union representatives, departmental officers and ISO is 
conducting Safety Audit. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL)  
 
No separate Director has been post ed. CGM (Safety) is heading the 
Safety  Department under the administr ative control of Director (Personnel & 
Projects). 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
In NLC, the Safety Audit is being conducted once in a month by Internal 
Safety Audit Team and once in 2 years through the external agencies as 
proposed. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:   12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para No. 3.37) 
 
The Committee feel that very little has been done to tackle serious 
economic and environmental probl ems arising out of the coal fires.  Today coal 
fires are mainly under control in develo ped countries, but effective techniques for 
fire fighting are missing in newly industria lizing countries.  It has been brought to 
the notice of Committee that a US Mining Engineer had invented high tech 
means of putting out coal fires.  Under this technique, the heat  resistant grout, a 

mixture of sand, cement, water and foam is pumped around the burning coal and 
shut off its oxygen supply.  This has been used to quench 25 fires in the western 
US.  The Committee desire that the Minist ry of Coal/CIL should evaluate this 
technology to access its effectiveness.  If found suitable in terms of cost and 
effectiveness, it should be replicated for use in our country in  phased manner in 
order to save further damage to the valuable coal reserves. 
 
Reply of the Government   
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Applicability of the technology to Indian conditions can be examined if 
details of the technol ogy/party who developed the same are available. A 
technique similar to the one referred to by the Committee is commonly used 
technique in CIL and has bee n used successfully for tackling fires of individual 
coal mines like those at New Kendra, Jharia etc. 
 
However, how far the technology is applic able, in vast areas under fire in 
multiple seams which have been worked by primitive mining practices from the 
time of 2 nd World War and whose exact location is often not known, containing 
areas under fire, waterlogged areas, areas containing noxious gases, in close 
proximity above/beneath working areas, under conditions of flat gradient, is to be 
examined very carefully. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Use of foam and CO 2 for inertisation and control of fires has been taken 
up in BG panels.  Help of CMRI is also take upon the usage of sealant 
component for preventing the fires at two projects in SCCL i.e. Kothagudem and 
Ramagundam. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the risk of fire is only  due to spontaneous 
heating of Lignite.  The periodical in spections/checks are being carried out for 
any symptoms of spontaneous heating. 
 
The following systems are maintained in NLC Mines for fire Prevention. 
 
(a) The Lignite stock yards are provi ded with fire hydrants to spray water  
periodically over the surface of the lignite heaps to prevent any fire  
hazards. 
 
(b) Water quenching facilities are al so provided in the lignite bunker. 
 
(c) The height of the stored lignite in the stock yard is reduced to avoid 
 combustion. 

 
(d) The fine lignite dust accumulations in the Conveyor galleries water 
washing is given  then and there and the conveyor system is inspected at 
regular intervals. 
 
(e) Identification of gaps and bridging of gaps by up gradation of Fire Safety 
facilities  to cope up with the present challenges and hazards. 
  
(f) In addition to the above, Fire tenders exclusively for the lignite Mines are 
provided  and these Fire Tenders are well equipped and maintained round 
the clock. 
 
(g) Spray Lines are provi ded along the Lignite Carryi ng Conveyor and in the 
Lignite cut face also spraying is done wherever needed. 
 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated  :   12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 22, Para No. 4.14) 
 
 The Committee express it s concern over the fact  that updated maps are 
not displayed at the promi nent places and also are not made available to the 
supervisors, inspectors, mine sirdars and trade unions on the plea that mining 
safety statutes, as embodied in t he Mines Act, 1952 and the Coal Mines 
Regulations, 1957 framed ther eunder, do not specifically provide for display of 
mining maps at prominent places. The Committee recommend that updated 
maps should be displayed at the promi nent places and given to representatives 
of Trade Unions as a number of Trade Uni ons working in various subsidiaries 
have desired the same before this Comm ittee. If need be, the amendment of 
Mines Act, 1952 may be carried out for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
 Mine Plan like Systematic  Support Rules, Escape Routes, Plan showing 
manner of extraction, etc. are displayed at prominent places. Updated plans are 
made available to supervisors, mining Sirdars and workmen’s inspectors. Mine 
plans, as & when required by trade unions, are made available to them. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
 Mine Plans are not displa yed at prominent places but they have  been 
given to representative of Trade Unions on requisition. 
 

Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
 As far as NLC is concerned the updat ed maps are being displayed at the 
prominent places, and the same are being given to the representatives of the 
Recognized Trade Unions. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No.54012/1/04-CRC Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 23, Para No. 5.20) 
 
The Committee note that basically DG MS was started as the Bureau of 
Mines Inspections in 1902 to take care of safety in mining activities.  However, 
over the period, a large number of other functions have been assigned to the 
Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS).  This coupled with perennial 
shortage of staff has affected DGMS capacit y to oversee the safety standards in 
various mines, and especially in coal mines, where the material is always 
combustible.  Even various functions a ssigned to DGMS may adversely affect its 
capacity to oversee safety in mines.  Fo r example, one of the function of DGMS 
is to grant statutory permissions and ex emptions under the Mines Act, 1952 and 
review project reports and mining plans.  If later on, a mishap occurs in a mine 
where no mining should have been allowed in the first place, it is doubtful 
whether DGMS would ever accept this fact while investigating the case of 
accident in such a mine.  In most of the cases, it has  been noted that the blame 
is put on the persons who lost their lives in an accident and the case is closed.  
Rarely, action is taken against senior persons in management. The Committee 
feel that there is a need to review the working of DGMS and examine as to which 
of the functions should be entrusted to them and which can be  better handled by 
some other organization.  For example, whether holding of examinations for 
grant of statutory certif icates can be transferred to UPSC or any other 
organization like Indian School of Mines, et c. can also be considered.  DGMS is 
also responsible for development of safety equipment, materi al and safe work 
practices, etc.  However, as it is under  the control of Ministry of Labour it can 
hardly be expected to get any support and guidance in these matters from 
Ministry of Labour.  The Committee des ire that DGMS should be put under 
Ministry of Science and Technology and  also closely associated with the Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research, as it is one of the Science and Technology 
Organization and de-linked from the Mini stry of Labour.  The shortage of 
manpower in DGMS, has affected the periodicity of conducting inspection of 
mines.  In this context, the Committee recommend that cadre review of DGMS be 
undertaken immediately and need based manpower provided to them.  The 
Committee also desire that an Authority should be es tablished which can hear 
the appeals against the decisions taken by the DGMS. 
 

Reply of the Government  
 
Directorate General  of Mines Safety (DGMS): 
 
Transferring the function of conducti on Statutory Exam inations from 
Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) to other Organization: 
 
Statutory Certificates, as required under Coal Mines Regulations, 1957 & 
Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961, is  issued by the Board of Mining 
Examinations ( not DGMS ) consisting of five members (at least three from 
industry and one from educational institute/scientific body with DG/CIM  being the 
ex-officio Chairman and an offi cer of DGMS as Secretary of the Board).  The 
examination is, however, conducted by  DGMS.  The Board, after such 
examinations, issues statutory certificate to competent  persons for supervision & 
management in mines so as to ensure safe mining operation.   
 
When compared to regular University Examinations, such examinations 
are essentially different in nature, viz;  the level of competence of individual 
candidate (without any compulsory structured training as in the case of University 
students) is examined with stress laid on practical aspects of 
managing/supervising a mine/part of it, besides his  theor etical knowledge, 
keeping in mind the changing scenario of  risk in the industry with change in 
technology level and management practice s.  The examiners are renowned 
practicing Mining Engineers from the industry & DGMS/Inspectorate, holding 
statutory certificate of competency & hav ing wide exposure to the industry.  
Incidentally, out of five papers of exami nation, examiners for four are from 
Industry and only one is from DGMS/Inspectorate. 
 
DGMS, being basically an inspectorate, has the distinct advantage of 
having wider exposure to the industry & thereby having an  in-depth knowledge 
base in the specialized field of mine safe ty.  Obviously such an advantage had, 
so far, made it easier for DGMS to conduct such examination efficiently.  
However, processing large number of application while conducting such 
examination has been a bi g job for DGMS, and theref ore, strengthening the 
available infrastructure in  terms of providing supporti ng resources would greatly 
enhance its efficiency.  The Ministry of Labour, therefore, is of the view that since 
the DGMS  is issuing the ce rtificate, it is appropriate  that the examinations are 
conducted by them and not by any other institution.  
 
De-linking Directorate General if Mines Safety (DGMS) from Ministry of Labour: 
 
Under the Constitution of India, sa fety, health & welfare of workers 
employed in mines are the concern of the Central Government (Entry 55-Union 
List – article 246) & so far as Allocation of Business is concerned the Safety of 
Mines & Oilfields comes under the Jurisd iction of Ministry of Labour.  DGMS, 
being a subordinate office under Minist ry of Labour, is encrusted with the 

responsibility of administering the Safety  Statute in Indian mines.  On other 
countries also, viz, USA similar o ffice (called Mine Safety and Health 
Administration) is under the Ministry of Labour (called Department of Labour). 
 
To effectively discharge its duties  DGMS needs S&T plan scheme.  
However, collaborative support  by Mini stry of Science and Technology/Council 
for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSI R) in this respect may greatly enhance 
the resource potential. 
 
Cadre Review & provision of need based manpower 
 
Directorate General of Mines Sa fety (DGMS) being basically an 
Inspectorate and bulk of its work relates to inspection.  In view of the continuing 
shortage of the front -line inspecting officers, the inspection work of mines is 
affected considerably.  Over the years, the expansion in the mining industry in 
the country has further aggravated the problem.  Provision of need-based 
manpower, commensurate with the size of mining indust ry, would definitely have 
an impact on the overall performance & would allow wider coverage of the 
industry. 
 
Establishment of an Authority to hear  appeal against the decisions by 
Directorate General of Mines Safety: 
 
The provision under Sec. 12 of Mi nes Act, 1952 to hear & decide appeals 
or objections against notices  or orders issued by DGMS already exists. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 25, Para No. 5.22) 
 
The Committee find that one of the institutions to strengthen safety 
apparatus in the mining industry is in organizing mine conferences from time to 
time.  The aim of these conferences is to  review and implement safety in mines 
in a spirit of mutual c ooperation and trust.  At thes e conferences, problems of 
Mine owners, Managers, Supervisors, Workmen, Ministry of Labour, DGMS and 
other Government agencies, Educational and  Research Institutions, Professional 
bodies are addressed with a vi ew to enhance the status of safety in mines.  The 
Committee note that first conferenc e was held in the year 1958, 2 nd in 1966, 3rd 
in 1973, 4 th in 1978, 5 th in 1980, 6 th in 1986, 7 th in 1998, 8 th in 1999 and 9 th , 
which is the last, in the year 2000.  The Committee further find that these mine 
safety conferences have made far reaching contribution for promoting safety of 
mines by suggesting useful measures to improve the standard of health and 
safety in mines. Many of the recomm endations have been incorporated in the 
legislation as well. The Committee find t hat the periodicity of organizing this 
conference is not regular.  The Committ ee recommends that a period of 3 to 4 

years is desirable for conducting such a conference.  The Co mmittee, therefore, 
recommend that a fixed periodicity be assigned for holding this conference. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 
 
The periodicity of the recommendations  of Safety Conference is followed 
up by Directorate General of Mines Safety  (DGMS) by holding tripartite meeting 
at a regular interval of twice in a year in Coal & once in n on-Coal sector.  The 
safety conferences have been held in the past after substantial compliance of the 
recommendations was observed.  However, a periodicity of 3 to 4 years may be 
maintained. 
 
[Ministry  of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.55, Para No. 11.28) 
 
The Committee find that there is a need to have sectional/departmental 
Safety Committees so as to focus precisel y in a particular area of work.  This is 
all the more necessary because of the fact  that these days mining operations are 
being highly specialized.  In a big mec hanized mine, there may be areas which 
technically are so sophisticated that  only specialized workers who are 
continuously engaged in such work, will have the proper understanding of the job 
concerned.  The sectional/departmental Safety Committees can yield fruitful 
results for ensuring safety in work.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Sectional/Departmental Safety Commi ttee be constituted, under Safety 
Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
The Pit Safety Committee consists of members representing all major 
departments of the mine. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd  (SCCL )  
 
In place of Departmental Safety Committee meetings, members from 
various departments are opted to parti cipate in Mines Safety Committee 
meetings. 
 

Neyveli Lignite Corporation ( NLC )  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the Sectional/Departmental Safety 
Committee is constituted, under the Safety Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.62, Para No. 12.19) 
 
The Committee note that there does not exist a separate cadre for training 
in any of the coal companies.  Officials from all disciplines are posted in Training 
Centres without any yardstick to see whether they can im part any meaningful 
training.  The Committee, therefore, reco mmend that CIL should review its policy 
and post only trained and qualified personnel  at the VTCs or other training 
centres run by the CIL or its subsidiaries and set up a separate/cadre for training.  
It should be staffed by qualifie d professionals in mining and allied disciplines like 
electrical/mechanical engineering, occupational health, la w, mine surveying and 
statistics. Taking into consideration that a trained manpower is hope for the 
future, special dispensation, monetary or  otherwise, should be thought for the 
instructors.  The Committee also recommend that the CIL should set up a unified 
Vocational Training School/College for all its subsidiaries so that a standardized 
training can be imparted to different categories of mine personnel. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
CIL is presently having a separat e cadre for training known as 
Management Development and Training (MD&T) .  CIL is trying to locate people 
having interest in Training and for posting in the Training Department.  Qualified 
personnel are posted in the VT Cs and structural training programmes as per the 
recommendations of the “National Tripartite Workshop” held on 7 th & 8th January 
1999 at DGMS, Dhanbad, on revised modules for Vocational Training in mines.  
The programmes were designed by DG MS. Apart from this, need-based 
programmes are also being conducted regularly in CIL’s VTCs.  According to the 
recommendation of the Committee, CIL has set up Vocational Training Centre 
(VTC) in all Subsidiaries where the standardized training are being imparted for 
different categories of mine personnel. 
 
It will not be out of  place to mention here that CIL has special training 
Institute viz. Coal India Training Centre on Long wall mine mechanization at 
Moonidih, BCCL, CIL Training centre at Dishergarh, ECL. 
 

Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) 
 
Out of 8 training centres, First Class Mine Managers have been provided 
and at 6 (six) Training Centres retraining programme is imparted to the In-charge 
of MVTCs to improve their skills. Officers are posted at  MVTC on rotation basis. 
At present experienced executives are posted in Training departments as a part 
of career planning.  Soon a fter posting, they are sent for training at a reputed 
Institutions.   
 
SCCL is utilizing the services of ex perienced executives from Electrical, 
Mechanical and Survey discipline for their training programmes.  For this purpose 
every year SCCL is arranging training  programmes for their executive. SCCL is 
contemplating to send its executives for training on specialized jobs at the Unified 
Vocational Training School/Co llege to be started by Coal  India Limited. In the 
meanwhile Indian Institute of Coal Management, Ranchi  can be entrusted this 
work.  SCCL have already sent their exec utives for attending various training  
programmes at IICM, Ranchi. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, a full fledged Vocational Training Centre is 
available and only qualifie d Professionals in Mining and allied disciplines like 
Electrical/Mechanical Engineering, Occ upational Health, Law, Mine surveying 
and Statistics are handling  the classes for the participants. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.70,  Para No. 13.22) 
 
The Committee further note that dust c ontrol measures in the coal mines 
are not as rigorous as they should ha ve been.  Methane ga s ignition and coal 
dust clouds are commonly noticed in the underground mines. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Government (Central/State) at the time of giving lease 
of land for coal mining, whether openc ast or underground, should impose a 
complete ban on dry drilling.  Nece ssary amendments may be made in Mines 
Rules for use of water on cutter bars of al l mining machines while cutting rock of 
coal in the mines and on all Jackhammer drills while drilling in the mines either 
coal or rock.  Latest gas monitoring equip ment should always remain in order to 
constantly monitor the presence of gases. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 
 
The requirement of Regulat ions 123(6) of CMR 1957 specifically prohibits 
dry drilling/cutting to prevent liberati on of dust.  Regulation 123 in general 

specifies precautions against dust/dust control measures in coal mines. In 
respect of inflammable gas, measuremen t/monitoring provisions already exist 
under Regulation 145(I) of CMR 1957  and continuous moni toring is made 
mandatory in mechanized winning proces s in gassy seams while granting 
permission for such process under relevant law.  This is also emphasized in the 
recommendation of Sixth Conference on Safety in Mines. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
 
Health and Safety aspects of wo rkers are adequately covered under 
relevant statute and there is no need for imposing such conditions for grant of 
mining lease. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12.1.2005] 

CHAPTER IV  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No. 2.23) 
 
The Committee also observed that althou gh safety audit is required to be 
conducted once in two years, yet there is no uniformity in undertaking the safety 
audits by the subsidiaries of Coal India Limited (CIL) and other coal companies.  
The Committee had found that the periodicity  for conducting safety audit varies 
from one month to three year s in coal subsidiaries.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that CIL should review th eir orders and frame guidelines for 
conducting regular safety audit at uniform interval of time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
A uniform periodicity for all mining companies may not be a practical 
approach in view of the fact that wher eas some companies have lesser number 
of mines (less than 10) and that too with only opencast workings, the number of 
mines in other companies is in the or der of 90s with very complex underground 
workings in many seams. 
 
Keeping this in view, it was decided  in the Co-ordination Meeting of 
Director (Tech), CIL with Chiefs of Safety of companies on 14 th May, 2002 that 
Safety Audits are to be conducted every year where the same is the practice and 
in other companies, this shall be completed every 2 year. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Safety audit at all the mines conduct ed once in a year before the onset of 
monsoon. In addition to the above, during the year 2003, two more Special 
Safety Audit Inspections were carried out, one immediately after the occurrence 
of inundation disaster at GDK-7 LEP and the other one after the roof fall disaster 
at GDK-8A Inc.  All the shortcomings pointed out during above inspections have 
been rectified.  ISO coordinated all the works. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
In NLC, the Safety Audi t is being conducted once in a month by Safety 
Audit Teams which are formed exclusively for SME equipments/Conveyors and 
by the Pit Safety Committee in addition to  the routine safety inspection at Mine 
level, as well as by the Central Safety at  Corporate level.  Apart from the above, 
the Risk Assessment and Safety Audit was conducted in all the Mines during the 

year 2003 through the external exper t M/s Society for Mining Research 
Sustainable Development  and Environment, Dhanbad headed by a retired 
DGMS.  It is also proposed to conduct  the similar Audits once in  2 years. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 11 of Chapter I of the Report). 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.  17, Para No. 3.38) 
 
The Committee have recognized the urgent need for making the 
emergency plan responsive, speedy and effective in each mines. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that each mine should review the existing 
emergency plan at higher level keeping in view the risk fr om fire.  There is also a 
need of stabilizing rescue rooms in coal mines having risk of fire where more 
than 350 persons have been employed in a shift in underground mine.  The 
feasibility of storing oxygen type of rescuer at stra tegic places in underground 
mine with the risk of fire in an emergency situation should also be explored.  The 
coal companies should also formula te and implement structured training 
programmes for the miners, officials and management to develop awareness and 
increasing effectiveness of emergency response in case of fire. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Emergency Action Plan are reviewed in  the course of Inspections by 
Internal Safety Organisation (ISO).  Ho wever, fresh directions have been issued 
for review of Emergency Action Plans at a higher level. 
 
The present Mines Rescue Rules, 1985 require establishment of Rescue 
Rooms in underground mines where on an average more than 100 persons are 
employed daily and there is  no Rescue Station within  radius of 35 km. provided 
that it is sufficient to provide one Rescu e Room for a number of mines belonging 
to the same owner, if the to tal number of persons ordina rily employed in all such 
mines does not exceed 5000 and the mines ar e situated within a radius of 35 km 
and connected by road. 
 
The feasibility of storing oxygen type of  rescuer at strategic places in 
underground mine with the risk of fire  in an emergency situation is being 
examined.  However, this suffers from the disadvantage that the site of storage of 
oxygen type self rescuers may not be accessible at the time of emergency 
 

Training programmes for executives  and supervisors cover awareness 
about emergency response for various emergencies including fire. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
 
Consultative Committee emergency orga nisation will re view existing 
emergency plans on quarterly basis and modify emergency plans. 
 
Fire prone mines were identified and establishment of rescue rooms would 
be completed within nine months. 
 
300 oxygen type self-rescuers are bei ng procured and t hey would be 
stationed initially at rescue stations and later on, it is proposed to position them at 
strategic points in undergr ound at identified fiery mines. Structured training 
programme has been developed for officers and staff to deal with fire accidents.  
For miners, it is in the formulation stage and would be completed within one year.  
A total of 480 persons have been identified for training. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation  (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, as per the recommendation of the IX 
Conference on Safety in Mines, a Stru ctured Training Programme has been 
formulated for all the Miners, front line supe rvisory officials etc, in NLC  Mines on 
Fire Prevention to develop awarene ss and increasing effectiveness of 
emergency in case of fire.  The durati on of the Structured Training Programme 
has been programmed for a week durin g the Training Calendar 2004-05 in 
addition to Fire Prevention Mines Act, Rules & Regulations. Mine Operations, 
Identification of Hazards, Fi rst Aid, Worker’s Partici pation in Safety Management 
etc. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC  Dated :  12.1.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 36 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 24, Para No. 5.21) 
 
The Committee find that DGMS does not  part with copy of enquiry report 
conducted by them in the a ftermath of the fatal coal mine accidents either to 
Trade Unions or its repres entative/Members of Tripartite Safety Review 
Committee. In fact, the Report of DGMS  is never made public.  On the other 
hand, the Internal Safety Organisation (ISO) enquiry report was made available 
to the management and /or Trade Unions and is discussed in the Tripartite 
Safety Committee.  The Committee were of the view that when Reports of 
Enquiry Committee  constituted in the a ftermath of Rail/Air accidents, etc. are 

made public, there is no just ification or rationale, w hatsoever, in withholding the 
DGMS Enquiry Committee Reports from  public. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that inquiry reports of DG MS should be made public and copies 
thereof should be made available to concerned Trade Unions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) 
 
The provision under Sec.10 of Mines Act 1952 restricts such reports to be 
made public.  However, the cause portion of the enquiry reports are published in 
DGMS Annual Report (a public documen t) & also intimated to the mine 
management while communicating charge aga inst them.  Further, on specific 
requisition from any other  authority as indicated un der Section 10(2), which 
includes registered/recognized trade  union, the findings of the report are 
furnished keeping in view of the provisions of Sec. 10 of Mines Act 1952. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC       Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 52 of Chapter I of the Report). 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.26, Para No. 5.23) 
 
The Committee find that in the event  of a mine accident, there is a 
tendency of multiple disciplinary action simultaneously emanating from different 
authorities like ISO/DGMS and local police.  The Committee are of  the view that 
there is need to curb disciplinary action by multiple agencies and only one 
authority should be authorized for taking action, as in the case  of the Railways. 
Further, multiple outside interventions for taking action, as in the case of the 
Railways.  Further, multiple  outside interventions affect timely rescue operations 
and cause demoralization to the workers and officers.  The Committee note that 
in case of Railways, enquiry after acci dent is conducted by a single agency i.e. 
Commissioner of Railways, where officers  are on deputation fr om Railway.  The 
police or other authorities do not  come into picture, except  in case of sabotage.  
It is in this context that Committee re commend that DGMS, which is empowered 
by the Mines Act, 1952, fix responsibility and prosecute persons held responsible 
in a Court of Law for awarding punishme nt, should be sole authority for fixing 
responsibility of awarding puni shment in case of mine accidents.  This is all the 
more important as a person appointed by the Central Government to hold Court 
of Enquiry has all the power s of Civil Court (Section 24 of the Mines Act, 1952. 
The Committee also recommend that Mines  Act, 1952 be amended, if need be 
for ensuring protection to a miner in this regard. 
 

Reply of the Government  
 
The question of parallel enquiries by police authorities into the mining 
accidents had earlier been examined by Ministry of Labour and all the State 
Governments were requested in the year 2000 that wh ere an Inspector of Mines 
had commenced an enquiry into mining a ccidents, no Police Offi cer should start 
a fresh enquiry until the enquiry in  progress had been completed by the 
authorities of the DGMS. 
 
On making Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) the sole authority 
to fix responsibility/awar ding punishment in case of  mine accident, Government 
has no objection. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 56 of Chapter I of the Report). 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.45, Para No. 9.16) 
 
The Committee note that as per the provision of Mines Rescue Rules, 
1985, it is the responsibility of the owner to establish and ensure functioning of 
rescue room or rescue station and al so to provide rescue equipment and 
apparatus as may be necessary for compliance of these rules.  The Committee 
further note that coal subsidiaries  have well elaborated and structured rescue 
organization manned by trained personnel  and equipped with m odern state-of-
the-art equipments.  However, the past experience have shown that whenever 
any accident has taken place, t he rescue operations have been delayed 
considerably leading to loss of lives of  workers which otherwise could have been 
saved. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the system of 
keeping rescue teams always alert is no t visible and members of the Rescue 
Team are assigned day-to-day mine work.  Further, at the time of emergency, the 
rescue teams have failed to counter emergen cy, as they were ill equipped.  The 
Committee expressed their displeasure ov er this and recommend that a totally 
dedicated work force at the site be ra ised for the purpose. The Committee also 
desire that special perks and pre-requi site for rescue operation should be 
introduced. At the same time, the response time for undertaking rescue 
operations be further reduced from the present level of 30 minutes.  The 
Committee also recommend that for curtailing delays in starting of rescue 
operations at emergency sites, periodi cal integrity emergency stimulation 
exercise be conducted at least twice a year and the reasons for delay identified 
and corrective action taken thereon.  Th e Committee further recommend that the 
rescue equipments and accessories such as high capacity dewatering pumps, 
gas masks, fire extinguisher, etc., shoul d always remain in readiness especially 
in underground mines and periodically ch ecked to ensure their preparedness. 

The Rescue Team should be imparted extensive and rigorous training and given 
accommodation closer to rescue station/resc ue room so that they could report at 
the time of emergency without loss of time. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
When the Committee stated that “the Rescue Team are assigned day-to-
day mine work”, it appears that the Commi ttee is referring to the Rescue Trained 
Persons (RTPs) stationed at each undergro und mine, as reserves, in addition to 
the permanent Rescue Brigade s at the Rescue Stations  and Rescue Rooms.  
Such RTPs are permitted to perform their normal duties except when called upon 
to undertake Rescue work. 
 
Rescue Organisation dedicated solely to undertake rescue work  is always 
kept on alert and kept well equipped. 
 
Rescue Allowance payabl e for each Rescue Practice has been suitably 
enhanced. In addition Annual rescue bonus is also paid to Rescue workers. 
 
Rescue Trained persons ar e imparted four rigorous  Rescue Practices in 
mines and four under simulat ed hot and irrespirable atmo sphere in state-of-the-
art Training Galleries every year. 
 
Rescue Apparatus undergo rigorous peri odic tests to ensure that the 
same are always kept in readiness. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd.(SCCL)  
 
As per statute, rescue trained personnel required to be provided are 584.  
Over and above the requirement 20% additional rescue trained personnel have 
been provided among the mines of SCCL.  
 
Enhancement of perks is being done on  the recommendation of JBCCI.  
However, in SCCL, it is proposed to en hance the existing a llowances over and 
above the JBCCI recommendations by 35%. 
 
Emergency rescue vehicles fully loade d with equipment are being kept in 
Air-conditioned garages to reduce the response time to 10 minutes. 
 
Training is being imparted in the galle ries 4 time in a year.  One new 
training gallery has been es tablished on surface at  GDK. Two more such 
galleries are proposed to be establish ed one at KGM and one at BPA region at 
rescue stations. 
 

All Rescue Stations are being equi pped with rescue equipment as per 
statute. 
 
9 Nos. of high gallon age and low-head submersibl e  pumps are being 
procured and would be installed and kept in readiness at rescue stations. 
 
30 Nos. of latest model BG4k breathing apparatus has been obtained over 
and above 166 Nos. of BG 174 breathing apparatus. 
 
100 Nos. of fire exti nguishers are being kept in readiness at rescue 
stations to cater the needs of emergency. 
 
As per statute, training is being imparted to all rescue trained personnel. 
 
There are 6 rescue service points ca tering to the rescue needs of 67 
mines of SCCL.  Three rescue serv ice points situated at Kothagudem, 
Godavarkhani and Bh oopalpalli have been provided with accommodation to its 
bridged members and other essential staff within the rescue station premises. 
 
At the other rescue service points, accommodation has been provided in 
the nearby colonies. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
NLC is operating mechanized opencast mines. More than one route is 
available to all the benches for any em ergency.  The same are known to the 
employees, workmen etc. and are being monitored regularly. 
 
The emergency mock drills are being conducted at required intervals and 
if any delay is identified, the corrective action is also taken. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M .No . 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 79 of Chapter I of the Report). 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.60, Para No. 11.33) 
 
It has been brought to the notice of t he Committee that senior officials 
from Ministry of Coal, Chairman and M anaging Directors of coal subsidiaries 
seldom visit coal mines, especially undergr ound.  As a result, they are not aware 
of the ground realities  in coal mines .  The Committee recommend that senior 
officials in the rank of Joint Secretar y and above in the Ministry of Coal should 
undertake surprise visit of underground mines at least once a month and thereby 
keep themselves abreast with the latest mining status in the mine.  Similarly, all 

CMDs should also conduct surprise visit of underground mines on safety 
periodically. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
CMDs are making visits in underground mines.  However the 
recommendation of the Committee has been circulated for needful action. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
CMD is conducting surprise visits to underground mines.  
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the Se nior Officials including the CMD are 
conducting surprise visit of the Mines periodically. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
 
Senior Officers of the Ministry do visit mines as and when required. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 91 of Chapter I of the Report). 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.63, Para No. 12.20) 
 
There is also a need to  develop clear-cut curriculu m for different trainings 
being imparted at VTCs so that the level of training can be ra ised.  At the end of 
training some type of examinat ion can be held so that miners take it seriously.  
Those who pass the examination be given increments, etc., as an 
encouragement.  The Committee also find t hat VTCs are not be ing inspected by 
DGMS due to shortage of staff.  The Committee do not approve this and 
recommend that DGMS should inspect VTCs once in a year without fail. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
There is a clear-cut curriculum for the different trainings imparted at VTCs 
under the Vocational Training  Rules.  Also, a clear cut detailed curriculum was 
prepared by the DGMS as Training Modul es and circulated and includes 5 

modules for (1) Surface, (2) UG Workers, (3) OC workers, (4) Specific categories 
of OC workers/Supervisors, (5) Specific categories of UG workers/supervisors. 
 
There is a provision for feed back and test for which 1-2 days have been 
specially allocated in the Training Modules. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
DGMS staff visits MVTCs occasionally. 
 
Gas Testing Examination, Mining Sir dar Examinations ar e being held at 
Training Centres.  These examinations  are conducted by DGMS, during the time 
they are overseeing MVTC activities such examinations are being  taken 
minimum 4 times in a year at each MVTC. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  
 
As far as NLC is concerned, DGMS is visiting the Group Vocational 
Training Centres at regular intervals at least once in a year. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been circulated to DGMS for 
necessary action. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 99 of Chapter of the Report).

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.28, Para No.5.25) 
 
The Committee find that the present Mines Act was enacted in the year 
1952 for regulating the working conditions in mines by providing for measures to 
be taken for the safety of the workers employed therein and to provide certain 
amenities to them.  The Mines Rules, 1955, Mines Vocational Training Rules, 
1966 and Coal Mines Regulations were framed under the Act.  The Committee 
further find that the Coal  Mines Regulations primar ily deal with the underground 
mining only. At present, there is no regulations for opencast mining and 
regulations for underground mi ning are made applicable to them. Taking into 
consideration that more t han 75% of coal is extracted from the opencast mines, 
there is a need for separate Regulations for opencast mines also. At the same 
time, the Committee are of the view that there is a need for change in the Mines 
Act, 1952.  Similarly, the Rules/Regul ations have not kept pace with the 
development taking place in the coal mining sector.  Thus, there is also a need to 
examine these Rules/Regul ations/Orders afresh.  T he Committee, therefore, 
desire that Government should review the Mines Act, 1952 and the 
Rules/Regulations/Orders made thereunder in the light of latest development 
taking place in the mining sector and amend the relevant Act, Rules, 
Regulations, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Coal 
 
The Mines Act, Regulations and Rules are administered by Ministry of 
Labour & Employment.  The Go vernment/Ministry of Labour  agree that there is 
need for periodical review of Mines Act & its subordinate Rules & Regulations.  In 
fact, this is an ongoing ex ercise that the governm ent/DGMS have been doing on 
regular basis. 
 
As far as Opencast Regulation is concerned, draft Opencast Regulations 
has been framed  and circulated to all concerned for eliciting comments.  
Comments have since been received by Mi nistry of Labour & Employment. The 
matter is under process. 
 
[Ministry of Coal.O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated:   12.1.2005] 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 49, Para No. 10.11) 
 
The Committee note that in the event  of death of a mine worker, the 
benefits under Workmen’s Co mpensation Act, 1923, Ex-g ratia payment as per 
National Coal Wage Agreement, life co ver shcme payment of Rs.30,000, 
Provident Fund, Coal Mines Pensio n Scheme etc., is admissible to a 
mineworker. The Committee fu rther note that there is  no insurance scheme for 
the Coal India Limited (CIL)  as a whole. However, there are some insurance 
schemes/Benevolant Schemes in the subsidiaries and payment made as per the 
schemes. Coal subsidiaries; namely MCL, WCL and SECL had insurance 
schemes for the workers and execut ives from Nationalized Insurance 
Companies. The Committee are pained to note that the insurance company 
unilaterally withdrew the scheme after so me period in MCL Insurance Schemes 
for WCL  and SECL wee also dispens ed with. Whereas WCL and SECL had 
gone to the Court aginst the unilateral withdrawal of the scheme by insurance 
company, MCL’s efforts to get the scheme restarted did not yield any results. The 
Ministry of Coal/Coal India Limited did not take up the matter with Ministry of 
Finance on the ground that the schem e was introduced with the mutual 
understanding between MCL and Oriental Insurance Company and they were not 
involved in any way under this schem e. The Committee do not approve of 
inaction in any way under this schem e. The Committee do not approve of 
inaction on the part of the Ministry of Co al should take up all the three cases with 
the Ministry of Finance at the highest level for an amicable solution. At the same 
time, the Committee strongly recommend t hat as coal mining is a hazardous 
occupation, and exclusive Group Insuranc e Scheme be arranged for the benefit 
of coal mine workers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The matter has been take up with Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Finance 
have informed that since the matter is sub-judice and the contempt petitions have 
bee filed, it will not be appropriate for the Ministry of Finance to intervene at this 
stage. 
 
[Ministry of Col O.M.No.54012/1/04-CRC  Dated:  12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 65, Para No. 12.22) 
 
The Committee feel that  with the rapid changes in the technology, the 
prescribed period of 5 years for undertaki ng training as per MVTD, 1966 need to 
be re-examined. The Committee desire that the appropriate period of training 
ought to be 2-3 years, instead of 5 year. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by Ministry of  Coal in this regard 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Ministry of Labour & Employment 

 
The Rule 9 of Mines Vo cational Training Rules (MVTR) 1966 stipulates 
the periodicity of refresher training as “at least one fifth of the person employed 
per year”, i.e. at 5 years interval. 
 
The requirement of the law does not bar mine oper ators to impart training 
at lesser intervals.  
 
Ministry of Coal  
 
Recommendation of the Committee al ong with the comments of Ministry 
of Labour & Employment has been circulated to coal companies for 
consideration. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC   Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.67, Para No. 13.19) 
 
The Committee have noted that coal miners continue to be exposed to 
harmful dusts and fumes.  The prolonged exposure of miners to coal dust causes 
pneumoconiosis, which has been identified as occupational disease prevalent in 
coal mines.  Besides this, silicosis, Manganese poisoning, asbestosis and cancer 
of lungs, stomach and pleura, have been identified as occu pational health 
hazard.  In WCL alone, 524 cases of occupational diseases have been identified, 
after the Nationalisation  of coal mine industry in 1971 and 1973. Similarly, in 
other subsidiaries also, a good number of patients have contracted occupational  
diseases.  The Committee have noted that the Periodical Medical Examination 
(PME) of workers is conducted at an interval of five years.  The Committee are of 
the view that this period is too long.  The Committee, therefor e, desire that the 
matter should be re-examined in c onsultation with the experts/specialized 
hospitals in  the country and the time lim it should be re-fixed. For this purpose, 
the help of Ministry of Health should be taken.  CIL should also undertake a 
survey for comprehensive study of the Occupational Diseases in collaboration 
with the reputed institutes like National Inst itute of Occupational Health, Ministry 
of Health, ILO, UNDP, Educational and Research Institutes in India.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, this will help in taking preventive measures so that the 
workers are not affected any further. 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
Coal India Limited (CIL)  
 
Occupational diseases are chronic in nature taken years for manifestation 
of the diseases as such the present system as per the miner Rules, 1955 which 
states that for periodical medical examin ation thereafter (i.e . after the initial 
medical examination of every person employed in Mine)  of every person 

employed in mine at intervals of not more  than five years is more logical and 
effective in identification and treatm ent of any employee.  However, the 
employee if he suffers for any ailments always has the option to report to the 
company hospital for treatment and if di agnosed of suffering from occupational 
disease immediate steps are taken for it s treatment to the Occupational Disease 
Board. 
 
As recommended a committee being formed to make comprehensive 
survey of occupational diseases in Coal Industry.  If needed, other institutions will 
also be involved.  Further action will  be taken on the basis of the committee 
report. 
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL)  
 
The main aim of the PME is to detect the occurrence of occupational 
diseases pertinent to the industry at an early stage itself so that necessary 
interventions could be instituted. The occupational disease in case of coal 
industry is Coal Workers Pneumoconiosis and it taken long time to present  early 
discernable changes to be seen on exami nation. Hence the periodicity of  
medical examinations of 5 years is  enough to detect any early changes 
suggestive of the occupational lung disease to be detected.  
 
However, for other morbid conditions viz., Hypertension, Diabetes etc., the 
periodicity at lesser intervals is of mu ch use.  Frequent medical examination and 
treatment is given to those with the chronic disease as mentioned above at 
regular intervals is in practice at SCCL. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation(NLC) 
 
As far as NLC is concerned, the per iodical study is being conducted to 
identify and to detect emergi ng occupational health haz ards like Silicosis and 
Pneumoconiosis and like.  But no such cases were identified as occupational 
diseases in NLC so far.  
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M.No. 54012/1/04-CRC    Dated: 12.1.2005] 
 
 
 
 
 
N E W  D E L H I ;         A N A N T H  K U M A R ,  
21 March, 2005 ____                    Chairman, 
30 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Coal & Steel. 

ANNEXURE I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2004-05) HELD ON 21ST MARCH, 2005 IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 The Committee met from 1700 hrs. to 1815hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Ananth Kumar -  In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G.Ahir 
3. Shri Harischandra Chavan 
4. Shri Bikash Chowdhury 
5. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey 
6. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
7. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam 
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
9. Shri E.Ponnuswamy 
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
11. Shri Ramsewak Singh (Babuji) 
12. Shri Devdas Apte 
13. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
14. Capt.Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
15. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad 
16. Shri G.K.Vasan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Singh - Director 
2. Shri Shiv Singh - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following 
Draft Reports: 
 
(i)  **  **  **  **  
(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the 
Forty Seventh  Report of the Standing Committee onEnergy (2004) 
on the subject “Safety in Coal Mines”.  
 

3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor 
additions/deletions/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairm an to finalise these Reports after 
making consequential change arising out of factual verifications by the concerned 
Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

ANNEXURE II 
(Vide Para IV of the Introduction)  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL  
 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 73 
 
II. Recommendtions that have been accepted by the Government 
(vide recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 
59, 61, 64, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72 and 73). 
53 
 
 
 
 
 
 Percentage of total 72.60%
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (vide recommendation at 
Sl.Nos.2, 5, 16, 22, 23, 25, 55, 62 and 70). 
9 
 
 
 
 Percentage of total 12.32%
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (vide recommendation 
at Sl.Nos. 4, 17, 24, 26, 45, 60 and 63). 
7 
 
 
 
 Percentage of total 9.58%
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (vide recommendation at Sl.Nos.28, 
49, 65 and 67). 
4 
 
 
 
 Percentage of total 5.47% 
 