STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEEL
(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COAL
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
3636363636
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORTTHIRTY-SIXTH REPORTTHIRTY-SIXTH REPORTTHIRTY-SIXTH REPORTTHIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Thirty-first Report of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Coal]

37
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2008-09)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COAL
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Thirty-first Report of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Coal]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.C.&S. No. 36C.C.&S. No. 36C.C.&S. No. 36C.C.&S. No. 36C.C.&S. No. 36
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2008 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by The Indian
Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
15
27
28
31
34
36
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE...................................................................
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report....................................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies.....................................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee......................................................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited........
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2008-09) held on 5.12.2008...................
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-first
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)...................................................
P
AGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2008-09)
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
 3. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu
 4. Shri Hiten Barman
 5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
 6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
 7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
 8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
 9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
12. Shri Tarachand Sahu
13. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
14. Smt. Karuna Shukla
*15. Shri Prabhunath Singh
16. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
17. Shri Sugrib Singh
18. Shri Bhishm Shanker alias Kushal Tiwari
19. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
20. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
21. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
23. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
(iii)
*Resigned from the Membership of Lok Sabha on 11.11.2008

(iv)
24. Shri Jesudas Seelam
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
27. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
28 Shri T.K. Rangarajan
29. Shri B.J. Panda
30. Shri R.C. Singh alias Ram Chandra Singh
31. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Gurpreet Singh — Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Thirty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants 2008-09)”
of the Ministry of Coal.
2. The Thirty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha
on 16th April, 2008. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received
on 25th July, 2008.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 5th December, 2008.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations
and observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December , 2008 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee deals with Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Thirty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2007-08) on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Coal which was presented to
Lok Sabha on 16th April, 2008.
1.2 The Action Taken Replies have been received from the
Ministry of Coal in respect of all the 9 recommendations/observations
contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Sl. Nos.1 (Para no. 2.2), 2 (Para no. 3.17), 5 (Para no. 3.38),
6 (Para no. 4.17), 7 (Para no. 5.8) and 8 (Para no. 5.12).
Total : 6 Chapter - II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
NIL     Chapter - III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. No. 3 (Para no. 3.23)
Total: 1 Chapter - IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 4 (Para no. 3.28) and 9 (Para No. 5.15).
Total: 2 Chapter - V

2
1.3 The Committee desire that final replies in respect of theThe Committee desire that final replies in respect of theThe Committee desire that final replies in respect of theThe Committee desire that final replies in respect of theThe Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations/observations which have been categorized asrecommendations/observations which have been categorized asrecommendations/observations which have been categorized asrecommendations/observations which have been categorized asrecommendations/observations which have been categorized as
interim replies by the Committee and response to the Committee’sinterim replies by the Committee and response to the Committee’sinterim replies by the Committee and response to the Committee’sinterim replies by the Committee and response to the Committee’sinterim replies by the Committee and response to the Committee’s
comments in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to thecomments in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to thecomments in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to thecomments in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to thecomments in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to the
Committee at the earliest.Committee at the earliest.Committee at the earliest.Committee at the earliest.Committee at the earliest.
1.4 The Committee now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations made in
the Thirty-first Report.
I.I.I.I.I. Status of Research  and Development (R&D) ProjectsStatus of Research  and Development (R&D) ProjectsStatus of Research  and Development (R&D) ProjectsStatus of Research  and Development (R&D) ProjectsStatus of Research  and Development (R&D) Projects
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No.  3.23)Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No.  3.23)Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No.  3.23)Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No.  3.23)Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No.  3.23)
1.5 The Committee had been given to understand that out of 36
Research and Development (R&D) projects spilled over from 10th Plan
to 11th Plan, 24 projects were still under various stages of
implementation.  The Committee regretted to observe that when the
R&D projects had been inordinarily  delayed, further reduction of
funds at RE 2007-08  to Rs. 12.86 crore from BE of Rs. 22.54 crore due
to delay in tendering process etc.  and lesser allocation of funds of
Rs.10 crore  in BE 2008-09 would further adversely affect the timely
implementation of the projects. The Committee were constrained to
point out that the Ministry had failed to give due importance  to R&D
projects because of complex procedures. As R&D projects played a vital
role for optimal utilization of resources, the Committee desired the
Ministry to pursue all the R&D projects vigorously and allot additional
funds therefor in  2008-09 at RE stage.
1.6 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows:—
1. Status of the 36 R&D Projects spilled over from X Plan to
XI Plan as on 14.05.2008 is as under:—
(a) No. of Projects Completed — 13
(b) No. of Projects Terminated — 01
(c) No. of spilled over projects which are on-going — 22

3
2. In order to enhance quantum of R&D work it is necessary
to address the complexity of operations of the coal industry
and also for wider involvement of research agencies in the
S&T programme. Expressions of Interest (EOIs) for few
research topics has been invited through an open advertise-
ment in National Dailies by Coal Companies. In response
to it, a number of EOIs have been received and already
scrutinized by the Technical Committee.  Suitable projects
will be placed before Sub committee of the Standing
Scientific Research Committee  and thereafter Standing
Scientific Research Committee for its consideration.  Initially
following 9 areas have been targeted:—
(i) Development of mobile goaf edge supports for
depillaring operations in underground mines.
(ii) Hard roof management by use of slow acting expansion
cement/chemicals for inducing caving.
(iii) Introduction of water jet cutting technology in coal
mines for seams on fire.
(iv) Wind power generation using mine fan exhaust air.
(v) Mapping of underground old unapproachable aban-
doned workings.
(vi) Developing a methodology for baseline measurement
of Green House Gases (GHG) emissions in mine fire
areas.
(vii) Development of software for prediction of air quality
in coal mining areas in India.
(viii) In-situ gasification of Indian coal.
(ix) Development of communication system to locate
trapped miners in case of unforeseen incidents in
underground mines.

4
3. Steps taken to facilitate timely completion of the projects:
(i) Progress of S&T projects is monitored by CMPDI and
reviewed by SSRC Technical Sub-committee and SSRC.
Progress of the projects is also monitored by periodic visits
to the implementing institutes by the officials of S&T
Department of CMPDI to monitor/co-ordinate the imple-
mentation of projects.
(ii) Progress reports (both physical and financial) as received
from implementing agencies on a quarterly basis are
reviewed by CMPDIL. The causes of delay, if any, are
discussed in detail and remedial measures are suggested. In
addition, Standing Scientific Research Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal) also reviews the status of
on-going R&D Projects periodically for timely implementa-
tion of the same.
Additional funds for R&D scheme will be proposed at RE
2008-09 as per requirement raised by implementing agencies.
1.71.71.71.71.7 Keeping in view the tardy progress in the implementation ofKeeping in view the tardy progress in the implementation ofKeeping in view the tardy progress in the implementation ofKeeping in view the tardy progress in the implementation ofKeeping in view the tardy progress in the implementation of
Research and Development (R&D) projects resulting in spillingResearch and Development (R&D) projects resulting in spillingResearch and Development (R&D) projects resulting in spillingResearch and Development (R&D) projects resulting in spillingResearch and Development (R&D) projects resulting in spilling
over of 36 projects from 10th Plan to 11th Plan, the Committeeover of 36 projects from 10th Plan to 11th Plan, the Committeeover of 36 projects from 10th Plan to 11th Plan, the Committeeover of 36 projects from 10th Plan to 11th Plan, the Committeeover of 36 projects from 10th Plan to 11th Plan, the Committee
had recommended the Ministry to pursue all the R&D projectshad recommended the Ministry to pursue all the R&D projectshad recommended the Ministry to pursue all the R&D projectshad recommended the Ministry to pursue all the R&D projectshad recommended the Ministry to pursue all the R&D projects
vigorously and allot additional funds therefor in Revised Estimatesvigorously and allot additional funds therefor in Revised Estimatesvigorously and allot additional funds therefor in Revised Estimatesvigorously and allot additional funds therefor in Revised Estimatesvigorously and allot additional funds therefor in Revised Estimates
(RE) 2008-09 stage. The Committee are unhappy to note that out(RE) 2008-09 stage. The Committee are unhappy to note that out(RE) 2008-09 stage. The Committee are unhappy to note that out(RE) 2008-09 stage. The Committee are unhappy to note that out(RE) 2008-09 stage. The Committee are unhappy to note that out
of 22 on-going projects only 9 projects have been taken up by theof 22 on-going projects only 9 projects have been taken up by theof 22 on-going projects only 9 projects have been taken up by theof 22 on-going projects only 9 projects have been taken up by theof 22 on-going projects only 9 projects have been taken up by the
Coal India Subsidiaries for which Expresstions of Interest (EoIs)Coal India Subsidiaries for which Expresstions of Interest (EoIs)Coal India Subsidiaries for which Expresstions of Interest (EoIs)Coal India Subsidiaries for which Expresstions of Interest (EoIs)Coal India Subsidiaries for which Expresstions of Interest (EoIs)
have been invited. It is not clear what is the fate of the remaininghave been invited. It is not clear what is the fate of the remaininghave been invited. It is not clear what is the fate of the remaininghave been invited. It is not clear what is the fate of the remaininghave been invited. It is not clear what is the fate of the remaining
13 projects and the reasons for not taking up these projects. Even13 projects and the reasons for not taking up these projects. Even13 projects and the reasons for not taking up these projects. Even13 projects and the reasons for not taking up these projects. Even13 projects and the reasons for not taking up these projects. Even
in regard to the 9 projects taken up for implementation, nothingin regard to the 9 projects taken up for implementation, nothingin regard to the 9 projects taken up for implementation, nothingin regard to the 9 projects taken up for implementation, nothingin regard to the 9 projects taken up for implementation, nothing
has been mentioned about the anticipated dates for completion ofhas been mentioned about the anticipated dates for completion ofhas been mentioned about the anticipated dates for completion ofhas been mentioned about the anticipated dates for completion ofhas been mentioned about the anticipated dates for completion of
these projects nor about the requirement of allotted funds.  Thethese projects nor about the requirement of allotted funds.  Thethese projects nor about the requirement of allotted funds.  Thethese projects nor about the requirement of allotted funds.  Thethese projects nor about the requirement of allotted funds.  The
Committee would await this information.Committee would await this information.Committee would await this information.Committee would await this information.Committee would await this information.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No.  3.28)Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No.  3.28)Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No.  3.28)Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No.  3.28)Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No.  3.28)
1.8 The Committee  were concerned to note that out of Rs.28.22 crore
allocated for Environmental and Subsidence Control (EMSC) at the

5
RE 2007-08, only Rs.17.99 crore had been actually utilized so far due
to  non-finalization of Rehabilitation & Resettlement (R&R) Policy.   For
BE 2008-09 as against Rs. 25.69 crore proposed by the Ministry, the
Planning Commission provided only Rs. 10 crore. The Committee
were dismayed to note that the implementation of EMSC Schemes
had been adversely affected due to delay in finalisation of R&R Policy
and lesser utilization of earmarked funds. The Committee, therefore,
recommended the Ministry to finalise the R&R Policy at an early date
and also allocated more funds for time-bound implementation of EMSC
Schemes.
1.9 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the
prime responsibility to finalize the R&R policy lies with the concerned
State Governments. This Ministry has pursued the matter vigorously
with the State Governments of West Bengal and Jharkhand to finalize
the R&R policy.  The Govt. of West Bengal has conveyed their
acceptance to the proposed R&R package contained in the Master Plan
dealing with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation with some modifica-
tions.  The Master Plan pertaining to ECL areas at an investment of
Rs. 2661.73 crore (April, 2008 base) has been approved by EFC in its
Meeting held on 1.7.2008. Acceptance of Govt. of Jharkhand to the
proposed R&R package for affected people of Jharia Coalfield in BCCL
area has been received and the proposal is being processed for EFC
approval. Both the proposals together will be placed for CCEA
approval.
1.10 The Committee had earlier recommend that the  RehabilitationThe Committee had earlier recommend that the  RehabilitationThe Committee had earlier recommend that the  RehabilitationThe Committee had earlier recommend that the  RehabilitationThe Committee had earlier recommend that the  Rehabilitation
& Resettlement (R&R) Policy should be finalised at an early date& Resettlement (R&R) Policy should be finalised at an early date& Resettlement (R&R) Policy should be finalised at an early date& Resettlement (R&R) Policy should be finalised at an early date& Resettlement (R&R) Policy should be finalised at an early date
since it has been adversely affecting the implementation ofsince it has been adversely affecting the implementation ofsince it has been adversely affecting the implementation ofsince it has been adversely affecting the implementation ofsince it has been adversely affecting the implementation of
Environmental and Subsidence Control Schemes (EMSC) resultingEnvironmental and Subsidence Control Schemes (EMSC) resultingEnvironmental and Subsidence Control Schemes (EMSC) resultingEnvironmental and Subsidence Control Schemes (EMSC) resultingEnvironmental and Subsidence Control Schemes (EMSC) resulting
in lesser utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose. Since thenin lesser utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose. Since thenin lesser utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose. Since thenin lesser utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose. Since thenin lesser utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose. Since then
the proposed R&R package has reportedly been accepted by thethe proposed R&R package has reportedly been accepted by thethe proposed R&R package has reportedly been accepted by thethe proposed R&R package has reportedly been accepted by thethe proposed R&R package has reportedly been accepted by the
Governments of West Bengal and Jharkhand and the master planGovernments of West Bengal and Jharkhand and the master planGovernments of West Bengal and Jharkhand and the master planGovernments of West Bengal and Jharkhand and the master planGovernments of West Bengal and Jharkhand and the master plan
pertaining to ECL approved by EFC.  The Committee urge that thepertaining to ECL approved by EFC.  The Committee urge that thepertaining to ECL approved by EFC.  The Committee urge that thepertaining to ECL approved by EFC.  The Committee urge that thepertaining to ECL approved by EFC.  The Committee urge that the
proposal regarding BCCL also be placed for approval by EFC andproposal regarding BCCL also be placed for approval by EFC andproposal regarding BCCL also be placed for approval by EFC andproposal regarding BCCL also be placed for approval by EFC andproposal regarding BCCL also be placed for approval by EFC and

6
by by by by by CCEA without any further loss of time.  As alreadyCCEA without any further loss of time.  As alreadyCCEA without any further loss of time.  As alreadyCCEA without any further loss of time.  As alreadyCCEA without any further loss of time.  As already
recommended by the Committee, requisite funds in this regard berecommended by the Committee, requisite funds in this regard berecommended by the Committee, requisite funds in this regard berecommended by the Committee, requisite funds in this regard berecommended by the Committee, requisite funds in this regard be
allocated to ensure time bound implementation.allocated to ensure time bound implementation.allocated to ensure time bound implementation.allocated to ensure time bound implementation.allocated to ensure time bound implementation.
Recommendation (Sl No. 6, Para No.  4.17)Recommendation (Sl No. 6, Para No.  4.17)Recommendation (Sl No. 6, Para No.  4.17)Recommendation (Sl No. 6, Para No.  4.17)Recommendation (Sl No. 6, Para No.  4.17)
1.11 The Committee  noted that Internal  and Extra Budgetary
Resources (IEBR) for Coal India Ltd. (CIL) had  been reduced from
Rs.2472.14 crore at BE 2007-08 to Rs.2066.97 crore at RE stage.  However,
a provision of Rs.3214.70 crore had been made for the year 2008-09.
The reasons advanced by the Ministry for reduction at RE 2007-08 stage
were stated to be delay  in  acquisition of land, obtaining forest land
clearances, delay in rehabilitation and finalisation of tenders etc.
Similarly, the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd.(NLC) reduced  IEBR
allocation from Rs.2066.97  crore at 2007-08 BE stage to Rs.1930.00 crore
at 2007-08 RE stage. However, at 2008-09 BE stage this allocation had
again been increased to Rs.2717.00 crore. It was thus evident that the
funds provided  at BE stage were more which were not utilized
subsequently. The Committee had been time and again emphasizing
the need for preparation of realistic estimates as far as possible and
avoid major reduction of funds later on. The Committee were, however,
constrained to note that coal PSUs are still preparing inflated Budget
Estimates and reducing the same at RE stage. The Committee would
like to urge upon the PSUs to prepare realistic estimates in future and
desired the Ministry to facilitate the CIL and NLC in implementing
of the schemes.
1.12 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows:—
Action Taken Report by CILAction Taken Report by CILAction Taken Report by CILAction Taken Report by CILAction Taken Report by CIL
Initially, all the physical activities scheduled for achieving the
targets for the planned year are assessed carefully. Thereafter, for
completing the activities in the same year. Capital requirement
are estimated. It may be mentioned that during estimation of
capital requirement, 100% of capital requirement for all activities
to be taken up during the year is considered to avoid difficulty

7
in obtaining budget concurrence. Considering the above facts,
Capital Budget of CIL for 2007-08 (BE) was Rs. 2472.14 crore.
At RE stage it was assessed after one year of assessment of BE.
At this stage, all the physical activities of the previous year were
reviewed/assessed and RE was arrived at Rs. 2066.97 Crore,
considering the activities or part thereof, which could be
completed within the financial year. It may be appreciated that
all the activities envisaged for the year do not materialize for the
reasons which are beyond the control of CIL / Subsidiaries which
cause reduction of capital budget at RE stage.
The reduction in RE stage took place due to:
• Delay in acquisition of land and availability of forest land
clearances
• Delay in rehabilitation and
• Delay in finalization of tenders/cancellation of tenders etc.
In 2008-09, a provision of Rs.3214.70 crore has been made for CIL
for the year 2008-09 and for improvement in utilization of
budgeted estimate in 2008-09, the following measures have been
taken:
(i) Survey off norms for equipments have been revised which
will help in reducing time for procurement of the same.
(ii) Re-appropriation of fund has been made simpler.
(iii) Standard NITs are being prepared to avoid, delay in
finalization of tenders for procurement of equipment and
major development activities.
Action Taken Report by NLC
1.1.1.1.1. Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08
In BE 2007-08, an amount of Rs.117.87 crores was provided
to Barsingsar Mine. While finalizing the estimates, OB

8
removal at Barsingsar Mines was planned to be done
departmentally. As this was subsequently changed to
outsourcing, the allocation was reduced to Rs. 65 crores.
Apart from this, no allocation was intended for new projects
of which even preliminary works had not commenced.
Therefore, the proposals were reduced from Rs. 2006.97
crores in BE 2007-08 to Rs. 1930 crores in RE 2007-08.
2.2.2.2.2. Utilization of funds providedUtilization of funds providedUtilization of funds providedUtilization of funds providedUtilization of funds provided
RE 2007-08 estimates of NLC was Rs. 1930.00 crores against
which the actual expenditure was Rs. 1766.71 crores. This
is 91.54% of the estimation. The plan outlay is totally funded
by IEBR generation of NLC. There is no budgetary support
sought for/drawn from Government. Hence, there is no lapse
of funds due to reduction in utilization.
3.3.3.3.3. Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09
The main reason for increase in BE is the requirement for
projects under implementation and sanction of new projects.
Following projects which were sanctioned in 2004-05 are
expected to be commissioned in 2008-09. The details are
furnished below:
Projects B.E. 2008-09 (Rs. Crores)
Mine II Expansion 650.00
TPS II Expansion 750.00
Barsingsar Mines 78.00
Barsingsar Thermal 645.00
Total 2123.00
The projects are in advance stage of implementation and
expected to be commissioned by the end of this year. Of total

9
Plan Outlay of Rs. 2717 crores proposed in B.E. 2008-09,
nearly 78% is required for these projects alone.
Besides the above, the Tuticorin Project also cleared by PIB
for which Rs. 500 crores is provided. All the Statutory and
Non-Statutory clearances have been obtained for this project.
CCEA also have approved the project in April 2008,
Provision of Rs. 62.04 crores has been made in the BE
2008-09 to meet the spill over payment and payment towards
land already acquired.
In view of the above, it may be informed that due caution
and care is put forth by NLC in formulating the budgetary
proposals. The projections are based on the progress of the
projects and their anticipated requirements. As such NLCs
budget proposals are not inflated. All the projects are funded
by Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources. NLC is not
drawing any budgetary support from Govt. and hence there
would not be any provision being lapsed. There were some
delays in the progress of new projects which had attributed
to a slight reduction in utilization of funds and this had no
impact in either physical or financial performance.
To ensure full utilization of the fund provided for in the
budget, progress of the projects are closely monitored. A
separate Project Monitoring Wing constantly monitors the
progress on day to day basis. Project Officers have been
posted to co-ordinate and monitoring has been strengthened
at all levels viz.
• Each package is being monitored by respective Officer
on day to day basis and by Unit Head on weekly basis.
• Periodical meetings are held with suppliers to monitor
the progress of the supplies, erection.
• Physical progress and financial progress in the projects
are regularly monitored. Issues are sorted out at

10
appropriate levels to ensure smooth implementation of
the projects.
• Site visit/inspection are being made by the Project
Monitoring Group on weekly basis.
• Corporate Level Monitoring is being done on monthly
basis.
• Board level reviews are also made on the progress.
In view of the above monitoring system, funds provided will
be used to the maximum extent possible to achieve the targets.
1.13 The Committee had earlier urged upon the coal PSUs to prepareThe Committee had earlier urged upon the coal PSUs to prepareThe Committee had earlier urged upon the coal PSUs to prepareThe Committee had earlier urged upon the coal PSUs to prepareThe Committee had earlier urged upon the coal PSUs to prepare
realistic estimates in future so that the Ministry of Finance/Planningrealistic estimates in future so that the Ministry of Finance/Planningrealistic estimates in future so that the Ministry of Finance/Planningrealistic estimates in future so that the Ministry of Finance/Planningrealistic estimates in future so that the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission need not to reduce allocation at RE stage.  The Ministry inCommission need not to reduce allocation at RE stage.  The Ministry inCommission need not to reduce allocation at RE stage.  The Ministry inCommission need not to reduce allocation at RE stage.  The Ministry inCommission need not to reduce allocation at RE stage.  The Ministry in
their reply have cited delay in acquisition of land and availability of foresttheir reply have cited delay in acquisition of land and availability of foresttheir reply have cited delay in acquisition of land and availability of foresttheir reply have cited delay in acquisition of land and availability of foresttheir reply have cited delay in acquisition of land and availability of forest
land clearance, delay in rehabilitation and delay in finalization of tenders/land clearance, delay in rehabilitation and delay in finalization of tenders/land clearance, delay in rehabilitation and delay in finalization of tenders/land clearance, delay in rehabilitation and delay in finalization of tenders/land clearance, delay in rehabilitation and delay in finalization of tenders/
cancellation of tenders as the reasons for reduction of allocation at RE stage.cancellation of tenders as the reasons for reduction of allocation at RE stage.cancellation of tenders as the reasons for reduction of allocation at RE stage.cancellation of tenders as the reasons for reduction of allocation at RE stage.cancellation of tenders as the reasons for reduction of allocation at RE stage.
The Committee are constrained to observe that these are nagging problemsThe Committee are constrained to observe that these are nagging problemsThe Committee are constrained to observe that these are nagging problemsThe Committee are constrained to observe that these are nagging problemsThe Committee are constrained to observe that these are nagging problems
the coal PSUs have been facing since long and it appears that the Ministrythe coal PSUs have been facing since long and it appears that the Ministrythe coal PSUs have been facing since long and it appears that the Ministrythe coal PSUs have been facing since long and it appears that the Ministrythe coal PSUs have been facing since long and it appears that the Ministry
of Coal have not effectively intervened to remove these bottlenecks in time.of Coal have not effectively intervened to remove these bottlenecks in time.of Coal have not effectively intervened to remove these bottlenecks in time.of Coal have not effectively intervened to remove these bottlenecks in time.of Coal have not effectively intervened to remove these bottlenecks in time.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to play proactive and decisiveThe Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to play proactive and decisiveThe Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to play proactive and decisiveThe Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to play proactive and decisiveThe Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to play proactive and decisive
role in this regard.role in this regard.role in this regard.role in this regard.role in this regard.
Recommendation (Sl No. 7, Para No.  5.8)Recommendation (Sl No. 7, Para No.  5.8)Recommendation (Sl No. 7, Para No.  5.8)Recommendation (Sl No. 7, Para No.  5.8)Recommendation (Sl No. 7, Para No.  5.8)
1.14 The Committee had been informed that mechanization and
modernisation of mines were being carried out to increase coal
production. However,  mechanization of mines had been severely
affected due to lesser utilization of funds by the subsidiaries of Coal
India Ltd. in 2007-08. Under Heavy Earth Moving Machinery (HEMM)
— open cast mines the utilization was only Rs.528.99 crore upto
February, 2008 as against the allocation of Rs.969.73 crore. Similarly,
for P and M (Underground mines) the amount spent so far during
2007-08 was  only  Rs.214.48 crore as against Rs.507.99 crore.  The
Committee would like to emphasize  the Ministry that  sincere efforts

11
should be made for optimal utilization of funds so that coal production
is substantially enhanced. At the same time,  the Ministry ought to
ensure that employment opportunities in the coal sector  are generated
in proportion to increase in coal production.
It had been brought to the notice of the Committee that Small
Scale Industry was facing problem in getting adequate quantity of coal
at reasonable prices. The Committee, therefore, desired that the
Ministry should take appropriate steps for uninterrupted supply of coal
to the Small Scale Industry.
1.15 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows:—
(i)  Under Heavy Earth Moving Machinery (HEMM) heads of
the 2007-08 capital budget of CIL, the utilization of fund till
March 2008 is Rs. 705.25 crore (Provl) against the BE
provisions of Rs. 877.08 crore i.e. approximate 80.41 %. The
utilization of fund would have been more, had all the
HEMM ordered in 2007-08 been supplied in time.  In case
of ECL, order for HEMM for Rs. 25.45 crore has already been
placed, but due to delay in supply, expenditure could not
be made in 2007-08. In case of CCL, due to delay in supply
of Atlas Cop co Drills, expenditure could not be made in
2007-08. Procurement action is on for over Rs. 200 crore of
HEMM.
(ii) Under P&M Head of 2007-08 Capital Budget of CIL, the
utilization of fund till March 2008 is Rs. 268.44 crore against
Rs. 603.59 crore i.e. approximate 44.47%. The low utilization
of Capital fund took place due to following reasons:
(a) Due to non-finalization of Global Tender for Longwall
equipment.
(b) Delay in finalization of tenders affecting procurement
of other P&M.
(c) Delay in supply of P&M items by suppliers.

12
For improvement in Utilization of Capital Budget in
2008-09, the following measures have been taken:
(a) Standard NITs are being prepared to avoid delay in
finalization of tenders for procurement of equipment.
(b) Survey off norms for equipments has been revised
which will help in reducing time for procurement of
the same.
Under the New Coal Distribution Policy (NCDP) notified on
18.10.2007, with a view to meet requirement of more Small &
Medium Sector consumers present cap of 500 tonnes per annum
has been enhanced to 4200 tonnes per annum.  In order to meet
the enhanced cap fixed for such consumers, the quantity
earmarked for distribution to these agencies has also been
increased to 8 million tonnes annually, to start with. This quantity
would be allocated for distribution to those units/consumers in
small and medium sector across the country whose requirement
is less than 4200 tonnes per annum and are otherwise not having
any access to purchase coal or conclude Fuel Supply Agreement
(FSA) for coal supply with coal companies. Copy of FSA has been
circulated to all State Government Representatives in the Chief
Secretaries Conference held on 1.2.2008 under the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Coal) for implementation of NCDP. The earmarked
quantity would be distributed through state government agencies,
central government agencies or trade associations as notified by
the State Governments.
The earmarked quantity would be distributed through
agencies notified by the State Governments.   These agencies could
be State Govt. Agencies / Central Govt. Agencies (National Co-
operative Consumer Federation [NCCF] / National Small
Industries Corporation [NSIC] etc.) or industries associations, as
the State Govt. may deem appropriate.  The agency so notified
will continue to distribute coal until the State Government chooses
to denotify it.

13
The price charged to such agencies would be same notified
price as applicable to other consumers entering into FSA.   The
agency would be entitled to charge actual freight and unto 5%
margin as service charge, over and above the   basic price charged
by the coal company, from their consumers. The concerned State
Governments and Central Government Department having
administrative control over the agencies would be responsible to
ensure that coal allotted for targeted consumer is distributed in
a fair and transparent manner and appropriate action taken to
prevent its misuse.
Coal India Limited has reported that till April 2008, 14 States
have nominated their agency(s) for distribution of coal to Small
and Medium consumers in their respective States.
1.16 The Committee had earlier recommended that the Ministry ofThe Committee had earlier recommended that the Ministry ofThe Committee had earlier recommended that the Ministry ofThe Committee had earlier recommended that the Ministry ofThe Committee had earlier recommended that the Ministry of
Coal should take appropriate steps for uninterrupted supply of coalCoal should take appropriate steps for uninterrupted supply of coalCoal should take appropriate steps for uninterrupted supply of coalCoal should take appropriate steps for uninterrupted supply of coalCoal should take appropriate steps for uninterrupted supply of coal
to the Small Scale Industries.  The Committee have been informedto the Small Scale Industries.  The Committee have been informedto the Small Scale Industries.  The Committee have been informedto the Small Scale Industries.  The Committee have been informedto the Small Scale Industries.  The Committee have been informed
that till April 2008, 14 States have nominated their agencies forthat till April 2008, 14 States have nominated their agencies forthat till April 2008, 14 States have nominated their agencies forthat till April 2008, 14 States have nominated their agencies forthat till April 2008, 14 States have nominated their agencies for
distribution of coal to small and medium consumers in theirdistribution of coal to small and medium consumers in theirdistribution of coal to small and medium consumers in theirdistribution of coal to small and medium consumers in theirdistribution of coal to small and medium consumers in their
respective States.  It is hoped that by now all the remaining Statesrespective States.  It is hoped that by now all the remaining Statesrespective States.  It is hoped that by now all the remaining Statesrespective States.  It is hoped that by now all the remaining Statesrespective States.  It is hoped that by now all the remaining States
would also have nominated their agencies in this regard.  In case,would also have nominated their agencies in this regard.  In case,would also have nominated their agencies in this regard.  In case,would also have nominated their agencies in this regard.  In case,would also have nominated their agencies in this regard.  In case,
any States had not done so, they should be impressed upon to notifyany States had not done so, they should be impressed upon to notifyany States had not done so, they should be impressed upon to notifyany States had not done so, they should be impressed upon to notifyany States had not done so, they should be impressed upon to notify
their agencies without any further delay.their agencies without any further delay.their agencies without any further delay.their agencies without any further delay.their agencies without any further delay.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No.  5.12)Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No.  5.12)Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No.  5.12)Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No.  5.12)Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No.  5.12)
1.17 The Committee had been informed that the Ministry had taken
various measures such as the setting up of Joint Action Committee
involving State Governments and coal companies, Task Force at State
and the District levels and a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Minister of State for Coal to mitigate the problem of illegal
mining of coal.  Despite these above measures, cases of illegal mining
of coal were still increasing day by day causing huge  loss to
the exchequer. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the
Ministry should strengthen/monitor the mechanism to prevent illegal
mining.

14
1.18 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the
Government is taking all necessary steps to check illegal mining.
Further a meeting was organized on 15.12.2007 by Chairman, CIL at
IICM Ranchi to deliberate on the issues of illegal mining of coal in
the State of Jharkhand and West Bengal.  Ten local MPs were invited
in this meeting. Four Hon’ble MPs namely, Shri B.P. Mehta,
Shri Furkan Ansari, Shri Hemlal Murmu and Shri Devdas Apte
attended the meeting.  Chairman, CIL alongwith CMD/CCL and high
officials of CIL, ECL, BCCL and CCL were present in that meeting.
Representative of the Govt. of Jharkhand was also invited in the
meeting.  ISM, Dhanbad presented draft recommendation of the study
being conducted by them on illegal mining issues in the State of
Jharkhand and West Bengal.
CMD, ECL also held a meeting with Shri Bansagopal Choudhury,
MP, Lok Sabha to discuss the issue of illegal mining of coal on
03.01.2008.
CMD, SECL has initiated steps to organize similar type of meeting
shortly. The matter will be pursued again with the State Governments
concerned.
1.19 The Committee have been apprised of the steps taken to
mitigate the problem of illegal mining of coal.  The Committee feel
that what is needed is strict monitoring and enforcement.  The
Committee would suggest that in addition to involving State
Governments for the purpose,  feasibility of deploying paramilitary
forces should also be explored.

15
CHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee hope that the Ministry of Coal will implement
the Recommendations in a time bound manner which the Committee
commented upon in their Action Taken Report. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the Action Taken in respect of the
Recommendations not accepted by the Committee. The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Coal should furnish final reply to the
Recommendation No. 4 which was categorized as of interim nature.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the Action Taken in this
regard.
Action TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction Taken
Recommendation (No. 4 of 23rdRecommendation (No. 4 of 23rdRecommendation (No. 4 of 23rdRecommendation (No. 4 of 23rdRecommendation (No. 4 of 23rd  Report) Report) Report) Report) Report)
In an Inter-Ministerial meeting held on 27.09.2007 under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure), decision has been taken to
treat the two CCDA Schemes as Plan Schemes
Recommendation (No. 7 of 23Recommendation (No. 7 of 23Recommendation (No. 7 of 23Recommendation (No. 7 of 23Recommendation (No. 7 of 23 rdrdrdrdrd Report) Report) Report) Report) Report)
Detailed status of the S&T projects is furnished in reply to the
recommendations under Para 3.23. Expenditure incurred against budget
and reviewing process is indicated below:—
This Ministry has been monitoring the implementation of research
and development projects regularly. The Actual expenditure
during 2006-07 was Rs. 8.09 crore against the RE provision of
Rs. 6.0 crore.  Further, during 2007-08, Rs. 12.48 crore has been
spent as against RE provisions of Rs. 12.86 crore.
15

16
Further, out of 47 Science & Technology projects sanctioned
during Xth  Plan, 29 projects have been completed till June, 2008.
Remaining 18 Projects are ongoing as per schedule.
Projects are reviewed both at Sub-Committee level and
Standing Scientific Research Committee level.  Project leaders and
Coordinators are asked to explain the causes of delay if any and
the Committee members suggest measures for timely completion
of the projects.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated 25.07.2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.17)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.17)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.17)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.17)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.17)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Coal had proposed
Rs. 7685.87 crore for 11th Five Year Plan but the Planning Commission
which initially recommended Rs. 5831.56 crore has finally approved
only Rs. 1315.95 crore. As a result, there was less allocation of funds
for the Central Scheme for the years 2007-08 and 2008-09. On the one
hand, the Ministry has been suffering from drastic cut in 11th Plan
outlay, on the other hand, they were unable to utilize even the revised
plan outlay of Rs. 250 crore in 2007-08 fully. Needless to say that
allocation of sufficient funds for the Ministry and utilization is of
paramount importance when the nation is striving for energy needs.
It is obvious that, the steep reduction in 11th Plan Outlay and under-
utilization of funds will hinder the growth and development of the
Coal Industry. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to
approach the Planning Commission for more allocation of funds for
the 11th Plan and also additional funds at RE 2008-09 so that the Central
Schemes could be implemented smoothly.
Action TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction Taken
Depending upon the requirement of funds Planning
Commission will be approached during Mid-Term Review of 11th Plan
for revised allocation of funds, for smooth implementation of

17
six plan schemes. In RE 2008-09 assessment of funds for six plan
schemes will be made and Ministry of Finance will be requested for
funds accordingly.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated 25.07.2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.38)Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.38)Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.38)Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.38)Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.38)
According to the Ministry, the detailed drilling in coal mines is
carried out to increase the coal reserves.  The Committee have been
given to understand that the provision made for this purpose during
2007-08 was drastically reduced to Rs. 43.84 crore from Rs. 104.50 crore
as there was delay in tendering process and the drilling target of
1.86 lakh meter was revised to 0.775 lakh meter.  What is more
concerning is the fact that the outlay for 2008-09 has been reduced to
Rs. 60 crore as against the proposed outlay of Rs. 138.72 crore, which
has forced the Ministry to revise the drilling target to 1.08 lakh metre
from 2.49 lakh metre.  The Committee are inclined to conclude that
the drilling targets are not being met due to continuous reduction of
funds and delay in tendering process. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to simplify and expedite the tendering
processes and ensure additional funds for achieving the drilling targets.
Action TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction Taken
The Detailed Exploration is carried out in potential areas
identified through Regional/Promotional Exploration to bring the
resources into Proved category to increase the confidence level of
resource positioning/quality for mine planning purpose.
To achieve the 1.075 lakh meter of drilling target in 2008-09 under
the scheme of Detailed Drilling in Non-CIL/Captive Mining Blocks,
departmental drilling is continuing in 2008-09.  The outsourcing of
detailed exploration during 11th Plan is taken up in two phases i.e.
phase–I and II.  Under phase–I, the tendering process for 5 Non-CIL
blocks (1.25 lakh meter) has been finalized and letters of intent has

18
been issued. The targets of 2008-09 are expected to be achieved.
Tendering for 2 CIL blocks in NEC (0.04 lakh meter) has been
completed and exploration commenced. Tenders for the remaining
3 CIL Blocks (2.36 lakh meters) are under evaluation. As per decision
taken in the Ministry of Coal, it has been agreed that CIL will provide
the balance fund to the extent of reduction in BE 2008-09.
Under phase-II, tendering for 4 CIL Blocks (0.28 lakh meters)
has been taken up. Of these,  tenders for 3 blocks are under
evaluation.  In addition to this, a Global Tender has been proposed
for 8 Non-CIL blocks (6.49 lakh meters) for which NIT is under
finalization.
Thus, the physical targets envisaged for 2008-09 and beyond are
expected to be achieved.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated 25.07.2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.17)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.17)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.17)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.17)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.17)
The Committee note the Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources
(IEBR) for Coal India Ltd. (CIL) has been reduced from Rs. 2474.14
crore at BE 2007-08 to Rs. 2066.97 crore at RE stage. However, a
provision of Rs. 3214.70 crore has been made for the year 2008-09. The
reasons advanced by the Ministry for reduction at RE 2007-08 stage
are stated to be delay in acquisition of land, obtaining forest land
clearances, delay in rehabilitation and finalization of tenders etc.
Similarly, the Neyveli Lignite (NLC) reduced IEBR allocation from
Rs. 2000.97 crore at 2007-08 BE stage to Rs. 1930.00 crore at 2007-08
RE stage. However, at 2008-09 BE stage this allocation has again been
increased to Rs. 2717.00 crore. It is thus evident that the funds provided
at BE stage are more which are not utilized subsequently. The
Committee have been time and again emphasizing the need for
preparation of realistic estimates as far as possible and avoid major
reduction of funds later on. The Committee are, however, constrained
to note that coal PSUs are still preparing inflated Budget Estimates and

19
reducing the same at RE stage. The Committee would like to urge upon
the PSUs to prepare realistic estimates in future and desire the Ministry
to facilitate the CIL and NLC in implementing of the schemes.
Action TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction Taken
Action Taken Report by CILAction Taken Report by CILAction Taken Report by CILAction Taken Report by CILAction Taken Report by CIL
Initially, all the physical activities scheduled for achieving the
targets for the planned year are assessed carefully. Thereafter, for
completing the activities in the same year. Capital requirement are
estimated. It may be mentioned that during estimation of capital
requirement, 100% of capital requirement for all activities to be taken
up during the year is considered to avoid difficulty in obtaining budget
concurrence. Considering the above facts, Capital Budget of CIL for
2007-08 (BE) was Rs. 2472.14 crore.
At RE stage it was assessed after one year of assessment of BE.
At this stage, all the physical activities of the previous year were
reviewed/assessed and RE was arrived at Rs. 2066.97 crore, considering
the activities or part thereof, which could be completed within the
financial year. It may be appreciated that all the activities envisaged
for the year do not materialize for the reasons which are beyond the
control of CIL/Subsidiaries which cause reduction of capital budget
at RE stage.
The reduction in RE stage took place due to:
• Delay in acquisition of land and availability of forest land
clearances
• Delay in rehabilitation and
• Delay in finalization of tenders/cancellation of tenders etc.
In 2008-09, a provision of Rs. 3214.70 crore has been made for
CIL for the year 2008-09 and for improvement in utilization of

20
budgeted estimate in 2008-09, the following measures have been
taken.
(i) Survey off norms for equipments have been revised
which will help in reducing time for procurement of the
same.
(ii) Re-appropriation of fund has been made simpler.
(iii) Standard NITs are being prepared to avoid, delay in
finalization of tenders for procurement of equipment and
major development activities.
Action Taken Report by NLCAction Taken Report by NLCAction Taken Report by NLCAction Taken Report by NLCAction Taken Report by NLC
1.1.1.1.1. Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08:Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08:Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08:Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08:Reduction of IEBR allocation in RE 2007-08:
In BE 2007-08, an amount of Rs.117.87 crores was provided
to Barsingsar Mine. While finalizing the estimates, OB
removal at Barsingsar Mines was planned to be done
departmentally. As this was subsequently changed to
outsourcing, the allocation was reduced to Rs. 65 crores.
Apart from this, no allocation was intended for new
projects of which even preliminary works had not
commenced. Therefore, the proposals were reduced from
Rs. 2006.97 crores in BE 2007-08 to Rs. 1930 crores in
RE 2007-08.
2.2.2.2.2. Utilization of funds provided:Utilization of funds provided:Utilization of funds provided:Utilization of funds provided:Utilization of funds provided:
RE 2007-08 estimates of NLC was Rs. 1930.00 Crores
against which the actual expenditure was Rs. 1766.71 Crores.
This is 91.54% of the estimation. The plan outlay is
totally funded by IEBR generation of NLC. There is no
budgetary support sought for / drawn from Government.
Hence, there is no lapse of funds due to reduction in
utilization.

21
3.3.3.3.3. Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09:Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09:Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09:Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09:Reasons for increase in BE 2008-09:
The main reason for increase in BE is the requirement for
projects under implementation and sanction of new projects.
Following projects which were sanctioned in 2004-05 are
expected to be commissioned in 2008-09. The details are
furnished below:
Projects B.E. 2008-09 (Rs. Crores)
Mine II Expansion 650.00
TPS II Expansion 750.00
Barsingsar Mines 78.00
Barsingsar Thermal 645.00
Total 2123.00
The projects are in advance stage of implementation and expected
to be commissioned by the end of this year. Of total Plan Outlay of
Rs. 2717 crores proposed in B.E. 2008-09, nearly 78% is required for
these projects alone.
Besides the above, the Tuticorin Project also cleared by PIB for
which Rs. 500 crores is provided. All the Statutory and Non Statutory
clearances have been obtained for this project. CCEA also have
approved the project in April 2008, Provision of Rs. 62.04 crores has
been made in the BE 2008-09 to meet the spill over payment and
payment towards land already acquired.
In view of the above, it may be informed that due caution and
care is put forth by NLC in formulating the budgetary proposals. The
projections are based on the progress of the projects and their
anticipated requirements. As such NLCs budget proposals are not
inflated. All the projects are funded by Internal and Extra Budgetary

22
Resources. NLC is not drawing any budgetary support from Govt. and
hence there would not be any provision being lapsed. There were some
delays in the progress of new projects which had attributed to a slight
reduction in utilization of funds and this had no impact in either
physical or financial performance.
To ensure full utilization of the fund provided for in the budget,
progress of the projects are closely monitored. A separate Project
Monitoring Wing constantly monitors the progress on day to day basis.
Project Officers have been posted to co-ordinate and monitoring has
been strengthened at all levels viz.
• Each package is being monitored by respective Officer on
day to day basis and by Unit Head on weekly basis.
• Periodical meetings are held with suppliers to monitor the
progress of the supplies, erection.
• Physical progress and financial progress in the projects are
regularly monitored. Issues are sorted out at appropriate
levels to ensure smooth implementation of the projects.
• Site visit / inspection are being made by the Project
monitoring Group on weekly basis.
• Corporate Level Monitoring is being done on monthly basis.
• Board level reviews are also made on the progress.
In view of the above monitoring system, funds provided will be
used to the maximum extent possible to achieve the targets.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated 25.07.2008]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para No. 5.8)Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para No. 5.8)Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para No. 5.8)Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para No. 5.8)Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para No. 5.8)
The Committee have been informed that mechanization and
modernization of mines are being carried out to increase coal

23
production. However, mechanization of mines has been severely
affected due to lesser utilization of funds by the subsidiaries of Coal
India Ltd. in 2007-08. Under Heavy Earth Moving Machinery (HEMM)-
opencast mines, the utilization is only Rs. 528.99 crore upto February
2008 as against the allocation of Rs. 969.73 crore. Similarly, for P &
M (Underground mines) the amount spent so far during 2007-08 is only
Rs. 214.48 crore as against Rs. 507.99 crore. The Committee would like
to emphasize the Ministry that sincere efforts should be made for
optimal utilization of funds so that coal production is substantially
enhanced. At the same time, the Ministry ought to ensure that
employment opportunities in the coal sector are generated in
proportion to increase in coal production,
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that Small
Scale Industry is facing problem in getting adequate quantity of coal
at reasonable prices. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry
should take appropriate steps for uninterrupted supply of coal to the
Small Scale Industry.
Action TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction Taken
(i)  Under Heavy Earth Moving Machinery (HEMM) heads of
the 2007-08 capital budget of CIL, the utilization of fund till
March 2008 is Rs. 705.25 crore (Provl.) against the BE
provisions of Rs. 877.08 crore i.e. approximate 80.41 %. The
utilization of fund would have been more, had all the
HEMM ordered in 2007-08 been supplied in time.  In case
of ECL, order for HEMM for Rs. 25.45 crore has already been
placed, but due to delay in supply, expenditure could not
be made in 2007-08. In case of CCL, due to delay in supply
of Atlas Cop. Co. Drills, expenditure could not be made in
2007-08. Procurement action is on for over Rs. 200 crore of
HEMM.
(ii) Under P&M Head of 2007-08 Capital Budget of CIL, the
utilization of fund till March 2008 is Rs. 268.44 crore against

24
Rs. 603.59 crore i.e. approximate  44.47%. The low utilization
of Capital fund took place due to following reasons:
(a) Due to non-finalization of Global Tender for Longwall
equipment.
(b) Delay in finalization of tenders affecting procurement
of other P&M.
(c) Delay in supply of P&M items by suppliers.
For improvement in Utilization of Capital Budget in 2008-09, the
following measures have been taken:
(a) Standard NITs are being prepared to avoid delay in
finalization of tenders for procurement of equipment.
(b) Survey off norms for equipments has been revised which
will help in reducing time for procurement of the same.
Under the New Coal Distribution Policy (NCDP) notified on
18.10.2007, with a view to meet requirement of more Small & Medium
Sector consumers present cap of 500 tonnes per annum has been
enhanced to 4200 tonnes per annum.  In order to meet the enhanced
cap fixed for such consumers, the quantity earmarked for distribution
to these agencies has also been increased to 8 million tonnes annually,
to start with. This quantity would be allocated for distribution to those
units/consumers in small and medium sector across the country whose
requirement is less than 4200 tonnes per annum and are otherwise not
having any access to purchase coal or conclude Fuel Supply Agreement
(FSA) for coal supply with coal companies. Copy of FSA has been
circulated to all State Government Representatives in the
Chief Secretaries Conference held on 1.2.2008 under the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Coal) for implementation of NCDP. The earmarked
quantity would be distributed through State Government Agencies,
Central Government Agencies or Trade Associations as notified by the
State Governments.

25
The earmarked quantity would be distributed through agencies
notified by the State Governments.   These agencies could be State
Govt. Agencies / Central Govt. Agencies (National Co-operative
Consumer Federation [NCCF] / National Small Industries Corporation
[NSIC] etc) or industries associations, as the State Govt. may deem
appropriate.  The agency so notified will continue to distribute coal
until the State Government chooses to denotify it.
The price charged to such agencies would be same notified price
as applicable to other consumers entering into FSA.   The agency would
be entitled to charge actual freight and unto 5% margin as service
charge, over and above the   basic price charged by the coal company,
from their consumers. The concerned State Governments and Central
Government Department having administrative control over the
agencies would be responsible to ensure that coal allotted for targeted
consumer is distributed in a fair and transparent manner and
appropriate action taken to prevent its misuse.
Coal India Limited has reported that till April 2008, 14 states have
nominated their agency (s) for distribution of coal to Small and
Medium consumers in their respective States.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated 25.07.2008]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 5.12)Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 5.12)Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 5.12)Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 5.12)Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 5.12)
The Committee have been informed that the Ministry have taken
various measures such as setting up of Joint Action Committee
involving State Governments and coal companies, Task Force at State
and District levels and a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Minister of State for Coal to mitigate the problem of illegal mining
of coal.  Despite these above measures, cases of illegal mining of coal
are still increasing day by day causing huge loss to the exchequer.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strength/
monitor the mechanism to prevent illegal mining.

26
Action TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction Taken
The Govt. is taking all necessary steps to check illegal mining.
Further a meeting was organized on 15.12.2007 by Chairman, CIL at
IICM Ranchi to deliberate on the issues of illegal mining of coal in
the State of Jharkhand and West Bengal.  Ten local MPs were invited
in this meeting.  Four Hon’ble MPs namely, Shri B.P. Mehta,
Shri Furkan Ansari, Sri Hemlal Murmu and Shri Devdas Apte attended
the meeting.  Chairman, CIL alongwith CMD/CCL and high officials
of CIL, ECL, BCCL and CCL were present in that meeting.
Representative of the Govt. of Jharkhand was also invited in the
meeting.  ISM, Dhanbad presented draft recommendation of the study
being conducted by them on illegal mining issues in the State of
Jharkhand and West Bengal.
CMD, ECL also held a meeting with Shri Bansagopal Choudhury,
MP, Lok Sabha to discuss the issue of illegal mining of coal on
03.01.2008.
CMD, SECL has initiated steps to organize similar type of meeting
shortly. The matter will be pursued again with the State Governments
concerned.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated 25.07.2008]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report)

27
 CHAPTER III CHAPTER III CHAPTER III CHAPTER III CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-
27

28
CHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 3.23)Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 3.23)Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 3.23)Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 3.23)Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 3.23)
The Committee have been given to understand that out of 36
Research and Development(R&D) projects spilled over from 10th Plan
to 11th Plan, 24 projects are still under various stages of
implementation.  The Committee regret to observe that when the R&D
projects have been inordinarily  delayed, further reduction of funds
at RE 2007-08  to Rs. 12.86 crore from BE of Rs. 22.54 crore due to
delay in tendering process etc.  and lesser allocation of funds of Rs.10
crore  in BE 2008-09 would further adversely affect the timely
implementation of the projects. The Committee are constrained to point
out that the Ministry have failed to give due importance  to R&D
projects because of complex procedures. As R&D projects play a vital
role for optimal utilization of resources, the Committee desire the
Ministry to pursue all the R&D projects vigorously and allot additional
funds therefor in  2008-09 at RE stage.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
1. Status of the 36 R&D Projects spilled over from X Plan to XI Plan
as on 14.05.2008 is as under:-
(a) No. of Projects Completed - 13
(b) No. of Projects Terminated - 01
(c) No. of spilled over projects which are On-going - 22
28

29
2. In order to enhance quantum of R&D work it is necessary to
address the complexity of operations of the coal industry and also
for wider involvement of research agencies in the S&T
programme. Expression of Interest (EOIs) for few research topics
has been invited through an open advertisement in National
Dailies by Coal Companies. In response to it, a number of EOIs
have been received and already scrutinized by the Technical
Committee.  Suitable projects will be placed before Sub
Committee of the Standing Scientific Research Committee  and
thereafter Standing Scientific Research Committee for its
consideration.  Initially following 9 areas have been targeted:—
(i) Development of mobile goaf edge supports for depillaring
operations in underground mines.
(ii) Hard roof management by use of slow acting expansion
cement/chemicals for inducing caving.
(iii) Introduction of water jet cutting technology in coal mines
for seams on fire.
(iv) Wind power generation using mine fan exhaust air.
(v) Mapping of underground old unapproachable abandoned
workings.
(vi) Developing a methodology for baseline measurement
of Green House Gases (GHG) emissions in mine fire
areas.
(vii) Development of software for prediction of air quality in coal
mining areas in India.
(viii) In-situ gasification of Indian coal.
(ix) Development of communication system to locate trapped
miners in case of unforeseen incidents in underground
mines.

30
3. Steps taken to facilitate timely completion of the projects:
(i) Progress of S&T projects is monitored by CMPDI and
reviewed by SSRC Technical Sub-committee and SSRC.
Progress of the projects is also monitored by periodic visits
to the implementing institutes by the officials of S&T
Department of CMPDI to monitor/co-ordinate the imple-
mentation of projects.
(ii) Progress reports (both physical and financial) as received
from implementing agencies on a quarterly basis are
reviewed by CMPDIL. The causes of delay, if any, are
discussed in detail and remedial measures are suggested. In
addition, Standing Scientific Research Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal) also reviews the status of
on going R&D Projects periodically for timely implementa-
tion of the same.
Additional funds for R&D scheme will be proposed at RE 2008-09
as per requirement raised by implementing agencies.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated 25.07.2008]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

31
31
CHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No. 3.28)Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No. 3.28)Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No. 3.28)Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No. 3.28)Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No. 3.28)
The Committee are concerned to note that out of Rs.28.22 crore
allocated for Environmental and Subsidence Control (EMSC) at the
RE 2007-08, only Rs. 17.99 crore has been  actually utilized  so far due
to  non-finalization of Rehabilitation & Resettlement (R&R) Policy.  For
BE 2008-09 as against Rs. 25.69 crore proposed by the Ministry, the
Planning Commission provided only Rs.10 crore.  The Committee are
dismayed to note that the implementation of EMSC Scheme has
been adversely affected due to delay in finalization of R&R Policy and
lesser utilization of earmarked funds.  The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to finalize the R&R Policy at an early date
and also allocate more funds for time-bound implementation of EMSC
Scheme.
Action TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction Taken
The prime responsibility to finalize the R&R policy lies with the
concerned State Governments. This Ministry has pursued the matter
vigorously with the State Governments of West Bengal and Jharkhand
to finalize the R&R policy.  The Govt. of West Bengal has conveyed
their acceptance to the proposed R&R package contained in the Master
Plan dealing with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation with some
modifications.  The Master Plan pertaining to ECL areas at an
investment of Rs. 2661.73 crore (April, 2008 base) has been approved
by EFC in its Meeting held on 1.7.2008. Acceptance of Govt. of
Jharkhand to the proposed R&R package for affected people of Jharia
31

32
Coalfield in BCCL area has been received and the proposal is being
processed for EFC approval. Both the proposals together will be placed
for CCEA approval.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated  25.07.2008]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para no. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 5.15)Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 5.15)Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 5.15)Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 5.15)Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 5.15)
The Committee note that the consultant, Administrative Staff
College of India which was appointed at the instance of the Planning
Commission, to examine the need of an independent regulator for coal
sector has submitted its Report to the Government. The  Committee
also note that the various coal PSUs  from which comments were sought
on the said Report by the Ministry of Coal have submitted their
comments. However, the matter is still pending as comments from the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Power are awaited. The
Committee would like the Ministry to expedite the process for setting
up of an independent regulator for coal sector so that the coal sector
should not suffer.
Action TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction TakenAction Taken
Representations were received in the Ministry from various
sources regarding appointment of Coal Regulator. The Energy
Coordination Committee (ECC) headed by Prime Minister decided that
the Planning Commission will prepare a Paper on this issue.  The
Planning Commission, in turn, requested this Ministry to appoint a
Consultant in this connection.
The Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) was appointed
as a Consultant. ASCI has since submitted its report along, with a draft
Bill  which is under consideration of the Govt. Inter-Ministerial
consultations are in progress. The comments of Ministry of Power and

33
the Planning Commission have since been received. Ministry of Labour
has requested for some more time for sending their comments. In order
to discuss this matter further, a meeting was held on 09.05.2008 with
the representatives of Ministries of Power, Labour, Planning Commis-
sion and ASCI.  ASCI would be sending a revised draft Bill in
pursuance of the discussions held during the meeting.  The matter is
being pursued diligently.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/6/2008-IF, dated 25.07.2008]
 N EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December , 2008 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

34
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2008-09) HELD ON 05.12.2008 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1530 hours to 1720 hours.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
12. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
13. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
14. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
15. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
16. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla
18. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
11. Shri Jesudas Seelam
12. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
34

35
** ** ** ** **
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up first agenda regarding
consideration and adoption of the following draft Action Taken
Reports:—
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Thirty-first Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(2007-08) on “Demands for Grants (2008-09)” of the Ministry
of Coal;
(ii) ** ** ** ** **
(iii) ** ** ** ** **
3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports. The
Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports and
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
4. ** ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
**Does not pertain to this Report.

36
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTY-FIRST REPOT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total number of Recommendations made 9
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government
(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8) 6
Percentage of total 66.66
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies Nil
Percentage of total Nil
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
(Vide recommendations at Sl. No. 3) 1
Percentage of total 11.11
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited
(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4 and 9) 2
Percentage of total 22.22
36

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.