 
22 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2006-2007) 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL  
 
 
  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the  
Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel   
(Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                           
        
      TWENTY - SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928(Saka) 


  
 
 
 
 
TWENTY - SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2006-2007) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL  
 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2006 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2006 
 
                                                              
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 
   

  
CC&S. No.22   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. 47.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  National Printers, New Delhi.   
   

  
CONTENTS 
  
                     
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………………. 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………... …………………………………………. (v) 
   
CHAPTER I Report   ……………………………………………………… 1 
   
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………………. 
 
13 
  
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
replies……………………………………………………………. 
 
 
 
26 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………………………………………………. 
 
 
 
30 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………………….  
 
34 
  
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
  
Minutes of  fifth sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal 
and Steel (2006-07) held on 14 th Dec ember 
2006…………………………….. ……………………… 
 
 
 
38   
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Sevent eenth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok  
Sabha)…………………………………………….………... 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
   

  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON COAL AND STEEL(2006-07) 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
 3. Shri D.K.Audikesavulu  
 4. Shri Hiten Barman 
 5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury  
 6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey   
 7. Shri Chandrakant B.Khaire  
 8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
 9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
10. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon  
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
12. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
13. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
14. Shri Tarachand Sahu  
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
16. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
17. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
19. Shri Sugrib Singh 
20. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
21. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav 
  
Rajya Sabha 
22. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
24. Shri Surendra Lath  
25. Shri Ajay Maroo   
26. Shri B.J. Panda 
27. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
28. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh  
 
   

  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K.Sharma  - Addl. Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Bhandari  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  -     Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  -  Under Secretary 
5. Shri T.Mathivanan  -   Sr. Committee Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
   

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on Coal and St eel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty-Second Report (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha) on Action Taken b y the 
Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Sevent eenth Report of  
the Standing Committee on Coal and St eel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  on 
“Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Steel”.  
 
2.  The Seventeenth Report (Fourt eenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Stee l was present ed to Lok  Sabha on 23rd May, 2006.   
Replies of the Government to all the recom mendations contained in the Report 
were received on 6th October, 2006.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this  
Report at their sitting held on 14th December, 2006.   
 
4. An analys is on the Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seve nteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.  
 
5. For facilit y of reference and  conven ience, the observations an d 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body  
of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                   ANANTH KUMAR 
18 December, 2006                                                                                Chairman 
27 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
 
 
 
 
 
   

  
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in t he Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth Lok  
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2005-06) on “Demands for 
Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of St eel” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
23.5.2006.    
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect  
of all the recommendations  c ontained in the Report. These have been 
categorised as follows:  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
   
Sl. Nos.1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13 and 14. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
 
Sl. Nos. 9 and 17. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respe ct of which replies  of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl. Nos. 3, 8 and 16. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies  of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
 Sl. Nos. 4,10 and15. 
 
1.3   The Committee desire that final r eplies in respect of the recommendations  
which hav e been categorised as interim replies by the Committee should be 
furnished to the Committee at the earliest. 
   
1.4 The Committee desire that utmost  importance should be giv en to the 
implementation of recommendations accepted by the Government.  In case, it is 
not possible for the Government to impl ement any recommendation(s) in letter 
and spirit for any reasons, the matter should be reported to the Committee in 
time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations made in the Seventeenth Report. 
 
   

  
BUDGETARY SUPPORT TO STEEL PSUs 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 3.10) 
 
1.6 The Committee had noted that the Ministry proposed the annual plan 
outlay of Rs.3728.49 crore including Budget ary Support of Rs.82.50 crore for the 
year 2006-07.  The Planning Commission had, however, approved an outlay of  
Rs.3172.30 crore with Budg etary Support of Rs.45 cr ore.  As a sequel to 
reduction in approved outlay the Inte rnal and Extra Budgetary Resources  
(I&EBR) allocation in  respect of Kudr emukh Iron Ore Compan y Ltd. (KIOCL) 
came down from Rs .335 crore to Rs.200  crore and  in the case of Nationa l 
Minerals Development Corporation (NMD C) from Rs.387.49 crore to Rs.150.00 
crore.  The I&EBR alloca tion for Manganese Ore Indi a Ltd. (MOIL) has been 
reduced from Rs.71.29 crore to Rs.48.50 crore whereas  in the case of Bir d 
Group of Companies (BGC), it stood reduced from Rs.43.25 crore to Rs.25 crore.  
The prov ision of Budget ary Support had b een made for Hindus tan Steelworks 
Construction Ltd. (HSCL), ME CON Ltd. and Bharat Refr actories Ltd. (BRL) as 
these companies were unable to generat e I&EBR.  In the approved outlay,  
however, Budgetary Support of  MECON Lt d. had been r educed from Rs. 67.50 
crore to Rs. 30 crore. 
 
1.7 The Committee observed that the projection of estimates for BE 2006-07 
were unrealistic and unattainable as th e Ministry had failed t o convince the 
Planning Commission to allocate the funds as projected by KIOCL, NMDC, MOIL 
and MECON Ltd.  The Committee in their 10th report had recom mended that the 
Ministry should make realistic estimate s and alloc ate funds at BE stage itself 
instead of r esorting to provision of f unds at RE stage.  The Committee had little 
doubt that reduction in allocation was  going to advers ely affect the performance 
of the PSUs. 
 
1.8 The Committee, therefore, recommended the Mini stry to approach the 
Planning Commission with am ple justific ation to provide sufficient funds at  
revised estimates stage as per the needs  of PSUs.  The Committee once again 
emphasized that the realistic projections  and allocat ion of sufficient funds for 
PSUs were essential for sustained progre ss of steel industry and therefore, 
reiterated their earlier  recommendations  for immediate corrective measures in 
this direction. 
 
1.9 The Ministry of Steel in its reply has stated that the plan outlay for 2006-07 
proposed by NMDC, KIOCL, MOIL & Bird  Group had been reduced  by Planning 
Commission, in consultation with  the Ministry, since it wa s felt that the proposed 
outlays of these 4 Companies were on the higher side and not realistic taking into 
account the trend of past expenditure and t he current status of the propos als. 
The 3 PSUs and Bird Group (a Govern ment managed company) were consulted 
and they had agreed to the suggested reduction in their respective outlays. Since 
the plan outlay alloc ations for 2006-07 we re reduced with the consent of  these 
Companies, the reduced outlay s are not ex pected to adversely affect their 
   

  
performance. Howev er, if there are just ifications for increasing the outlay for 
2006-07 in respect of these Companies, the Ministry would approach Planning 
Commission at the R E stage for increased allocations as per the needs of the 
Companies. 
 
1.10 In respect of MECON, Ministry  of Steel had proposed an amount of 
Rs.101.00 crore (based on the revised rest ructuring proposal for MECON; initial 
proposal was for Rs.67.50 crore) as Plan budgetary support for equity investment 
in MECON in 2006-07. However, Pl anning Commission approved only Rs.30.00 
crore and the releas e of this amount in  2006-07 is subject to the approval of 
MECON’s restructuring propos al by the competent aut hority. As and when the 
restructuring proposal for ME CON, which is presently under consideration of the 
Government is approved, the necessary  funds required to implement the 
restructuring of MECON would be made available. 
 
1.11 The Com mittee ha d noted that the Planning Commission reduced 
Plan outlay for BE 2006-07 in respect of Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd. 
(KIOCL), National Mineral D evelopment Corporation (NMDC), Manganese 
Ore (India) Ltd. (MOIL) and MECON Lt d. and ther efore, recommende d the 
Ministry to provide sufficient funds at revised estimates sta ge as per the 
needs of PSUs. Th e Ministry in its repl y has state d that as the Plan o utlay 
of the above PSUs w ere on higher side  and unrealistic, the  outlay s w ere 
reduced with the consent of these companies considering the past trend of 
expenditure and the current status of the proposals. The Ministry  has 
further stated that necessary funds would be provided to them at RE stage 
if there is justification and for ME CON funds would be made available once 
its restructuring proposal is approved , which is under consideration of the  
Government. 
 
 The fact that three PSUs viz. NM DC, KIOCL, MOIL and Bird Group of 
Companies, a Government managed co mpany, had agreed t o reduce t heir 
respective outlays on the suggestions of the Ministr y ampl y show s that 
outlays b y these companies are being prepared inflated and unrealistic 
year after year. The Ministry  also failed to keep a check on th e tendency of 
these PSUs to  prepare inflated estimates w ithout having an y 
schemes/programmes to implement and  justifying the allocation of outlay s 
as project ed b y t hem. The Committee are con cerned that steel PSUs 
instead of taking fullest advantage of  boom period in steel sector have 
failed to come out  w ith viable sch emes w hich ultimatel y led to the 
reduction in their outlays. 
  
 The Com mittee, therefore, desire  the Ministry  / PSUs to prepare 
realistic estimates and provide adequate funds as per their need, in such a 
way that it would consolidate their position in the coming years. 
 
   

  
 The Committee are distressed to not e that restructuring proposal of 
MECON has been under the consideration of the Government for more than 
two y ears. The Committee in their 10 th Report (Para No.3.38) had also 
recommended that the capital restruct uring proposal of MECON should be 
cleared w ithout any  loss of time. The Committe e strongl y deprecate the 
limping a pproach of the Ministr y w hich has deprived MECON to grow  as  
self-propelling industr y by truncat ing its phy sical and financial  
performance.  
 
The Com mittee, therefore, recomme nd the Min istry to approve the 
restructuring proposal of MECON at  o nce as w ell as pro vide additional  
funds / p ackages for escalat ions due to time-lag in ap proval of the 
proposal. 
 
UTILISATION OF FUNDS BY RINL 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para No. 3.26) 
 
1.12 The Committee noted that Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) had been 
allocated Rs.1452 crore in BE 2006-07, an increase of 162% as compared to 
Rs.895.75 crore in BE 2005-06 with the provisions of Rs.901 crore to implem ent 
the expansion scheme and Rs.60 crore fo r acquis ition of iron ore mine and 
coking coal mine.   T he Committee further note that the utiliz ation of funds for 
Coke Oven Battery No.4 (Phase-II), Pulv erized Coal Injection and acquis ition of 
iron ore and coking c oal mine was subject to approval and availability of mi nes 
which were extremely vital for RINL.  
 
1.13 The Committee, therefore, desired that there should not be any procedural 
delay in c learing of t he abov e schemes .   The Committee also desired the 
Ministry to take effective steps to ens ure early acquisition of iron ore and coking 
coal mines. 
 
1.14 The Ministry has replied that the Co ke Oven Battery No .4 and Pulveriz ed 
Coal Injection Sc hemes earlier requir ed Government approval.    With RINL 
having been declared a Mini- Ratna, it is  now in a position to exercise its 
enhanced financial powers for completing the abov e schemes in order to cut the 
procedural delays and this is expected to  speed up progress.  In the case of 
expansion scheme of RINL the first phase costing Rs. 6421 crore, whic h is  
expected to be completed by 27.10.2008, is being constantly monitored by a 
High Powered Committee consis ting of Directors of the Board to ensure timely 
implementation.    
 
1.15 RINL has applied for ir on ore mining leases in the States of  Orissa, 
Chhattisgarh and Andhra Prades h.  In case  Mines are allotted, these have to be 
developed.   RINL has been allotted Mahal Coking Coal Mining Block in Jharia 
Coal Fields, Jharkhand State.   RINL has also submitted application for allotment 
of non-coking coal mines in the State of Andhra Pradesh. 
   

  
 
1.16 RINL is also making efforts to enter  into j oint ventur es with coal mines 
abroad.  In this regard, the Company has received proposal from some coal 
companies in Australia and United States of Amer ica for joint ven ture 
participation and further activity will be taken after scrutiny and due diligence. 
 
1.17 The Committee had noted tha t utilisation of funds by Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Limited (RIN L) in 2006-07 w as subject to approval of Schemes like 
Coke Oven Battery No.4 (Phase-II), Pulverised Coal Injection and 
availability of mines. The Com mittee, therefore, desired that there should 
not be any  procedural delay  in cl earing of the above schemes and earl y 
acquisition of iron ore and coking coal mines.  The Ministry in its reply has 
stated that RINL having been declared a Mini-Ratna, is now in a position to 
speed up  progress/complete the ab ove schem es and  its exp ansion 
programme is being monitored b y a High Powered Committee at the level 
of Directors of the Board.  T he Minist ry has further stated that RINL has 
applied for iron ore mining leases in Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and  
Chhattisgarh and for non-coking coal mi nes in Andhra Pradesh and is also 
making efforts to enter into joint venture with coal companies abroad. 
 
 The Com mittee appreciate that RI NL b y its relentless efforts has 
become a Mini-Ratna company  and hope that with this status, RINL w ould 
be able to implement its expansion programme well in time. The Committee 
consider the expansion programme of RINL extremely vital as any slippage 
therein would irreparably blunting its competitive edge.   
 
The Committee,  therefore, desi re though the pro gress of expansio n 
programme is being monitored at RINL level, the Ministr y also monitor the 
progress periodically at their level an d take co rrective steps w herever 
necessary. 
 
 
The Committee are, how ever, pained t o note th at despite the best  
efforts being made by RINL and the Ministry, the acquisition of iron ore and 
coking coal mines has still r emained a dream for it .  The Committe e are 
apprehensive that huge investment in  expansion without assured linkages 
of ra w ma terial on long-term basis, RINL  w ould not be able to realise its 
goals.  The Committee strongly  b elieve that  the role of the Ministr y as a 
facilitator becomes all the more im portant keeping in vie w the massive 
expansion programme of RINL.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to  act with sense 
of urgency and prepare a comprehensi ve plan for uninterrupted suppl y of 
raw material to RINL.  
 
   

  
ACQUISITION OF MINES BY KIOCL 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No.3.34) 
 
1.18 The Com mittee had noted that K udremukh Iron Ore Company Limited 
(KIOCL) had been allocated Rs.200 crore in BE 2006-07 for implementation of 
various new schemes /ongoing schemes as against Rs.225 crore in BE 2005-06 
reduced to Rs.129.66 crore in R E-2005-06. The Committee felt that unlike the 
previous y ear, KIOC L should u tilize the allocated a mount of Rs.200 crore to 
retain its financial strength in the aftermath of Hon’ble Supreme Court direction to 
stop mining at Kudremukh. The Co mmittee, therefor e, desired that 
schemes/projects relating to acquisition and development of new mines s hould 
be giv en highest priority and incessant  efforts should  be made for the 
sustainability of the Company.  
 
1.19 In its Action Taken Reply, the Mini stry has stated that against an outlay o f 
Rs.200 crore for 2006-07 an amount of Rs.155 crore had been earmarked 
towards ‘Development of Per manent Rail way Siding, Construction of  bulk  
material h andling fa cilities for receip t o f iron ore by rail’ and ‘other  Mine 
Development’. As certain claimants w hose land was  getting affected went to 
Court therefore, allotment of land fo r dev elopment o f permanent railway  sidin g 
and bulk material handling facilities, c ould not be done.  T herefore expenditure 
under ‘Dev elopment of Perma nent Railway Siding’ and ‘Const ruction of bulk  
material handling facilities’ may not be made as earmarked in 2006-07.  
 
1.20 KIOCL has applied for mining leas e in Ramandurg, Chikkanayakanahalli 
iron ore deposits in Karnat aka and Khandadhar in  Sundergarh District of Orissa.  
KIOCL has also signed an M emorandum of Understanding (MoU) with  Steel  
Authority of India Limited (SAIL) to form a joint venture company to mine iron ore 
at Kalta, Taldih and Barsua mines in Oris sa. KIOCL is giv ing the highest priority 
for acquisition and development of new mines which will enable the company to 
survive in future.  In case of Ramandurg,  the allotment is not being made due to 
a High Court stay in Karnatak a.  Also allocation of mi ning leases are a long term 
process. Therefore, the expenditure  on development of some mines as 
earmarked may not be made in 2006-07. 
 
KIOCL is making a ll out effort to utilize the maxim um funds from the 
allocated amount to remain sustainable.  
 
1.21 The Com mittee had earlier recommen ded that Kudremukh Iron Ore 
Company Limited (KIOCL) should give topmost priority  in utiliz ing the 
allocated amount o f Rs.200 cror e in 2006-07 f or accom plishing the 
schemes/projects relating to acquisiti on and development of ne w mines  
and relentless efforts be made for the sustainability of the Compan y.  Th e 
Ministry of Steel in its reply has stated that Rs.155 crore out of Rs.200 crore 
earmarked under ‘ Development of Permanent Railw ay Siding’ and 
   

  
‘Construction of bulk material handling facilities’ may not be utilized due to 
litigation in this scheme. The Ministry  h as further stated that KIOCL has 
applied for mining lease in Karnataka and Orissa, entered into joint venture 
with Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) to mine iron ore at Kalta, Taldih 
and Barsu a mines in Orissa and it is making all out efforts to utilize the 
allocated amount to remain sustainable. 
 
The Com mittee note w ith concern th at aftermath of Supreme Court  
direction to stop mining at Kudremukh, the future programmes  and 
acquisition of new  iron ore mines of KIOCL are either hindered b y 
litigations or pending w ith the State Governments for w ant of clearances.   
This has been tellin g heavily on the fin ancial health of the Company . The 
Committee are of th e view that KIOCL has already suffered due to del ay in 
granting of mining leases to KIOCL b y the State Government and failure of 
the Ministry to resolve the deadlock on this issue. The Committee in t heir 
10th Rep ort had recommended that the Ministry  to t ake step s in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law  to explore the possibilities of setting  
up of special courts for speed y di sposal of steel PSUs ca ses pendi ng in 
various courts. The reply of the Ministry thereto is yet to be received.  
 
The Committee, therefore, desire th e Ministry of Steel to take up the 
matter with the Government of Karnataka at the highest level to endeavour  
for early hearing and decision in th e court cases filed against KIOCL. Th e 
Committee also desire that possibilit y may  be explored for out of court 
settlement in such cases. 
 
The Committee also note that KIOC L has been left with very limited 
sources of iron ore and even the Memorandum of Understanding signed b y 
it w ith SAIL to form  a joint venture  co mpany to  mine iron ore at Kalta, 
Taldih and Barsua Mines in Orissa,  may  n ot sail it through the present  
crisis. The Committee, therefore, d esire KIOCL to explore other avenues 
and acqui re and develop new  mines as w ell as chalk-out road map for   
diversification of its activities.  
 
 The Committee also desire that the Ministry should take into account 
all these points w hile making budget estimates a nd not block the scarce 
national resources due to the schemes w hich are not likel y to materialize 
during the year. 
 
PERFORMANCE OF SAIL 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Para No. 5.11) 
 
1.22 The Committee had noted that the y ear 2004-05 was an exceptional y ear 
for the steel industry with demand outstri pping the supply, which resulted in 
higher realization for s teel products.  However, in the y ear 2005-06, the dem and 
   

  
for steel products was sluggish resulting in lower realization.  The Committee 
further noted that though the steel product ion of Steel Authorit y of India Limited 
(SAIL) units was increasing s ince 2004- 05, the net profit had declined from 
Rs.6817 crore in 2004-05 to Rs .3528 crore in 2005-06.  Th e net profit was lik ely 
to decline further in 2006-07 to Rs.3106 cr ore.  SAIL ha d planned to increase 
profit by taking v arious steps like focus on marketing strategi es, improvement in 
product mix, use of alternate fuels in bl ast furnaces, acquisition of overseas 
coking coal mines and manpo wer rationalisation etc.  The Com mittee were not  
satisfied with the reply of  the Ministry that the pr oposed multiple interventions  
and its Corporate Plan 2012 would ensure  competitiveness of SAIL to withstand 
the cyclic nature of steel industry.  
 
1.23 The Committee in their 10th report  on the Demands for Grants (2005-06)  
had cautioned that increasing cost of inputs coupled wit h cyclic nature of steel 
industry would put tremendous  pressure  on SAIL to improve its physical 
performance and recommended to revamp t he corporate plan to suit the long-
term requirements. The Committee were di stressed to note that  the meas ures 
taken by SAIL have not yielded t he required benefits in arresting the dec line in 
profit in 2005-06 and 2006-07.   
 
1.24 The Committee, therefore, re-emphasized that  the corporate plan be 
revamped and also effective short term and long-term measures be taken to 
enable SAIL to maintain its pre-eminent position.  
 
1.25 The Committee further noted that one of the reasons advanc ed by the 
Ministry of Steel about dec line in sales and consequent dipping of profits of 
domestic s teel companies was  further reduction in customs duty on finished 
products of steel from 10% to 5%. The Committee in their 10th Report had 
expressed their view that duty struct ure introduced in Budget 2005-06 was 
anomalous and it should be rolled back from  10% to 15% on finished refractory. 
The Ministry in pursuance to the Committee’s recommendation had sen t 
proposal to the Minist ry of Finance. T he Committee were unhappy to not e that 
the Ministry of Steel had not only failed to convince t he Ministry of Financ e but 
also could not take up t he matter effecti vely to prevent further reduction in 
customs duty.  
 
1.26 The Committee were apprehens ive that the extant customs duty structure 
would further jeopardize the domestic steel industry with the possibility of spurt in 
import of steel.  The Committee, ther efore, recommended the Minis try to 
vigorously pursue the matter at the highes t level to saf eguard the domestic steel 
companies from the dumping of cheaper steel.   
 
1.27 In its Action Taken Reply, the M inistry has stated that the Corporate Plan 
2012 aims at making SAIL a fundamenta lly strong company and ret aining 
leadership position in the I ndian steel industry.  This  is to be attained by  
increasing the hot metal pr oduction to 22.5 MT from cu rrent level of 14.5 MT.  
   

  
Besides, a number of schemes  have been identified to reduc e cost of production 
by reduction in energy consumption, increase BF productivity, improve the quality 
of steel and also enrich the product-mix. 
 
1.28 Schemes estimated around Rs. 37000 cror e would be taken up to attain 
the targets set under Corpor ate Plan 2012.  SAIL has al ready initiated measures 
in this regard and around Rs.6000 crore worth projects are under various st ages 
of implementation.  In addi tion, approval is  likely to be accorded for schemes 
costing around Rs 20,000 crore during 2006-07. 
 
1.29 The benefit of the schemes would start flowing in only with the completion 
of identified schemes.  However, in the intervening p eriod fluctuations in costs 
such as price of steel, cost of key input material suc h as coking coal etc. wil l 
have an impact on the profit s of the company.  Profits of S AIL which was  
Rs.6817 cr ore in 2004-05 ca me down to Rs.4013 cr ore in 2005-06 mainly on 
account of fall of steel prices and higher cost of coking coal.  
 
1.30 SAIL’s plan to augment high value products and increase in the proportion 
of finished steel, will help in  improving Sales  realizati on.  However, this can  
happen only after the schemes related to  new mills, new SMS, continuous 
casting facilities and secondary refining are commissioned. 
 
1.31 SAIL has also initiated measures to improve availability of domestic coking 
coal in c ollaboration with C oal India Limited (CIL) and substituting the imported 
hard coal with auxiliar y fuel injections.  While a number of blas t furnaces have 
been provided with auxiliary fuel injection system, the rest of the blast furnaces  
will be provided with this facility after augmenting the oxygen availability. 
 
1.32 With the implementation of major projects under Corporate Plan 2012, the 
company will be in a stronger  position to withstan d fl uctuations emanating in 
output/input market. In the intervening years, the pr ofits of the company can only 
be protected by fully exploiti ng the potential of av ailable assets.  SAIL is already 
improving its physical efficiency paramet ers on year-to-year basis.  The break  
through in parameters however will be consequent to capital project 
programmes. 
 
1.33 However, as suggested by the Committee, the plan for growth, quality and 
of cost competitivene ss will b e further ex plored in S AIL to grow in line with  
National Steel Policy and c hanging business scenario.  The Plan would als o be 
revised at an appropriate time consider ing the progress of the existing plan,  
changes in the market dynamics and trend in the macro environment. 
 
1.34 As regards duty structure, in the general budget 2006-07 the customs duty 
on refractories as well as on t he foll owing raw mat erial for m anufacture of 
refractories has also been reduc ed to 7.5%. Ministry of Steel had r ecommended 
   

  
that duty on the entire range of materials used in the refractory industry should 
be brought down to a uniform level of 5%. 
 
SNo. Item Tariff No. 
1. Natural Graphite powder 2504.10 
2. Aluminous Cement  2523.30 
3. Silicon Metal (99% purity) 2804.61 
4. Micro/Fumed Silica 2811.22 
5. Calcined Alumina 2818.20 
6. Brown fused Alumina 2818.20 
7. Sintered/Tabular Alumina 2818.20 
8. Fused Zirconia 2825.20 
9. Sodium Hexameta phosphate 2835.29 
10. Silicon Carbide 2849.20 
11. Boron carbide 2849.20 
12. Reactive Alumina 3802.90 
13. Phenolic Resin 3909.40 
14. Fused Silica 2811.12 
 
1.35 In keeping with its co mmitments at the WT O the Government reduced the 
peak rates  for all non-agricultural produc ts from 20% to 15% in the General 
Budget 2005-06 and revised it further downwards to 12.5% in the General Budget 
2006-07. Duty on all metals including alloy steel was reduced from 15% to 10% in 
General Budget 2005- 06 and further reduced on a lloy steel t o 7.5% in the 
General Budget 2006-07. The import dut y on iron ore, chrome ore and 
manganese ore has also been reduced from 5% to 2%.  
 
 
 
   

  
1.36 Keeping i n vie w the continuous er osion in the profit of Steel  
Authority of India Limited (SAIL) for the past three y ears, the Committee 
while examining the Demand s for Gran ts  (2006-07) had recommended the 
Ministry of Steel to revamp SAIL’s co rporate plan and t ake effective short-
term and long-term measures to maintain its pre-eminent position.   
 
The Ministr y in its repl y has stated  that profits of SAIL w hich w as 
Rs.6817 crore in 2004-05 came dow n to Rs.4013 crore in 2005-06 mainly on  
account of fall of s teel price s and higher cost of coking coal. With the 
implementation of a number of schem es to reduce the cost of production 
and major projects under cor porate plan  2012, SAIL w ill be in a stronger  
position to w ithstand fluctuations em anating in market. The Ministry  has 
further stated that the corporate plan, as suggested b y the Committee, 
would also be revised at an appropr iate time considering the progress of  
existing plan, changes in market dynamics and trend in the macro 
environment.  
 
While the Committee agree that fluctu ation in costs such as price of 
steel, cost of key in put materials such  as coking coal etc. w ould have an  
impact on the profit, they  are of the view that if no sincer e and  effective 
steps are taken, the profits which have  seen an erosion of nearl y 5 0 per 
cent in 2005-06, may go down further in the years to come.  The Committee 
are unhap py at lackadaisical approach of the SAIL and are distressed to 
note that despite the Ministry havi ng been cautioned b y t hem in earlier 
recommendations, it has failed to take  corrective steps to contain  th e 
decline in profits and to revamp cor porate plan suitabl y by incorporating 
short-term and long-term measures to withstand the increasing cost of 
inputs coupled w ith cy clic nature of  steel industr y.  The Comm ittee, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendati on that the Ministry  should r eview 
and revamp SAIL’s corporate plan for arresting huge decline in profits in 
the coming years. 
 
The Committee note that a n umber of schemes have been  identified 
to reduce cost of production b y d ecreasing the energ y consumptions, 
increase Blast Furnace produ ctivity, improve the qualit y of steel and also 
enrich the product-mix. Besides, schem es relating to ne w mills, new SMS, 
continuous casting  facilities and seconda ry refiner y are required to be 
commissioned to improve sales realizat ion. The Committee consider these 
steps quite signific ant for increasi ng production and reducing co st of 
production thereby increasing profits. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry / SAIL to take up these 
schemes on priority  b asis for their speed y com missioning and  
implementation in the overall interest of the company. 
 
   

  
The Com mittee also desire that before revamp of the schemes, it 
should also study  as to how  other st eel producing countri es of the world 
are meeting the challenge of cy clical nature of the industry  and w ork out 
innovative schemes. 
 
 
   

  
MERGER OF HSCL WITH SAIL 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para No.6.19) 
 
1.37 The Committee had noted that t he Committee of Secretaries had 
recommended for merger of Neelanchal Is pat Nigam Limited (NINL) with Steel 
Authority of India Limit ed (SAIL) and enabling actio ns were in progress. The 
Committee were of the view that the merger of steel PSUs with SAIL would bring 
far reaching benefits like cons olidating their strength in terms of competitiveness 
and distribution of raw material among the steel PSUs etc.  
 
1.38 The Committee also f elt that whil e merging smaller companies with SAIL 
due considerations should be given to  the economies and financial impact 
thereof on SAIL without ignoring the labour  and social obligations entrusted to 
public sector undertakings in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the merger of Bharat Refractories  Limited (BRL) and NINL 
since accepted by the Government, s hould be expedited and co mpleted in the 
time-bound manner. The Committee would like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendations on merger of Hindu stan Steelworks Construction Limited 
(HSCL) with SAIL and desire that till a final decision is taken, the Ministry should 
endeavour to award new projects as we ll as work on modernization/upgradation 
of existing projects to HSCL in order to bail it out from financial crunch. 
 
1.39 The Ministry of Steel in its Action Taken Reply has  stated that selection of 
Merchant Banker for the valuat ion of NINL is currently going on by the Selection 
Committee comprising of the m embers at Director level from SAIL & NINL. Final 
decision on the merger issue of NINL with SAIL will be  taken aft er the valuation 
of NINL. As regards merger of BRL with SAIL, it  is submitted that the proposa l 
has been sent to Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) 
for consideration.   
 
1.40 In so far as merger of HSCL with SAIL is concerned, there is no such 
proposal under consideration of Government. HSCL is able to bag orders for new 
projects on its own merit.  HSCL is appr oaching RINL/SAIL to secure work order 
in their modernization and upgradation programmes. 
 
1.41 The Committee in their earlier report had recom mended the merger  
of Hindustan Steelw orks Construction Li mited (HSCL) w ith Steel Authorit y 
of India Limited (SAIL) and also desire d to award new projects to HSCL till 
a final decision is taken on th e merger. The Ministry in its repl y has stated 
that final decisions on the merger of Neelanchal Ispat Nigam Limited (NINL) 
will be taken after the valuation of NI NL and proposal for merger of Bh arat 
Refractories Limited (BRL) has been se nt to Board for Reconstruction of 
Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) fo r consider ation. The Ministry  has 
further stated that there is no proposal under consideration for merge r of 
   

  
HSCL.  As regards awarding new projects to HSCL, the Ministry has replied 
that HSCL has been able to bag work orders on its own merit.    
 
The Committee appreciate that merger  of BRL and NINL w ith SAIL is 
under process and  therefore , desire the Ministry  to pursue the matter 
vigorously and accomplish the task by the end of current financial year.  As 
far as merger of HSCL is co ncerned, the Committee in their 13th Report 
had also reiterated that the Ministr y might consider merger of HSCL w ith 
SAIL as it w ould provide an impetu s to HSCL due to financial and 
managerial support of SAIL. The Committee  express their strong 
displeasure that the Ministry  h as chosen to completely  ignore their 
recommendation as they  have not even examined the issue of merger but  
also failed to extend any helping hand to HSCL to secure work orders. 
 
The Committee reiterate that merg ers and the strategic acq uisitions 
by the major companies all over the world has been resorted to consolidate 
their position in the International market. The Committee need  n ot to 
emphasise that SAIL, a steel behemoth, should also strengthen its position 
in the National and International aren a by w ay of merger and acquisition. 
The Committee, therefore, desire SAIL  to seriousl y examine the issu e and 
consider merger of HSCL w ith SAIL and furnish a status report thereof to  
the Committee within 3 months. 
 
   

  
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.10) 
 
The Committee had observed that the steel  industry, being a core sector, 
had a vital role in sustaining the pace of economic development.  The Committee 
hoped that with the large scale  modernization, huge inv estment in infrastructure, 
significant growth in the industrial sector, setting up of green-field and brown-field 
projects by domestic steel producers and entry of gl obal steel producers, the 
Indian steel industry promises tremendous growth opportunities.  The Committee 
were happy to note that the Governm ent announced National Steel Policy  (NSP) 
to create a modern and efficient steel industry of world standards.  
 
 The Com mittee, therefore, desired that the Government should bring 
proposed policy reforms as envisaged in N SP to facilitate further growth and  
expansion of steel sector by time bound improvement of in frastructure and 
effective measures to attract more investments includ ing Foreign Direct  
Investments. The Committee al so desired that considering the cyclical nature of 
steel industry, the Government should stra tegically prioritise the needs of Public  
Sector steel plants  to ensure long- term and short-term profitability  and  
sustainable growth.   
 
Action Taken 
 
The following strategy has been approv ed by the Government for the 
implementation of the National Steel Policy:- 
 
(i) Ministry of Steel may identify all issues relating to infrastructure and 
refer them to the Planning Commi ssion for being plac ed before the 
Committee on Infrastructure, which is headed by the Prime Minister, 
for decisions.   
 
(ii) Other issues related to the im plementation of NSP, requiring inter-
Ministerial coordination, Minist ry of Steel should whenever  
necessary refer such issues to the Committee of Secretaries and its 
recommendations should be put up fo r approval of the competent 
authority.   
 
The Minist ry is engaged in formulation of measures for attracting more 
investments in the steel sector which inter-alia inc lude further liberaliz ing the 
External Commercial Borro wing (ECB) norms and devising fisca l incentives  for 
the steel sector.  In a ny case 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is allo wed in 
the steel sector.  The Ministry is also engaged in discussi on with the State 
   

  
Government concerned, major steel comp anies and associations  for formulating 
action plan for development of infrastructure.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No. 2.1) 
 
 The Committee had hoped that the Minist ry of Steel would implement the 
recommendations in a time bound mann er which the Commit tee commented 
upon in their Thirteenth Action Taken Re port.  The Committee desired that  the 
Ministry of Steel should furnish final replies to the recommendations (No.4 & 9) 
which wer e categoris ed as of interim nat ure.  The Committee would lik e to  be 
apprised of the Action Taken in this regard. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Based upon the r ecommendations of  the Expenditure Reforms  
Commission (ERC) constituted by Ministry of Finance, an administrative decision 
was taken to close down the office of  the Development Commissioner for Iron & 
Steel Organization (DCI&S) and  its 4 regional offices located at New Delhi,  
Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkat a w.e.f. 23.5.2003. The total strength of the 
organization at the time of closure of DCI&S organization was 226. 
 
As on date out of 226 surplus st aff, 151 have been separated leaving a 
balance of 75 surplus staff to  be redeployed.  Out of these 75 surplus staff, 
Directorate of Personnel and Training (D oP&T) has f urther issued redeployment 
orders in respect of 57 surplus s taff and they will be relieved after receipt of offer 
of appointment from the accepting Departments/O ffices. The remaining 18 
surplus staff are also likely to be redeployed in the near future. 
 
The progr ess of redeployment of surplus staff is being continuous ly 
monitored in the Ministry of Steel. 
  
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.23) 
 
The Committee had noted that the steel sector PSUs generated I&EBR for 
implementation of their various  capita l sc hemes.  In the year 2006-07 SAIL, 
RINL, NM DC and KIOCL had been alloc ated Rs.12 75 crore, Rs.1452 cr ore, 
Rs.150 crore and Rs.200 crore respective ly from their I&EBR.  The Committee 
observed t hat for implementation of Sc hemes and other inve stments in PSUs, 
generation of sufficient I&EBR and utilization of the sa me was equally essential.  
The Committee, however, noted the discour aging trend that the steel PSUs  had 
not only faile d to utiliz e the I&EB R as reflected in BE but also faltered in  
expending even the reduced amount earmarked at RE stage.  The extent of 
   

  
reduction at RE stage in the year 2005-06 in respect of SAIL, RINL, NMDC and 
KIOCL was 21%, 71.50%, 32.29% and 42.38% respectively.  The Com mittee 
were perturbed to not e that in the year  2005-06, RINL and KIOCL had failed to 
utilize nearly 85% of their reduced allocation with SAIL and NMDC surrendering 
nearly 30% and 45% of their alloc ated funds.  The Committee were extremely 
unhappy that though the Monitoring Committee headed by  the Addit ional 
Secretary and Financial Advisor (Steel) had been reviewing the pr ogress of fund 
utilization on bi-monthly basis, the PSUs were unable to overcome the obstacles 
in utilizing the allocated funds year after year. 
 
While e xamining allo cation and  utilizat ion of I&EBR by SAIL in  the year 
2005-06, the Committee noted that the Mini stry had reduced the  allocation of 
Rs. 1030 crore provided in BE to Rs. 815 crore in RE based on the progress of 
ongoing schemes and new proposals.  The Committee were surprised to observe 
that SAIL had so far spent only Rs. 129.33 crore out of the a llocated amount of 
Rs. 1165.01 crore constituting barely 11. 13 per cent on the schemes scheduled 
to be completed bef ore 31st March, 2007.  The Committee considered the 
contention of the Ministry that no schemes got affected even after 21% reduction 
in allocation, entirely untenable and were of the view that  there was not even the 
remotest possibility that SAIL would be able to utilize  balance a mount without 
further rescheduling of the targets. 
 
The Committee felt that not  only the Ministry floundered in reviewing the 
progress of various schemes but the monitoring mechanism of SAIL also failed to 
perform its functions effectively resulting in under utilization of funds year after 
year.  The Committee also desired the Ministry to review the progress of  
utilization of funds a t r egular intervals a nd ensure  speedy implementation of  
schemes and full utilization of funds. 
 
Action Taken 
 
For monitoring of the projects, Minist ry of Steel regularly takes review 
meeting under the chairmans hip of Secretary (Steel) every three months where 
the status of the implementation of Projects (Rs. 20 crore & above) are discussed 
and targets are set. The constraints and the time overruns are discussed and 
necessary steps are suggested for better implementation. In addition to this 
Additional Secretary & Fi nancial Adviser of the Mini stry also reviews I&EBR 
implementation periodically. Besides this in SAIL at the Corporate level, the 
Board Sub-committee compris ing of two independent Directors, Director 
(Technical) and Managing Directors of Plants/Units has been constituted to 
review the major projects (Rs. 100 crore & above) on a quarterly basis.  
 
The monit oring mechanism to review I&EBR in SAI L has been further 
strengthened.  In addition to the monitoring of the projects on a day to day basis  
by the respective Project Managers, t he Plant Project Heads  (ED/GM In-charge) 
will review the projects on regular basis and the Plant Level Standing Com mittee 
   

  
comprising of ED (Projects)/Heads of  Projects, ED (Works) and ED (F&A)/Head 
of Finance shall review the projects on a monthly basis.  The Plant level Standing 
Committee will s ubmit its acti on plan to Managing Direct ors/Chief Executives of 
the Plants for remedial acti ons, if any, to ensure that  projects are complete d in 
time as per schedule.  Managing Directors /Chief Executives of the Plants will 
review projects every month for timely  actions to complete projects within 
schedule. In sum the  I&EBR monitori ng m echanism has bee n strengthened to  
ensure speedy implementation of the schemes. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.26) 
 
The Committee had noted that Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) had 
been allocated Rs.1452 crore in BE 2006-07, an increase of 162% as compared 
to Rs.895.75 crore in BE 2005-06 with the provisions of Rs .901 crore t o 
implement the expansion scheme and Rs.60 crore for acquisition of iron ore mine 
and coking coal mine.   T he Committee further noted that the util ization of funds 
for Coke Oven Battery No.4 (Phase-II) , Pulverized Coal Injection and acquisition 
of iron ore and coking coal mine was subject to approval and availability of mines 
which were extremely vital for RINL.  
 
The Committee, therefore, desired that there should not be any procedural 
delay in c learing of t he abov e schemes .   The Committee also desired the 
Ministry to take effective steps to ensur e early acquisition of iron ore and coking 
coal mines. 
Action Taken 
 
The Coke Oven Battery No.4 and Pu lverized Coal Injection Schemes  
earlier required Government approval.   With RINL having be en declared a Mini-
ratna, it is now in a position t o exercise its enhanced financial powers for 
completing the above schemes in order to  cut the procedural delays and this is  
expected to speed up progress.  In the case of expansion scheme of RIN L the 
first phase costing  Rs. 6421 crore,  wh ich is expected to be completed by 
27.10.2008, is being constantly moni tored by a High Powered Committee 
consisting of Directors of the Board to ensure timely implementation.    
 
RINL has applied for iron ore mining le ases in the States of Orissa, 
Chhattisgarh and Andhra Prades h.  In case  Mines are allotted, these have to be 
developed.   RINL has been allotted Mahal Coking Coal Mining Block in Jharia 
Coal Fields, Jharkand State.   RINL has  also submitted application for allot ment 
of non-coking coal mines in the State of Andhra Pradesh. 
 
RINL is also making efforts to enter into j oint ventur es with coal mines 
abroad.  In this regard, the Company has received proposal from some coal 
   

  
companies in Australia and United States of Amer ica for joint venture 
participation and further activity will be taken after scrutiny and due diligence. 
 
 [Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please See Para No. 1.17 Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No. 3.31) 
 
The Committee had found that in the y ear 2005-06, the allocation of funds 
to N ational Mi neral D evelopment Corpora tion (NMD C) had been drastic ally 
reduced from Rs.220.25 crore in BE to Rs.149.14 crore in RE with marginal 
increase to Rs.150 crore in BE 2006-07.  The Committee observed that setting 
up of NMDC Iron and Steel Plant (NISP)  envisaged in 9th Fi ve Year Plan got 
spilled over to 10th Five Year Pl an was yet to be commissioned due to non-
availability of Romelt Technology.  Another major project of NMDC viz. Ultra Pure 
Ferric Oxide (UPFO) plant at Visak hapatnam had ceased oper ation since April 
2004 for want of market tie up.  Further, the investment schemes viz. Rajasthan 
Lignite Scheme, Coal Project and Ar ki Limestone Project envi saged in T enth 
Plan outlay involving Rs.401 crore had remained on paper.  The Committee were 
extremely concerned at the performance of NMDC as not even a single scheme 
initiated by them in 10th Five Year  Plan had been c ompleted.  The Com mittee 
were convinced that NMDC had taken up these schemes in an extremely casual 
manner without proper planning and feasibility studies. 
 
The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to review the pending and 
proposed schemes of NMDC to ensure that  only viable schemes were taken up 
after a detailed groundwork to avoid wasteful expenditure. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry reviews the pending schemes  of NMDC from time to time.  
Proposed schemes are also gone in details at the time of clearance. 
 
The Com mittee’s suggestion for ensur ing that only viable schemes are 
taken up after detailed groundwork to avoid wasteful expenditure has been noted 
by the Ministry. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
   

  
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No.5.3) 
 
The Committee had noted that Steel Authority of Indi a Ltd. (SAIL) as a 
whole achieved the  full capacity utiliz ation in the  year 2005-06 showing  
satisfactory improvement over the year 2004-05.  The Committee were, however, 
distressed to find that  except  Bh ilai Stee l P lant rest of  the units have failed to 
utilize e ither their capacity or achieve t heir target.  In the case of Hot Metal 
production for the year 2006-07, wherea s Bhilai Steel Plant had antic ipated 
production of 4900 tonnes against the capa city of 4080 tonnes , Rourkela Steel 
Plant’s production would be bar ely 1650 t onnes against the capacity of 2000 
tonnes.  As regards the production of cr ude steel and saleable steel, whereas 
Bhilai Steel Plant would be producing at 120% of t he capacity, both the Bokaro 
Steel Plant and Rour kela Steel Plant would be operating between 80%-90 % of 
their capacity.  The Committee were constrained to observe that on the one hand 
Bhilai Steel Plant’s perf ormance had been exce edingly well, the other units  had 
been barely utilizing t heir capacity with Bo karo Steel Plant and Rourkela Steel 
Plant lagging behind.  The Committee desired SAI L to undertake a detailed 
Performance Audit of the SAIL units to pinpoint the weak  link s in their entire 
production process and take corrective steps before the next financial year. 
 
The Com mittee were unhappy  to note that the targets had been fixed 
below the capacity by SAIL and most of it s units except Bhilai Steel Plant. As 
reflected in the producti on plan 2005-06, the target production of both Hot Metal 
and Crude Steel was  below the installed capacity for the SAIL units though in 
respect of Saleable Steel, the target at  11356 tonnes was marginally high er than 
the installed capac ity of 11074 tonnes. The Committee were anguished to note 
the laidback approach of SAI L in the pr esent era of fierce  and aggressive 
competitive environm ent, particularly wh en the glo bal steel industry was 
booming. 
 
The Committee deprecated that the detai led production plan for 2006-07 
was yet to be worked out and the provis ional plan bas ed on optimistic scenario 
has fixed the target just marginally higher than the installed capacity. The 
Committee were not happy at this lackadaisic al approach of SAIL and felt that if  
Bhilai Steel Plant could exceed the capacity utilisation, the other SAIL units could 
perform equally well. 
 
The Committee, therefore,  emphasized that in t he current scenario with 
stiff competition from private sector steel players and current volatile international 
market, SAIL should set higher targets and strive to scale new heights.   
 
Action Taken 
 
As desired by the Standing Commi ttee on Coal and Steel, a Committee 
has been c onstituted in SAIL to undertake  a detailed performance audit of SAI L 
   

  
plants, to pinpoint the weak  links in the production process and take corrective 
steps.  
 
The Committee will also study the produc tion targets fixed for the plants  
vis-à-vis capacity and potential and sugg est / examine steps t o achieve higher 
level of performance. 
     
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Para No. 5.11) 
 
The Committee had noted that the year  2004-05 was an exceptional y ear 
for the steel industry with demand outstri pping the supply, which resulted in 
higher realization for s teel products.  However, in the y ear 2005-06, the dem and 
for steel products was sluggish resulting in lower realization.  The Committee 
further note that though the pr oduction of Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)  
units was increasing since 2004-05, the net profit had declined from Rs.6817 
crore in 2004-05 to Rs.3528 crore in 2005-06.  The net profit was likely to decline 
further in 2006-07 to Rs.3106 crore.  SAIL had planned to  increase profit by 
taking various steps like focus on market ing strategies, improvement in product, 
use of alternate fuels in blast furnaces, acquisition of overseas coking coal mines 
and manpower rationalisation etc.  The Committee were not satisfied wit h the 
reply of the Ministry that  the proposed multiple interv entions and its Corporate 
Plan 2012 would ensure competitiveness of SAIL to withstand the cyclic nature of 
steel industry.  
 
 The Committee in their 10th report  on the Demands for Grants (2005-06)  
had cautioned that increasing cost of inputs coupled wit h cyclic nature of steel 
industry would put tremendous  pressure  on SAIL to improve its physical 
performance and recommended to revamp t he corporate plan to suit the long-
term requirements. The Committee were di stressed to note that  the meas ures 
taken by SAIL had not yielded the require d benefits in arresting the decline in 
profit in 2005-06 and 2006-07.   
 
 The Committee, therefore, re-emphasized that the corporate plan be 
revamped and also effective short term and long-term measures be taken to 
enable SAIL to maintain its pre-eminent position.  
 
 The Committee further noted that one of the reasons advanc ed by the 
Ministry of Steel about dec line in sales and consequent dipping of profits of 
domestic s teel companies was  further reduction in customs duty on finished 
products of steel from 10% to 5%. The Committee in their 10th Report had 
expressed their view that duty struct ure introduced in Budget 2005-06 was 
anomalous and it should be rolled back from  10% to 15% on finished refractory. 
The Ministry in pursuance to the Committee’s recommendation had sen t 
proposal to the Minist ry of Finance. T he Committee were unhappy to not e that 
   

  
the Ministry of Steel had not only failed to convince t he Ministry of Financ e but 
also could not take up t he matter effecti vely to prevent further reduction in 
customs duty.  
 
 The Committee were apprehens ive that the extant customs duty structure 
would further jeopardize the domestic steel industry with the possibility of spurt in 
import of steel.  The Committee, theref ore, recommended the Ministry to 
vigorously pursue the matter at the highes t level to saf eguard the domestic steel 
companies from the dumping of cheaper steel.   
 
Action Taken 
 
The Corporate Plan 2012 aims at ma king SAIL a fundamentally strong 
company and retaining leadership position in the Indian steel  industry.  This is to 
be attained by increas ing the hot metal production to 22.5 MT from current lev el 
of 14.5 MT.  Besides,  a number of schem es have been identified to reduce cost 
of production by  reduction in energy consumption, increase BF produc tivity, 
improve the quality of steel and also enrich the product-mix. 
 
Schemes estimated around Rs. 37000 cror e would be taken up to attain 
the targets set under Corpor ate Plan 2012.  SAIL has al ready initiated measures 
in this regard and around Rs.6000 crore worth projects are under various st ages 
of implementation.  In addi tion, approval is  likely to be accorded for schemes 
costing around Rs. 20,000 crore during 2006-07. 
 
 The benefit of the schemes would star t flowing in only with the completion 
of identified schemes.  However, in the intervening p eriod fluctuations in costs 
such as price of steel, cost of key input material suc h as coking coal etc. wil l 
have an impact on the profit s of the company.  Profits of S AIL which was  
Rs.6817 cr ore in 2004-05 ca me down to Rs.4013 cr ore in 2005-06 mainly on 
account of fall of steel prices and higher cost of coking coal.  
 
 SAIL’s plan to augment high value products and increase in the proportion 
of finished steel will help in improving Sales realizat ion.  However, this can 
happen only after the schemes related to  new mills, new SMS, continuous 
casting facilities and secondary refining are commissioned. 
 
 SAIL has also initiated measures to improve availability of domestic coking 
coal in c ollaboration with C oal India Limited (CIL) and substituting the imported 
hard coal with auxiliar y fuel injections.  While a number of blas t furnaces have 
been provided with auxiliary fuel injection system, the rest of the blast furnaces  
will be provided with his facility after augmenting the oxygen availability. 
 
 With the implementation of major pr ojects under Corporate Plan 2012, the 
company will be in a stronger  position t o with stand fl uctuations em anating in 
output/input market. In the intervening years, the pr ofits of the company can only 
   

  
be protected by fully exploiti ng the potential of av ailable assets.  SAIL is already 
improving its physical efficiency paramet ers on year-to-year basis.  The break  
through in parameters however will be consequent to capital project 
programmes. 
 
 However, as suggested by the Committee, the plan for growth, quality and 
of cost competitivene ss will b e further ex plored in S AIL to grow in line with  
National Steel Policy and chang ing business scenario.  The Plan would als o be 
revised at an appropriate time consider ing the progress of the existing plan,  
changes in the market dynamics and trend in the macro environment. 
 
As regards duty structure, in the general budget 2006-07 the customs duty 
on refractories as well as on t he foll owing raw mat erial for m anufacture of 
refractories has also been reduc ed to 7.5%. Ministry of Steel had r ecommended 
that duty on the entire range of materials used in the refractory industry should 
be brought down to a uniform level of 5%. 
 
SNo. Item Tariff No. 
1. Natural Graphite powder 2504.10 
2. Aluminous Cement  2523.30 
3. Silicon Metal (99% purity) 2804.61 
4. Micro/Fumed Silica 2811.22 
5. Calcined Alumina 2818.20 
6. Brown fused Alumina 2818.20 
7. Sintered/Tabular Alumina 2818.20 
8. Fused Zirconia 2825.20 
9. Sodium Hexameta phosphate 2835.29 
10. Silicon Carbide 2849.20 
11. Boron carbide 2849.20 
12. Reactive Alumina 3802.90 
13. Phenolic Resin 3909.40 
14. Fused Silica 2811.12 
 
In keeping with its commitm ents at the WT O the Government reduced the 
peak rates  for all non-agricultural produc ts from 20% to 15% in the General 
Budget 2005-06 and revised it further downwards to 12.5% in the General Budget 
2006-07. Duty on all metals including alloy steel was reduced from 15% to 10% in 
General Budget 2005- 06 and further reduced on a lloy steel t o 7.5% in the 
General Budget 2006-07. The import dut y on iron ore, chrome ore and 
manganese ore has also been reduced from 5% to 2%.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please See Para No. 1.36 Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
   

  
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para No. 5.15) 
 
The Com mittee had noted that Rashtriy a Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) had 
installed c apacity to produce 3  million to ns per an num of liq uid steel a nd is 
operating at production levels of about 4.1 million tonnes (mt) hot metal, 3.5 mt of 
liquid steel and 3.1 mt of saleable steel, r epresenting capacity utilization levels of 
119%, 117% and 119% respectively. Though RINL had fulfilled the Memorandum 
of Understanding target by more than 100%, the production tar get set for the 
year 2005-06 and 2006-07 was marginally higher  than the preceding years.  The 
Committee further noted that the profit of RINL was expected t o decline from 
Rs.2008.09 crore in 2004- 05 to Rs.1032.74 crore in 2005-06 and Rs.592.00 
crore in 2006-07.  The Committee also not ed that the operating co st of the RINL 
had increased from Rs.5507.07 crore in 2004-05 to Rs .6710.10 crore in 2005-06 
and Rs.7646.56 crore in 2006-07 .  The Ministry had advanced the reasons s uch 
as sluggishness in market, higher price of  iron ore and coking coal for increasing 
operating cost and declining pr ofits.  The Ministry had further stated that RINL 
was planning to augment pr ofits by improving the te chno-economic factors, 
implement cost control measures, improve productivity and acquisition of iron ore 
and coal mines. 
 
The Committee were of the view that  had RINL acted with foresight and 
taken the essential measures viz. increasing sale of value-added products, 
expanding customer base and  future contract with consumers, it could hav e 
stemmed the steep decline in pr ofit in 2005-06 and 2 006-07.  The Committee,  
therefore, recommended that  RINL should devis e l ong term strategic plan 
keeping in mind the uncertainty of steel industry and take efforts pro-actively to 
contain the operating cost and ensure consistency in profits. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The major increase in operating ex penditure for the year 2005-06 as  
compared to 2004-05 was due to increas e in major raw material prices  like 
imported coking coal and iron ore.  Due to  increase in prices of imported Coking 
Coal the Company had to incur additional expenditure of about  Rs.577 crore.  
Unilateral increase of Ir on Ore prices by M/s Nati onal Mineral Development  
Corporation accounted for an increase in expenditure of about Rs.389 crore.  
Thus, these two raw materials alone bro ught down the operating profit by about 
Rs. 966 crore. 
 
The Company was subjected to Mini mum Alternative Tax (MAT) in the 
year 2004-05 @ 7.84% due to c arry forward losses of earlier years.  In the year 
2005-06, the Company wiped ou t the entire carry forward losses  in advance and 
turned into a net positive Company.  Thus the Company had to pay regular  
Income Tax @ 33.66% in the year 2005-06 as against MAT of 2004-05.  This has 
resulted in increase in Income Tax component by Rs.388 crore.   
 
   

  
The initiatives taken f or improving per formance in the future years are as  
follows: 
 
1. It is proposed to improve the produc tion of Hot Metal to 4.25 Mt and 
Saleable Steel to 3.315 Mt in 2006- 07 against 4.153 Mt and 3.237 Mt 
respectively achieved during the year 2005-06. 
2. Production of value added steel t o be increased to 1.2 Mt in 2006- 07 from 
the level of 0.8 Mt in 2005-06. 
3. Increase of sales to end user s and project customers by 10% and 
increasing customer base by 5% for original equipment manufacturers. 
4. Adding value to the end products through Service Centres for supply ing 
customized products to the customers. 
5. Maintaining strategic presence in Ex port market for export of Iron & Stee l 
products. 
6. Dynamic decision-making on domest ic and export sales for optimizing 
sales and revenue. 
7. Enlisting more authorized dealers to reach actual users inclu ding rur al 
areas. 
8. Appointment of Cons ignment Agents in Middle East, Sri Lanka etc., to 
take advantage of increasing market potential through exports. 
9. To match exp ort of steel from VSP with Cumulative Annua l Growth Rate  
(CAGR) of over 13% projected for exports in the National Steel Policy.  
10. To produce 60% of production based on customers orders. 
 
Cost Reduction Initiatives 
 
1. Optimization of the blend compos ition of Imported Coking Coal , I mported 
Coking  Coal Soft and Medium Coking Coal  at Coke Ovens. 
2. Maintaining gross coke yield at coke ovens and improve yields of  
ammonium sulphate, crude tar and crude benzol. 
3. Improvement of yields of tar distillation and benzol distillation. 
4. Reduction in consumption of iron ore fines by improving usage of 
metallurgical wastes. 
5. Reduction in consumption of flux at Sinter Plant by improving usage of LD  
slag. 
6. Optimize usage of coke dust at Sinter Plant. 
7. Reduction in carbon rate at Blast Furnace. 
8. Improvements in average converte r life, average ladl e life and average 
tundish life. 
9. Optimizing the input mi x (hot m etal/steel s crap/pig iron) at Steel Melting 
Shop. 
10. Reduction in defectives generation. 
11. Reduction in consumption heat & power  at Coke Oven, Sinter Plant, Blast  
Furnace, Steel Melting Shop, Mills, Air Separation Plant (ASP) and Turbo 
Power Plant. 
12. Reduction in maximum demand and gross import of power. 
   

  
13. Maximizing the recovery of by-product gaseous fuels viz., Coke Oven gas, 
Blast Furnace  gas and LD gas. 
14. Replacing coal tar fuel with Cok e Oven gas at Calcine Refractory Material 
Plant (CRMP). 
15. Maximize the recycling of waste materials – benzol muck and tar sludge. 
16. Conservation of water. 
17. Improving power generation from Gas Expansion Tur bine Sets (GETS) by 
reducing BF gas network pressure. 
18. Increasing LD Gas yield by commissioning of 4th stream. 
19. To improve production, produc tivity and effe ct cost reduction severa l 
Additions Modifications and Rectification  schemes are planned. 
20. Entrepreneurial Res ource Package to be introduced for Marketing and 
Finance for providing better services  to customers and making on line 
Management Information System available. 
 
Raw Material Security 
 
1. Mahal Coal Block is being explored for commercial exploitation to partly 
replace Imported Coking Coal. 
2. Efforts for acquiring Coal Mines abroad is continuing and pr ocess of 
appointment of Consultants is on to evaluate the offers received. 
3. Efforts are also on to acquire Iron Ore Mines. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.14, Para No.5.3) 
 
The Committee in their 10th report on the Demand of Grants (2005-06)  
had deprecated the utter lack of concern for R&D in the Ministry  of Steel as no 
allocation was made for the same in t he year 2005-06 and miniscule expenditure 
of Rs. 22.22 crore was incu rred till then  in 10th plan period  as agains t the  
allocated fund of Rs. 750 crore later r educed to Rs. 300 crore. The committee 
had, therefore, emphasized th e indispens ability to invi gorate the R&D in steel 
sector. The Committee noted that in pur suance of their recommendation,  the 
Ministry constituted a Task Force to review the existing institutional infrastructure, 
identify the gaps, identify the p resent/future needs of the industry and to suggest 
a blue print for setting up an Advanced Re search Centre for Iron & Steel for 
innovative and path breaking technology to utilize domestically av ailable 
resources. The Task  Force rec ommended creation of a virtual  center namely 
Steel Res earch and Deve lopment Mission (SRDM), a registered society, 
comprising of eminent scientists/te chnologists/professionals, leading 
industrialists and one represent ative from the Ministry of  Steel and Ministry of 
Science and Technology.   
 
The Committee hoped that the creat ion of St eel Research and 
Development Mission (SRDM) is a step in  the right direction to address  the 
   

  
various issues starting at steel industr y. The Committee desir ed that concerted 
efforts should be made to enable the SRDM to complete the task assigned to it in 
a time bound manner in order to achieve and sustain technological excellence.  
 
The Committee also noted that some pending research proposals awaiting 
clearances were at v arious stages of  examination. T he Committee was deeply  
anguished to note that in the year  2005-06 a paltry sum of Rs. 29 lakh has  been 
released from the SDF for the approved projects. 
 
The Committee, therefore, reiterated that the process es and procedures 
involved in the clearance of  the proposals needs to be simplified for speedy and 
efficient disposal. The Committee als o desired that in order to  have technology 
that suits the domestic steel sector with the available domestic inputs, network of 
R&D might be expanded with active partici pation of interested foreign research 
and academic institutions. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The suggestions have been noted and corrective actions are being taken. 
 
   [Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
   

  
CHAPTER III 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   WHICH THE    
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW  
OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 4.7) 
 
The Committee had o bserved that an outlay of Rs.11044 crore (I&EBR of 
Rs.10979 crore and Budgetary S upport of Rs.65 crore) pr ovided in 10th Five 
Year Plan of the Ministry of Steel with the aim of achieving the major thrust areas 
viz. improving the profitability of the Steel PSUs an d facilitatin g the domestic 
steel sector to overcome the problems faced by it at the beginning of the Plan 
period.  In the Mid-term Appraisal, the Plan outlay was scaled down by 24% from 
Rs.11044 crore to R s.8476.88 crore (I&E BR of Rs .8411.68 and Budgetary  
Support of Rs.65 crore).  The reasons advanced by  the Ministry for reduction 
were depressed market condition and adverse financial position upto 2002-2003, 
reprioritization and deferm ent of schemes, lesser expe nditure on Research and 
Development, delay in exec ution of ce rtain schemes of Nat ional Mineral 
Development Corporation (NM DC) an d Kudremukh Iron Ore Company  Ltd 
(KIOCL). 
 
The Committee were constrained to not e that the total expenditure during 
the first four years of the 10th Plan wa s Rs.2847.89 crore which came to merely  
34% of approved out lay.  Two major PSUs viz. SAI L and RINL could spent 
53.79% and 21.33% only of their revise d plan outlay .  The Committee were 
anguished that in the terminal year of the 10th Five Year Plan, the Ministry still 
had an unspent balance of Rs.5628.99 cr ore.  The Committee were deeply  
concerned about the possible impact of fa ilure of the Ministry to expend the 
allocated amount on modernization and expansion plans of the steel PSUs. 
 
The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to speed up the 
implementation of sc hemes to ensure maximum utilizat ion of funds in 2006-07 
and to foc us on achieving the targets fi xed in 10th Five Year Plan.  The 
Committee also desir ed the Ministry to identify the constr aints that had been 
responsible for lesser utilization o f funds during 10th Five Year Plan and prepare 
a strategy to address the same while fo rmulating and implementing the 11th Five 
Year Plan. 
Action Taken 
 
As desired by the Committee, al l efforts are being made by the Ministry to 
speed up the implementation of schemes to ensure m aximum utilization of funds 
in 20 06-07. Towards  this end, the utiliz ation of Plan  outlays b y the PSUs is  
already being reviewed by the Ministry in  the quarterly review meetings with the 
PSUs.  
The lesser utiliz ation of funds d uring the first four years of the 10th Fiv e 
Year Plan is primarily  due to the low expenditure incurred on Plan schem es & 
   

  
projects by five PSUs viz. SAIL, NM DC, RINL, KIOCL and MOIL, each of whos e 
10th Plan approved outlay was mo re than Rs.100.00 crore. The 
constraints/reasons for low utilizat ion of the approved outlay in res pect of the se 
five PSUs is given in the table below: 
 
First Four Years of 10th 
Five Year Plan  
(2002-03 to 2005-06) 
Name of  
PSU 
Approved 
Outlay 
(Rs. in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(Rs. in crore) 
Constraints/ Reasons for low  utilization 
of Plan Outla y vi s-à-vis Approved  
Outlay  
1 2 3 4 
1. SAIL 2780.00 2022.98 
(73%)* 
Delay in design & engineering, in  
equipment supply by contractors, in  firming 
up the cost of schemes/projects and in civil 
& structural work relating to various 
schemes & projects of SAIL. 
2. NMDC 1550.75 346.21 
(22%)* 
Delay/ Non-availability of forest,  
environmental and stat utory clearances for  
schemes/ projects a nd delay in the 
finalization of altern ate technology for 
NMDC Iron & Steel Plant. 
3. RINL 1478.00 283.89 
(19%)* 
Delay by Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEM) and suppliers 
affecting implementation of AMR schemes; 
delay in ap proval from the Govern ment for 
COB-4 and  capacity e xpansion schemes  
resulting in envisaged plan expenditure not  
taking place and non-allotment of Iron Ore 
and Coking coal mines due to state policies 
of allotment of mines only on the basis of  
value addition within the States. 
4. KIOCL 442.00 61.62  
(14%)* 
As per Hon’ble Supreme Court’s directive, 
mining had to be stopped at Kudremukh by 
the end of Dec., 200 5, which adversely 
affected th e Plan schemes of KIOCL  
resulting in reduced e xpenditure on Plan  
schemes. Utilisation of Plan funds has also  
suffered due to dispute over land allotted to 
the company, lack of  mining lea se with the 
company for Other Mine Deve lopment 
scheme and delay in formation of joint 
venture. 
5. MOIL 113.46 64.25 
 (57%)* 
MOIL was s lated for disinvestment a nd the 
process was under active consideration  
during the  years 2002-03 & 2 003-04. 
Consequently, investment decisio n/action 
on major Plan schemes/ projects 
envisaged in the 10 th Plan of th e company 
could not be taken. 
   

  
* Figure in bracket indicates the actual expenditure as a percentage of approved outlay.    
 
To address the issue of low utilization of Plan outlays during the 10th Plan 
and to ensure maximum utilization of funds  in the  11th Five Year Pla n, the 
following approach is proposed to be adopted by the Ministry of Steel: 
 
(i) While  formulating the 11th Plan, all efforts will be made t o 
ensure that the projections of Plan outlay of the PSUs  are on a 
realistic basis, keeping in view the trend of previous  
expenditure, stage of implementati on, av ailability of  statutory 
clearances, etc. of the schemes/ projects of the PSUs proposed 
to be included in the 11th Plan. 
 
(ii) During  the implementation of the 11th Plan,  rigorous monitoring 
will be d one to e nsure that funds are utiliz ed for the 
schemes/projects for whic h th ey have been earm arked. As 
mentioned earlier, a monitoring  mechanis m has already been 
put in place in the Ministry under which quarterly review 
meetings with the PSUs on utilization of Pl an outlay s is being 
taken by AS&FA (Steel). 
 
However, since the PSUs enjoy autonomy in the formulation and 
implementation of Plan schem es & projects, they are better situated to identify 
and address the constraints in the formu lation a nd implem entation of  their  
scheme/projects, and thereby  in the  utiliz ation of funds.  Simplification of 
procedures to cut short delays in t he procurement of goods  and services, 
improvement in the process of  awarding project related work, early finalization of 
technology tie-ups, timely preparation of fe asibility studies et c. would c ontribute 
to speedy  implemen tation of schemes a nd, therefore, to bet ter utilizatio n of 
funds.  Therefore, th e PSUs would be re quired to s treamline their system and 
processes to supplement the efforts of the Ministry to ensure maximum utilization 
of Plan outlays during the 11th Plan.    
  
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.17, Para No. 6.24) 
 
The Committee had noted that Global  Steel demand in 2006 might  
register a growth rate of 4.5%.  The dom estic steel industry was also expected to 
achieve higher growth rate as the domes tic economy started to register higher  
growth rates.  As against unfair compet ition from imports, the domestic steel 
industry would be protected by taking various steps like Anti-dumping, anti-
subsidy and safeguard actions.  As far as  raw material particularly escalating 
demand of Coking Coal was  concerned,  the steel indust ry would face 
tremendous pressure owing to expanding steel sect or.  The Committee also 
noted that with the announcemen t of National Steel Poli cy to achieve indigenous 
   

  
production of 110 Million Tonnes  (MT) per annum by 2019-20 from the 2004-05 
level of 38 MT, Government was geari ng up its mechanism to address all the 
issues which may hamper the growth and development of the steel industry.   
  
 The Com mittee noted that the steel pl ayers were willing to invest in  
domestic steel industry and s et up production capacity of more than 200 M T by 
2019-20 as admitted by the Secr etary during the course of  oral evidence but the 
cumbersome procedures and inordinat e delay in various  clearanc es viz. 
forest/environment clearance, grant/renewal  of mining lease hampered not only 
the growth of steel industry but also economy of the country. 
 
 The Committee were constrained to  observe that while NSP had pegged 
the total steel production at 110 MT by 2019-20, t he investment proposals had 
already been in the pipe line for more than 200 M T.  The Committee were 
optimistic that the inv estment scenario of the country was capable of attracting 
more investment and the capacit y for pr oduction of steel might well exceed 200 
MT per annum.  The Committee were not  sure whether NSP envisaged the 
provision of required infrastructure and related facilities.   
 
 The Comm ittee, therefore, desired the Ministry to address all the issues  
including adjustment i n NSP, related to domestic ste el industry with serious 
commitment and create investor-friendly envi ronment in order to  harness  the 
potential for achieving more than 200 MT  production of steel per annum   by 
2019-20.   
Action Taken 
 
The production target of 110 MT by 2019-20 has been based on modest 
projection keeping in mind the cyclicity in t he steel market. While it is a fact that  
intentions have been ex pressed by entrepreneurs fo r setting up large s teel 
capacities both in the brow nfield and the greenfield modes, most of the opti mism 
is based on the present buoyancy of t he steel market. The Government would 
continue to assess the growth prospect of  the steel sector and would be taking 
appropriate steps for facilit ating creation of required infrastructure and rela ted 
facilities.    
 [Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
 
   

  
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 3.10) 
 
The Committee had noted that the Mi nistry proposed the annual plan 
outlay of Rs.3728.49 crore including Budget ary Support of Rs.82.50 crore for the 
year 2006-07.  The Planning Commission had, however, approved an outlay of  
Rs.3172.30 crore with Budg etary Support of Rs.45 cr ore.  As a sequel to 
reduction in approved outlay the Inte rnal and Extra Budgetary Resources  
(I&EBR) allocation in  respect of Kudr emukh Iron Ore Compan y Ltd. (KIOCL) 
came down from Rs .335 crore to Rs.200  crore and in  the case of National 
Minerals Development Corporation (NMD C) from Rs.387.49 crore to Rs.150.00 
crore.  The I&EBR allo cation for Manganese Ore I ndia Ltd. (MOIL) had been 
reduced from Rs.71.29 crore to Rs.48.50 crore whereas  in the case of Bir d 
Group of Companies (BGC), it stood reduced from Rs.43.25 crore to Rs.25 crore.  
The prov ision of Budget ary Support had b een made for Hindus tan Steelworks 
Construction Ltd. (HSCL), ME CON Ltd. and Bharat Refr actories Ltd. (BRL) as 
these companies were unable to generat e I&EBR.  In the approved outlay,  
however, Budgetary Support of MECON Lt d. had been reduced from Rs. 67.50 
crore to Rs. 30 crore. 
 
The Committee observed that the projection of estimates for BE 2006-07 
were unrealistic and unattainable as th e Ministry had failed t o convince the 
Planning Commission to allocate the funds as projected by KIOCL, NMDC, MOIL 
and MECON Ltd.  The Committee in their 10th report had recom mended that the 
Ministry should make realistic estimate s and alloc ate funds at BE stage itself 
instead of r esorting to provision of funds  at RE stage.  The Committee had little 
doubt that reduction in allocation was  going to advers ely affect the performance 
of the PSUs. 
 
The Committee, therefore,  recommended the Minist ry to approach the 
Planning Commission with am ple justific ation to provide sufficient funds at  
revised estimates stage as per the needs  of PSUs.  The Committee once again 
emphasized that the realistic projections  and allocat ion of sufficient funds for 
PSUs are essential for sustained progr ess of steel industry and ther efore, 
reiterated their earlier  recommendations  for immediate corrective measures in 
this direction. 
 
   

  
Action Taken 
 
The plan outlay for 2006-07 proposed by NMDC, KIOCL, MOIL & Bir d 
Group had been reduced by Pla nning Commission, in cons ultation with Ministry 
of Steel, since it was felt  that the proposed outlays of  these 4 Companies were 
on the higher side and not realistic ta king into ac count the trend of pas t 
expenditure and the current status of the proposals. The 3 PSUs and Bird Group 
(a Govt. managed company) were cons ulted and they had agreed to the 
suggested reduction in their res pective outlays. Since the plan outlay allocations 
for 2006-07 were reduced with the consent  of these Compani es, the reduced 
outlays are not expected to adversely affect their performance. However, if there 
are justifications for increasing the outlay for 2006-07 in r espect of these 
Companies, the Ministry would approac h Planning Commission at the RE stage 
for increased allocations as per the needs of the Companies. 
 
In respect of MECON, Ministry of Steel had proposed an amount of 
Rs.101.00 crore (based on the revised rest ructuring proposal for MECON; initial 
proposal was for Rs.67.50 crore) as Plan budgetary support for equity investment 
in MECON in 2006-07. However, Pl anning Commission approved only Rs.30.00 
crore and the releas e of this amount in  2006-07 is subject to the approval of 
MECON’s restructuring propos al by the competent aut hority. As and when the 
restructuring proposal for ME CON, which is presently under consideration of the 
Government is approved, the necessary  funds required to implement the 
restructuring of MECON would be made available. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please See Para No. 1.11 Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No.3.34) 
 
The Com mittee had noted that Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited 
(KIOCL) had been allocated Rs.200 crore in BE 2006-07 for implementation of 
various new schemes /ongoing schemes as against Rs.225 crore in BE 2005-06 
reduced to Rs.129.66 crore in R E-2005-06. The Committee felt that unlike the 
previous y ear, KIOC L should u tilize the allocated a mount of Rs.200 crore to 
retain its financial strengthen in the aftermath of Hon’ble Supreme Court direction 
to stop mining at  Kudremukh. The Co mmittee, therefore, desired that 
schemes/projects relating to acquisition for development of new mines should be 
given highest priority and incess ant efforts should be made for the sustainability  
of the Company.  
 
   

  
Action Taken 
 
Against an outlay of Rs.200 crore fo r 2006-07 an am ount of Rs.155 crore 
had been earmarked towards  ‘Development  of Permanent Ra ilway Siding’ 
‘Construction of bulk material handling facilit ies for receipt of iron ore by rail’ and  
‘other Mine Development’. As certain claimants whose land was getting affected, 
went to Court therefore, a llotment of land for develop ment of per manent railway 
siding and bulk material handling faci lities, could not be done.  Therefore 
expenditure under ‘Development of Permanent Railway Siding’ and ‘Construction 
of bulk material handling facilities’ may not be made as earmarked in 2006-07.  
 
KIOCL has applied for mining leas e in Ram andurg (Karnataka), 
Chikkanayakanahalli iron ore deposits  in  Karnataka and Khandadhar in 
Sundergarh District of Orissa. The com pany has also signed  an MOU with Stee l 
Authority of India Limited to for m a join t v enture company to mine iron  ore at 
Kalta, Taldih and Barsua mines in Orissa. Kudremukh Iron ore Company Lim ited 
is giving the highest priority for acquisition and develop ment of new mines whic h 
will enable the company to survive in future.  In case of Ramandurg, the 
allotment is not being made due to a Hi gh Court stay in Karnataka.  Also 
allocation of mining leases are a long-term process.   Therefore, the expenditure 
on development of some mines as earmarked may not be made in 2006-07. 
 
KIOCL is making a ll out effort to utilize the maxim um funds from the 
allocated amount to remain sustainable.  
 
Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please See Para No. 1.21 Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para No.6.19) 
 
The Committee noted that the Committee of Secretaries recommended for 
merger of Neelanchal Ispat Nigam Limit ed (NINL) with Steel Authority of India 
Limited (SAIL) and enabling actions were in progress. The Committee were of 
the view t hat the merger of steel PS Us with SAIL would bring far reaching 
benefits like consolidating their strength in terms of competitiveness  and 
distribution of raw material among the steel PSUs.  
 
The Committee also f elt that while merging smaller companies with SAIL 
due considerations should be given to  the economies and financial impact 
thereof on SAIL without ignoring the labour  and social obligations entrusted to 
public sector undertakings in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the merger of BRL and NINL since ac cepted by  the 
Government, should be expedited and completed in the time-bound manner. The 
Committee would like to reiterate thei r ear lier recom mendations on merger of 
   

  
HSCL with SAIL and desir e that till a final decision is  taken, the Ministry should  
endeavour to award new projects as we ll as work on modernization/upgradation 
of existing projects to HSCL in order to bail it out from financial crunch. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Selection of Merchant Bank er for the va luation of NINL is  currently going 
on by the Selection Committee comprising of  the members at Dir ector level from 
SAIL & NINL. Final decision on the merger issue of NINL with SAIL will be taken 
after the valuation of NINL. As r egards merger of BRL with SAIL, it is s ubmitted 
that the proposal has  been s ent to Board for Recons truction of Public Sec tor 
Enterprises (BRPSE) for consideration.   
 
In so far as merger of HSCL with SA IL is concerned, there is no such 
proposal under consideration of Governme nt.  HSCL is able to bag orders for 
new projects on its own merit.  HSCL is approaching RINL/SAIL to secure work  
order in their modernization and upgradation programmes. 
    
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please See Para No. 1.41 Chapter – I of the Report) 
   

  
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL  
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No.3.16) 
 
The Com mittee were constrained to note that despite their  earlier 
recommendations made in the 10th Repor t on Demands for Grants (2005-06), 
the Ministry is yet to clear the restructuring proposal of MECON  Ltd. 
 
The Committee felt that inordinate del ay in clearing of  the proposal had 
already resulted in substantial reducti on in budgetary support to this ailing 
undertaking by Planning Com mission and any further delay would seriously  
impair the performance of ME CON Ltd.  The Com mittee, therefore, reiterated 
that the restructuring proposal of MECON Ltd. s hould be cleared at once so that  
the budget earmarked for the purpose could be spent and the funds reduced by 
the Planning Commission could be sought at RE stage. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Minis try has ci rculated Draft Cabinet Note to the concerned 
Ministries/Departments of Government of I ndia for their comments.  After receipt  
of their comments the matter will be taken up at the Cabinet in due course. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.H-110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para No.4.9) 
 
The Committee had found that despite  the budgetary support amounting 
to Rs.51 crore to HSCL, MECON Ltd. and BRL in 10th Five Year Plan period, 
these PSUs had still not been a ble to gen erate I&EBR.  The Committee noted  
that the Ministry had sent a comp rehensive proposal to the Boar d for  
Reconstruction of Public Sector  Enterprises (BRPSE)  based on  the diagn ostic 
study conducted by a consultant on futu re viability of HSCL.  A report on 
Business Plan-cum-Viability study of BR L was also under cons ideration of the 
Ministry. 
 
The Com mittee, therefore, desired t he Ministry to  revamp/restructure 
HSCL and BRL in the light of the studies conducted in this regard and prepare a 
road map to make them profitable. 
 
   

  
Action Taken 
 
Due to acc umulated losses HSCL, ME CON Ltd. and BRL have not been 
able to generate I&EBR. 
 
In case of  HSCL, the Ministry has  already submitted a c omprehensive 
proposal t o the BRPSE s eeking its re commendations.  On receipt  of 
recommendations from BRPSE further action will be taken up accordingly. 
 
As regards BRL, it is  submitted that a comprehens ive proposal, based on 
the Business Plan-cum-Viability Study  prepared by  MECON Ltd. has been 
prepared and will be placed before the BRPSE shortly for its recommendations. 
 
It is also s ubmitted that physical and financial performance of HSCL, BRL 
and MECON  Ltd. has improved during 2005-06 over 2004-05. 
 
 [Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No.6.17) 
 
The Committee had noted that availability of critical inputs such as iron 
ore, coking and non-c oking coal in required  quantity and quality determines the 
fate of the steel companies.  The Committee also noted that the financial strength 
of SAIL beyond 2012 would mainly depends on renewal of existing mining leases 
at Chiria and Rowg hat pending with State Govern ment of Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand and Orissa for more than a decade.  F urther, RINL did not hav e 
adequate linkages of raw material for t he next 20 years and NMDC’s expans ion 
programme had been hanging fire for many  years due to inordinate delay  in 
approval/clearances of Kumarswamy, Ba iladilla and Ramandurg mining leases.  
The NMDC too was heading t owards crisis  as renewal of three leases whic h 
meets 80% of its requirem ent were pending with Ori ssa Government and KIOCL 
which was  craving for iron ore mines to continue its  pellet operation was  also 
caught in the web of pending renewal of mining leases. 
 
The Committee had earlier recommended that a High Powered Committee 
might be constituted for speedy renewal of  mining leases including Chiria and 
Rowghat for SAIL and Bellar y-Hospet for KIOCL and expediting var ious 
clearances required from other Ministri es and the State Governments.  The 
Committee noted that although the Pr oject Coordination Group under the 
Chairmanship of the Minister of Steel  had been functioning since October 2004,  
no visible improvement had been noticed in the system. 
 
The Committee felt that the Ministry had fa iled to play its ro le of facilitator 
since most of the steel PSUs were faci ng the problem of availability of raw 
material in the absence of clearances required for mining lease/renewal of mining 
   

  
lease.  The Committee, therefore, desir ed the Ministry to address  the issue with 
utmost seriousness and bail out the steel PSUs by expediting the cle arance of 
the mining leases. 
 
The Com mittee further noted that regar ding grant of preference to the 
steel PSUs in the award of mining lease,  an Expert Group constituted by the 
Ministry of Steel inter-alia recommended that existing steel plant s in the Public  
Sector should be given higher priority .  The Ministry had referred the 
recommendations of the Expert Group and Dang Committee report on export, 
procedure/renewal of leases, etc. along with its view s to a High level Committee 
constituted in Planning Commiss ion for a comprehensive review of the National 
Mineral Policy and MMDR Act. 
 
The Com mittee desired that Nati onal Mineral Policy and MMDR Act 
should be suitably amended in or der to give preference to the steel PSUs in 
grant/renewal of mining leas e and time- bound appr oval of forest/environment  
clearances. 
  
Action Taken 
 
The existing requirement of iron or e for SAIL Steel Plants is being met 
from its captive sources located in th e States of Jharkhand, Orissa and 
Chhattisgarh.  Beyond 2011-12, the increased requirement of iron ore is planned 
to be met from captive mines of SAIL.  To meet this requirement SAIL has 
planned for development of new mines  including Rowghat  and Chiria and 
expansion of some of the mines. Rowghat would supply iron or e to Bhilai Steel 
Plant (BSP) and Chiria to Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL), Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP),  
Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) & IISCO Steel Plant (ISP).   Development of these 
mines by 2011-12 is  critical for ensuri ng uninterrupted supply of raw materia l 
inputs. Therefore renewal of mining leases of Chiria a nd grant of mining lease of 
Rowghat are of critical importance for SAIL.  
 
The Government of Jharkhand had earli er in Decemb er, 2004, cancelled 
three out of ten Iron Ore leas es at Chiria and Gua in West Sing hbhom district of 
Jharkhand, against which SAIL approached the Mines Tribunal,  which gav e its 
order in favour of SAIL. These issues are presently pending in t he Ranchi High 
Court.  In spite of efforts made by SAIL & Ministry of Steel, renewal of leases has 
been getting delay ed on account  of the st and taken by the State Government. 
The issue of renewal of mi ning leases of Chiria were taken up by  Hon’ble Steel 
Minister with Chief Minister, Jhar khand and Secretary, Steel  with Chief  
Secretary, Jharkhand in various meet ings. Intense efforts are under way to 
resolve these iron ore mining lease issues amicably. 
 
Deposit ‘F’ of Rowghat in Kanker Dis trict consists of seven sub-blocks  
namely Raodongri, Block-A, Tarhur, Anjr el, Koragaon, Kharkagaon & Tark rel. 
The Minist ry of Mines vide Gazette Notification dated 3.12.2004 had reserved 
   

  
only six sub-blocks namely Bloc k-A, Tarhur, Anjrel, Koragaon, Kharkagaon &  
Tarkrel of  ‘F’ block deposit of Rowg hat excluding Raodongri,  over an area of 
1702.70 hectares for 10 years in favour of Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL).  
 
Later on Ministry of Steel had requested the Ministry of Mines to reserve 
the entire ‘Deposit-F’ in favour of SAI L which has been agreed to, and a Gaz ette 
Notification dated 20th July, 2006 was issu ed by Ministry of Mines reserving an 
area of 2028.797 hec tares (including Raod ongri) for undertaking prospecting or 
mining operations through SAIL f or ten y ears. However the latitude & longitude 
shown in the notification was not in line with the latitude & longitude of Deposit-F. 
Now Ministry of Mines  has issued the required corrigendum on  8th Septem ber, 
2006. SAIL will now request Government of  Chhattisgarh for a consent letter 
consisting of lease boundary details  for an area of 2028.797 hectares and 
expedite further action in this regard. 
 
Issues related to mining lease / forest clearance are to be discussed in the 
Project Coordination Group, as and when raised by the Steel PSUs. 
 
A committee under Joint Secretary (Steel) has been constituted to monitor 
the expans ion programme of NMDC.  Repr esentatives from Mi nistry of Mines,  
Ministry of Environm ent and Forests, St ate Government of Chhattisgarh, State 
Government of Orissa, State Government of Karnataka are the members of this 
committee.  Till n ow two meetings of the committee have b een conve ned. 
Ministry of Steel has  taken up the iss ues of minin g leas e/environment/forest 
clearance of different PSUs with the c oncerned Stat e Governments/Ministry of  
Mines/Ministry of Environment & Forests. 
 
 The High Level Committee constituted in Planning Commission under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Anwarul Hoda Member (Planning Commission) for a 
comprehensive review of the Nati onal Mineral Policy and MMDR Ac t has 
submitted its report to the Government.   
 
Further action on the recommendati on contained in th e Hoda Committee 
Report for suitably amending National Mi neral Policy  and Mines and Minerals 
(Development & Regulation) Ac t, 1957 in or der to give preference to the Steel 
PSUs in grant/ renewal of the mining leases and  time bound approv al of 
environmental / forest clearances are to be taken by  Ministry of Mines.  The 
matter is being pursued with them. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(3)/2006 Parl., dated 6.10.2006] 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                             ANANTH KUMAR 
 18 December, 2006                                                                        Chairman 
 27Agrahayana  1928(Saka)     Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
   

  
ANNEXURE-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FIFTH SITTING OF  THE ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND ST EEL ( 2006-07) HELD ON 14 TH DECEMBER 2006 IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘A’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1700  hrs. to 1730 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Karuna Shukla - In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu 
4. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey 
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
6. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
7. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
9. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
10. Shri Surendra Lath 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
13. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
14. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Director 
3. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
 
2. Since the Chairman could not att end the meeting, t he Members of the 
Committee requested Smt. Karuna Shukla to  preside over the meeting under  
Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
   

  
3. At the outset, Chairperson, welcom ed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft 
Reports on Demands for Grant s(2006-07) of the Ministries of C oal, Mines and 
Steel:- 
 
(i) **  **  **  **  ** 
(ii) **  **  **  **  ** 
(iii) Action Tak en by the Government  on the r ecommendations cont ained in  
the Seventeenth Report (Fourteent h Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel(2005-06) on “Dem ands for Grants (2006-
07)” of the Ministry of Steel. 
 
4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports wit h minor  
additions/deletions/ amendments. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairm an to finalis e these Reports after 
making consequential change arising out of factual verification by the concer ned 
Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________ 
** Does not pertain to this Report. 
   

 
 
 
  
ANNEXURE II  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF  
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2005-06) 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made      17 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:  
  
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13 and 14)                 9 
 
Percentage of total         52.94% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government's replies:       2  
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 9 and 17) 
 
Percentage of total         11.76% 
       
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government  
have not been accepted by the Committee:       
(vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 3, 8 and 16)     3 
 
Percentage of total                17.64% 
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited:          
(vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 4, 10 and 15 )                3 
Percentage of total               17.64%  