 
6 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2004-2005) 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL  
 
 
  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the  Third 
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel   
(Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                           
       SIXTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2005 / Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) 
 
  

SIXTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL  
 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Third 
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.3.2005 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on  23.3.2005 
 
                                                              
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2005 / Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) 
  

CC&S. No.  6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. 19.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  
Business in Lok Sabha ( Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi –  
110 005.   
  

CONTENTS 
  
                      
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION   
   
CHAPTER I  Report     
   
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted 
by the Government  
 
  
  
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
 
 
  
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
  
Minutes of Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee on Coa l 
and Steel (2004-05) held on 21.3.2005 
 
 
 
   
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in  the Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2004-05)          
 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar    - Chairman 
 Mem bers 
            
           Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Bikash Chowdhury 
6. Shri  Chandra Sekhar Dubey 
7. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
9. Shri Nitish Kumar 
10. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam 
11. Shri  Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta 
12. Shri Hemlal Murmu 
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav 
14. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
16. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
18. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
19. Shri Rewait Raman Singh 
20. Shri Ramsewak Singh (Babuji) 
21. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
 
  

Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Devdas Apte 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
24. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
25. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad 
26. Shri B.J.Panda 
27. Shri Jibon Roy 
28. Shri G.K.Vasan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Secretary 
2. Shri N.K.Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri R.K.Sharma  - Committee Officer  
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairm an, Standing Comm ittee on Co al and Steel having been authorised 
by the Committee to  present th e Report on their beh alf, present this Sixth  Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Standi ng Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth  
Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Steel”.  
 
2.  The Third Report  (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha) of the Stan ding Committee o n 
Coal and S teel was pres ented to Lok  Sabha on 25 th August, 2004.   Rep lies of 
the Government to all th e recommendations c ontained in the Report were 
received on 17th December, 2004.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this  
Report at their sitting held on 21st March, 2005.   
 
4. An analys is on the Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II.  
 
5. For facility of reference and conveni ence, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      ANANTH 
KUMAR 
21 March, 2005_____                                                                      
Chairman, 
30  Phalguna , 1926 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Coal 
and Steel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER -I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Repor t (Fourteenth Lok Sabha ) of the S tanding 
Committee on Coal and Steel on “De mands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Steel” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 25.8.2004.    
 
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised as follows:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government:  
   
Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25,  
28 and 29.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do n ot desire to pursue in  
view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Sl. Nos.15,  22, 26 and 27. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Governm ent 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl. Nos.8 and 19 . 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Obser vations in  respec t o f which f inal rep lies of  the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
 Sl. No.11 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the recommendations which 
have been categorised as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to th e 
Committee at the earliest. 
   
1.4 The Committee desire that  ut most importance should  be given to the  
implementation of recommendations accepted by  the Governm ent.  In case, it  is  not 
possible for the Governme nt to implement any recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for 
any reasons, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-
implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations/Observations made in the Third Report. 
  

  UNDER UTILISATION OF FUNDS  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No. 2.5) 
 
1.6 The Committee had taken no te of the ap proved plan  outlay and  actual 
expenditure made during the first two years of current Five Year Plan and expressed their 
concern that as against the approved ou tlay of Rs.1,409 crore only Rs.442.90 crore were 
spent during 2002-2003 and during 2003-2004 ag ainst an approved outlay of Rs.1461.30 
crore only 606.40 crore had been sp ent.  This showed only 36.51% of fund utilization 
during the first two years.  The reasons given by the Ministry of Steel for not utilizing the 
budgeted am ount like depressed m arket conditions, delay in obtaining 
forest/environmental clearances, acquisition of land and preparation of DPR etc.  by the 
different wings of the Minis try and were not acceptable to the Committee.  The curren t 
trend showed that the Ministry had not take n any lesson from the sim ilar failures during 
the 9th Five Year Plan and the sam e trend was continuing during the current plan also.  
The Comm ittee noted that the m id-term appraisal of 10 th Five Year Plan (2002-2007)  
exercise was underway.  The Comm ittee had, therefore, strongly recommended that the 
Government should take all th e possible initiatives for full utilisation of plan outlay 
during the remaining years of current Five Year Plan so that the projects and programmes 
of the PSUs did not suffer and the current tu rn around in the steel sector was m aintained 
during the current year and in the remaining period of the current plan. 
 
1.7 In their reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated that the 
recommendations/observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.  Ministry of 
Steel would continue with its ef forts to ensu re full utilisation of plan outlay during the 
remaining years of the curren t five year p lan.  However, it m ay be pointed out that the  
plan outlays are only indicative and its operation is subject to the availability of resources 
through the successive Annual Plan allocations for the 10th Plan period. 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed dismal fund utilization reaching just 36.51% during the 
first two years, and, therefor e, strongly recommended that the Government should take  
all the possible initia tives for full utilisation of plan outla y during the re maining years of 
current Five Year  Plan so that the project s and progra mmes of th e PSUs did not suffer 
and the current  turnaround in the steel sector was maintain ed. The Ministry in its brief 
reply has stated that it would continue with its efforts to ensure full utilisation of the  plan 
outlay  but has pointed out that plan outlays  were only indicative  and its operations were 
subject to the availability of resources through successive Annual Plan allocations for the 
10th Plan period. The Committee deprecate the r outine reply of the Ministry, which is 
devoid of any details about  the specific  measures taken to ensure  the utilization of the 
allocated funds. The  Committee are also unhappy  with yet  another reason advanced by 
the Ministry to justify its failure in this regard which indicates that not only the execution 
  

but the planning in the Ministry is also re plete with flaws. The Committee would like to 
emphasize that the current scenario in the steel sector makes it all the more imperative for 
the Mi nistry t o furt her st rengthen and consolidate the  gains  by proper and e ffective 
utilization of the resources.  
 
1.9 The Committee reiterate that not only all possible  initiatives for full utilization of 
the plan outlay during the  remainder of the 10 th Plan should be  taken but  also the  target 
therefor be specified as  well. These also n eed to be regularly m onitored so that the 
investments made  in the  steel sector give  further i mpetus to the  turnaround in the 
industry.   
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS(2004-05) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No. 3.12) 
 
1.10 The Committee in their ear lier recommendation observed that they did not find 
justification for the allocation of an amount of Rs.3.79 crore in  the name of the office of 
the Develop ment Comm issioner f or Iron  and  St eel, Kolk ata when it was closed  w.e.f. 
23.5.2003 based upon the recomm endations of th e Expenditure Reforms Comm ission 
constituted by the M inistry of  Finance. These functions ha d been transferred to  the 
Ministry of Steel and Joint Plant Committee and they were doing it without any problem. 
The Comm ittee had noted that there were 226 e mployees of DCI&S at the tim e of 
closure. Out of 215 staff declared surplu s by Departm ent of Personnel and Training 
(DoPT), special VRS had been declared in case of 8 persons and 82 persons had been 
redeployed/nominated b y DoPT leaving 125 surplus staff, awaiting red eployment. The  
Ministry of Steel had made financial provisions for all 226 employees in the budget of  
2004-05 and they were m aking paym ents to them  without; any assignm ent. The 
Committee had, therefore, desired that the Mi nistry of Steel should undertake the matter 
with DoPT for  earliest completion of the redeployment process and save the expenditure 
allocated for the purpose. 
 
1.11 In their reply, the Minis try of Steel has stated that the suggestions of the Committee 
have been noted.  Rs.3.79 crore covers the establishm ent cost of establishm ent of entir e 
226 employees of DCI&S, Kolkata.  This provis ion is an estimation of the expenditure at 
the tim e of finalization of RE-2003-04 in the m onth of October/N ovember, 2003.  
However, based on the status of redeploym ent, this provision has been recomm ended to 
be revised in RE 2004-05 to Rs.2.9195 crore fo r 125 surplus staff awaiting redeploym ent 
plus expenditure incurred on 101 su rplus em ployees who have been 
nominated/redeployed/Spl. VR S/retired/died.  Under the sc heme of redeploym ent of 
surplus staff, employees in the surp lus cell would continue to receive full salary till they 
are redeployed.  Ministry of Steel is in c onstant touch with the DoPT for ensuring early 
redeployment of surplus staff of DCI&S. 
  

 
1.12 The Committee had desired th at the Ministry of Steel should take up the  matter of 
redeployment of 125 surplus  sta ff of th e erstwhile office of the  Development 
Commission for Iron and Steel, Kolkata with the   Depart ment of Personnel  & Training 
(DoPT) to save  the expenditure allocated for  the purpose. The Ministry  in its  reply has 
stated that it is in constant touch with the  DoPT for the redeployment of surplus staff but 
the employe es in the surplus cell would contin ue to receiv e f ully salar y till they are 
redeployed. The Committee observe that  the Officer of the Development Commissioner  
for Iron & Steel which was closed on 23 May 2003, still has 125 surplus employees to be 
redeployed by the Ministry/DoPT.   
 
1.13 The Committee are  astonished to find th at the  Ministry continues to  pay full 
salary employees awaiting redeployme nt for nearly 22 months. Th e Committee feel that 
the Ministry has not  pursued the  matter w ith Do PT with  any se nse of urgency and 
seriousness thereby causing avoidable drain on the exchequer. The Committee would like 
the Ministry to take up the matter with DoPT at the  top administrative level to ensure 
redeployment of the surplus staff without any further loss of ti me. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard within a period of three months.  
  
NON-PLAN LOAN TO PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 
Recommendation (Sl.Nos.8 and 10, Para Nos. 3.28 and 3.34) 
 
1.14 The Committee were surprised to note that a huge amount of Rs.218.74 crore was 
pending with steel sector PSUs sin ce last severa l year s.  I t was v ery painf ul th at stee l 
sector PSUs had kept the paym ents pendi ng/under dispute for such longer periods 
particularly under the condition when the HSCL was  trying to revive with the  
Government’s assistance.   The Comm ittee had no hesitation in sayi ng that the Ministry 
of Steel ha d not playe d its des ired role of f acilitator and  regula tor.  The Comm ittee 
strongly recomm ended that th e Dis pute Settlem ent Comm ittee of th e Min istry should 
undertake the m atter on top priority with a vi ew to decide the m atter at the earliest and 
direct PSUs to settle the accounts immediat ely.  The Co mmittee strongly recommended 
that the Ministry of Steel  should now prepare a tim e bound schedule for earliest 
settlement of issues and the matter should not be delayed any more.   
 
1.15  In its reply the Ministry of Steel has stated that the disputed dues have been taken 
up by the Dispute Se ttlement Committee of  the Minis try and the Comm ittee expects to 
settle the matters expeditiously. 
  

 
1.16 The Committee had noted that HSCL  was  outsourcing labour of younger 
generation who are able to perform. The Co mmittee did not support this approach of the  
company for the reason s that they were pa ying high salary to the regu lar em ployees 
without proper utilization of  their services. In addition, they were spending m oney by 
engaging y oung contractual labour. The Comm ittee had, therefore, desired that such 
regular workers of the company should not be paid for sitting idle. HSCL should identify 
such workers who had attained the age of 54 years and  above and p repare a sch eme to 
provide m ulti-skill  tra ining suitab le to them  with a view to utilize their se rvice to an 
optimum level. The com pany should also analyse the expenditure being m ade by 
engaging contractual labourers and should minimize it.  
 
1.17 In its reply,  the M inistry of Steel h as stated that the com pany will im plement a 
dual s trategy of  separ ating idle workf orce com bined with m ulti-skill train ing of 
remaining employees to  facilitate their optimum use. This will a lso enable the com pany 
to keep expenditure on contract labour at the minimum required level. 
 
1.18 The Committee  had recommended that  the  Ministry of Steel  should prepare a  
time bound schedule for  an early settle ment of outstanding claim s of Hindustan 
Steelworks Construction Ltd. (HSCL) pending with the  steel sector PSUs. The  Ministry 
has stated in its  brief reply that  the outstanding  dues have been taken up by the  Dispute 
Settlement Committee of the Ministry and the  matters  is expect ed to be settled 
expeditiously.   The Committe e ar e distressed  to note f rom the casual reply of  the 
Ministry  of Steel that it has not made any sincere effort to sort out the long pending issue 
and have also not com e out with a solution to  settle  the outstanding claim s of HSCL  
against Steel PSUs which are pending sin ce 1988 onwards.  The Committee strongly feel 
that the financial health of HSCL would have been much improved had these outstanding 
dues been paid  to it in ti me. The Committ ee desire the Ministry to fra me a time-bound 
programme to settle the issue immediately and effectively play its role as a facilitator and 
a regulator.  
 
1.19 The Committee in their earlier reco mmendation had desired that HSCL should 
provide multi-skill training to those workers who would have attained an age of  54 years 
and above with a  view to util ise their services to an opti mum level and to m inimize the 
contractual labour.  The Ministry  in its reply has stated that the company will implement 
a dual strategy of  separating idle  workf orce com bined with m ulti-skill train ing of  
remaining employees to fac ilitate their optim um use.  The Committe e note that the  
  

Ministry has  not, however, i ndicated as to when  HSCL  should prepare a  ti me-bound 
schedule for providing multi-skill tr aining to  employees  and utilize their services in the 
best possible manner. The Committee hope that with the availability of multi-skill trained 
staff, the outsourcing of labour will be eliminated in HSCL to a large extent.   
 
INVESTMENT IN PUBLIC SECTOR 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.18, Para No. 3.92) 
 
1.20 The Committee appreciated the achievem ents of SAIL in the financial 
performance and reduction in borrowings. Th e Comm ittee noted that s uch signific ant 
improvement in the turnover and financial performance was due to im proved production 
and sales volum e, m arket oriented product mix, intensive cost control m easures, 
rationalization of m anpower, reduction in borrowings  supported by external factors like  
growth in steel demand and firming up of international and domestic prices. The Ministry 
had expressed their hope that buoyant dem and conditions were likel y to continue in 
2004-2005 also on the basis of substantial inve stment in infrastructure and industrial 
projects in dom estic front and stability in global dem and. The com pany had now put 
thrust on debt reduction and fund m anagement. Outstanding borrowings, as on 
30.06.2004 is Rs.7728 crore and they propose to  make the repayment by 2006-2007. The 
Committee, therefore, desired that S AIL should work as per the road m ap proposed with 
specific short-term and long-term targets to maintain the present performance and further 
strengthening of financial stat us of the com pany so that the sudden changes in national 
and international scenario might not affect them adversely.  
 
1.21 In its  reply,  the Ministry   has stated that SAIL has prepared a w ell-defined road 
map, Corporate Plan – 2012, which inter-alia highlights the followings: 
 
In the short-term, the plan aims to remove bottlenecks in existing facilities such as 
introduction of alternative fuels, enhan cement of assets productivity, enhancing 
consistency in operations to maintain the current level of performance. 
 
Further, in the long-term, the plan envisages growth by enhancing the m arket 
share, along with Quality & Cost Com petitiveness. In this r egard, SAIL aims to produce 
about 20 million tonnes of Hot M etal by 2012 through value addi tion projects and 
capacity ad dition. Quality and Cos t Com petitiveness will be ensured by 100% steel 
making faci lity through  BoF route and near 100% continu ous casting with Secon dary 
Metallurgy facilities. Finishing facilities are also proposed to enhance value addition in 
line with the m arket requirem ents and for reduction of se mis. Strategic alliances 
including equity participation, long term tie-ups etc. in the areas of coal, power and iron 
ore are planned to ensure availability of critical inputs. 
 
The plan is under different stages of implementation. 
  

 
 
1.22 The Committee are happy to  note that SAIL has  prepared a well de fined Corporate 
Plan-2012, a  blue  print for  th e company’s  growth in the co ming years  in tandem with 
growing market.  The Committee hope that Corporate Plan – 2012 will take off smoothly 
and all the bottlenecks that may come in its implementation will be rem oved by the 
Ministry of Steel.  The  Committee desire th at SAIL/Ministry of Steel should prep are a 
time-bound schedule for its  execution and concer ted efforts made to adhere to the time  
schedule to reap the maximum fruits of the plan. The Committee also desire the Ministry  
to prepare the long-term perspective  plan beyond 2012 which woul d focus not only on 
long-term gains but  would also chalk out the  strategies  to face challenges during 
unfavourable period in the steel sector in future. 
 
DISINVESTMENT OF SAIL 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para No.393) 
 
1.23 The Committee found that after implem entation of the financia l and restructuring 
proposed for SAIL, m ajority of the tasks have been completed successfully. A few tasks 
like downsizing of manpower are still und er im plementation and they are also 
anticipating difficulties  in decision of disinvestments of SAIL units. The Committee had 
drawn the attention towards th e announced Governm ent policy that profit m aking PSUs 
will not be considered for disinvestments. Now, SAIL is a prof it-making company in all 
terms and a ny disinvestm ents at this stage may create great difficulty on the path of 
recovery. The Comm ittee, therefore, st rongly recommended that the issue of 
disinvestments of SAIL units should be rec onsidered in v iew of changed situation  and 
final decision should be taken as per the present policy. 
 
1.24 The Ministry in its reply has stated that SAIL will pursue its disinvestments 
process, as guided by the Government/policies. 
 
1.25 The Committee had strongly  reco mmended that the  issue  of disinvest ment of 
SAIL units should be reconsidered in view of the changed situation and final decision 
taken as per the present policy. The Committee are not satisfied with the sketchy reply of 
the Governme nt. The  Committee feel that  keeping in view the  buoyancy now having 
returned to the Steel Sector, the disinvestments of SAIL  and other steel PSUs is not at all 
desirable. Besides, the  a mbitious Corporat e Plan, 2012 formulated  by SAIL, clearly 
shows its progression. The  Committee, therefore, would like  to reiterate that SAIL and 
  

other PSUs under the Ministry of Steel should not be disinvested. It should be resorted to 
only if found absolutely necessary and all steps to revive any PSU have gone fruitless.  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 21, Para No.3.100) 
 
1.26 The Comm ittee expressed their happine ss to note that R ashtriya Ispat Nigam 
Limited (Visakhapatnam Steel Plant) had im proved their financial perform ance and net 
profit soared to Rs.1547 crore  in 2003-2004  from  Rs.521 crore in 2002-03.  This 
increase in profit of 192% from  the last y ear was supposed to be very im pressive. The 
Committee hope that RINL would m aintain this perform ance in future also. The 
Committee also welcome tha t the long term policy was being prepared by the com pany 
for expansion. The Comm ittee desire that RINL  should undertake the work relating to 
expansion on priority and start the work in this direction after getting the approval of the 
Government without any delay. The Comm ittee also strongly desired that the 
Government should work as facilitator in th e task of i mplementation of the prosperous 
expansion plan of RINL. 
 
1.27 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Steel stated that no com prehensive 
proposal for any expansion so far has been re ceived in the Ministr y.   As recommended 
by the Comm ittee the Ministry would take ap propriate action on the expansion plan of 
RINL. 
 
1.28 The  Committee  had in th eir earlier Report strongly desi red that the  Governme nt 
should work as facilitator in the task of implementation of the prosperous expansion plan 
of Rashtriya  Ispat Niga m Limited (RINL).  The Committee are, however, surprise d to  
note  that no comprehensive expansion pr oposal of RI NL has  been received in the 
Ministry and it  has  also not  taken any step in this direction. Th is shows the lac k of  
direction and c oordination on the  part  of the  Ministry  to get   the  expansion of RI NL 
expedited. The  Committee are fully convinced  that  in view of the turnaround taking 
place in the steel sector in the country, the expansion of RI NL beco mes all the more  
important in the overall interes t of the com pany.  The Com mittee, therefore, desire that 
the proposal for  the expansion of RINL shoul d be expeditiously prepared and appro ved 
as a long-term policy measure.  The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 3.110) 
 
1.29 The Commi ttee noted that in view of the order of Hon’ble Supreme Court  
permitted mining at Kudrem ukh upto 31 st December, 2005 only, Kudremukh Iron Ore 
Company Limited (KIOCL) had started looking  for alternative m ines and on accoun t of 
additional investm ents, the allocation has been  enhanced to the extent of Rs.54 c rore.  
  

The Committee welcomed the im pressive performance of the com pany during 2003-04 
and hoped that it will continue during 2004-05 and in co ming years.  The Comm ittee 
desired that KIOCL should undertake the work vigorously to explore the possibility to 
identify and develop new mines to prepare themselves for continuance of the operation of 
the company beyond December, 2005 on the similar pattern. 
   
1.30 The Governm ent in its reply has stat ed that the KIOCL had consulted the 
Attorney General of India and a senior A dvocate of the Hon’ble Suprem e Court on the 
Judgement of the Apex Court.  W ith the legal view that the com pany should file a 
petition before the Hon’ble Supreme Court to get relief from the safety point of view, the 
company should be perm itted to m ine in the unbroken area which has about 35 m illion 
tonnes of weathered ore which will last for another 2 years. 
   
The com pany had also contacted the offi ce of the Director General of Mines 
Safety, who has opined that from  the slope stability and safety point of view, the 
company should m ine in the unbroken area.  M/s National Institute of Rock Mechanics, 
Kolar Goldfields, a Govt. Rese arch Institution, has carried out an independent study and 
given their views on the m atter regarding c ontinuation of the operations of Kudremukh 
area from s afety point of view.  Their findi ngs corroborate KIOCL’s view from  s afety 
and slop e s tability ang le. They have offered that the co mpany should be given  th e 
unbroken area. 
   
A review petition has been filed in the Suprem e Court by KIOCL on 3 rd 
December 2003.  The Hon’ble Suprem e Court, after hearin g the parties on 02-08-2004, 
has directed the Monitoring Committee to examine the prayers of KIOCL. 
   
KIOCL has noted the recommendations of the Committee for guidance. 
 
 
1.31 The Committee understand the  li mitations of Kudrem ukh Iron Ore Com pany 
Limited (KIOCL) in continuing the mining opera tions from the existing  site in vie w of 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s judgement.  The Committee desire that  the review petition 
filed in the  Supre me Court  by KIOCL should be vehe mently argued in its  favour and 
every efforts to be m ade to allow the company to carry on mi ning operations at least in 
unbroken areas for the maximum period.  The Committee hope that the Ministry of Steel 
will play its proactive role in tiding over KIOCL from the present crisis and will r ender 
all the possible support to the company till it starts its  mining operations in other  
alternative areas. 
 
 
GENERAL TOPICS RELATING TO STEEL SECTOR 
 
  

Recommendation (Sl. No. 25, Para No.4.11) 
 
1.32 The Committee were surprised to note that the Empowered Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Minis try of St eel had approved only 33 R&D projects since 
1998 and only 17 projects had been com pleted so far.  The Governm ent had reduced the 
allocation for R&D purpose from  Rs.95 cror e during 2002-03 to Rs .60 crore during 
2003-04 and 2004-05.  During 2003-04 only  an am ount of Rs.13.426 crore wa s 
disbursed.  The Comm ittee were  not convinced with the justification given by the 
Government that they were not receiv ing th e sufficient num ber of R&D projects 
requiring high investm ents particularly when  steel PSUs and private sector had been 
making good investm ents for that purpose.  The Comm ittee str ongly criticized the 
neglecting approach of the Governm ent towa rds such an  im portant activ ity of  stee l 
sector.  The comm ittee felt th at  there was a lo t of scope of R&D in that sector but the 
Government was not paying desired atten tion to facilitate the im portant and good 
projects, w hich m ight usef ul f or the welf are of  the steel se ctor.  The Comm ittee, 
therefore, desired that the Government should take up the matter seriously in consultation 
with all the public and p rivate sector players and invite projects wh ich could benefit the 
industry in improving the cost of production and efficiency. 
 
1.33 In its Action Taken Reply, the Minist ry of Steel has stated that the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee have been noted for appropriate action. 
 
 
1.34 The Committee in their ear lier recommendation had desired the  Government to 
take up the matter serio usly in consultation with all the public and private sector players 
for the completion of 17 R&D pro jects whic h had not  been comple ted so f ar.  The 
Committee are not satis fied with th e casual re ply of the Governm ent as no action plan 
has been indicated by the Government for the completion of the remaining R&D projects.  
The Committee would like  to e mphasize that  the Government should take  up the  issue 
seriously and prepare a time bound programme for their early completion.   
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 29, Para No. 4.40) 
 
1.35 The Committee strongly criticize the lethargic approach of the Ministry of Steel in 
finalising the Steel Policy for the country. Th is policy was to be prepared essentially 
during the period when the steel industry was passing through very tough phase of 
recession. The Committee are happ y to no te that the steel sector has p assed that p hase 
and it has taken a positive turnaround during the past two years. Now in the ch anged 
situation there is an urgent need of a policy which can bring a stability in this sector and 
strengthened to f ight with the n ational an d inte rnational situa tions in f uture. The  
Committee, therefore, desire that Governm ent should adhere to their prom ise and bring 
  

out a Natio nal Stee l Policy with a n objective to prepare a road m ap for Indian Steel 
industry in the context if ongoing reforms, restructuring and globalisation.  
 
1.36 In its reply, the Ministry has stated that the draft National Steel Policy was 
submitted to the Cabinet Comm ittee on Econo mic affairs (CCEA) in Se ptember 2004. 
The CCEA considered the draft National St eel Policy in its m eeting held on 13.10.2004 
and has given the following directions: 
a. The draft N SP may be poste d at the W ebsite of Ministry  of Steel to elicit public 
opinion . 
 
b. A Committee of Secretaries und er the Ca binet Secretary may exam ine the draf t 
NSP in the first instance.  
Action is in progress accordingly. 
 
1.37 The Committee had recommended  the  formulation of the National  Steel Policy 
with an objective to prepare a  road map for Indian steel industry in the  context of on-
going reforms, restructuring a nd globalisation.  The  Ministry in its reply has state d that 
the National Steel Policy has been prepared an d posted at the W ebsite of the Ministry to 
elicit public opinion and thereafter a Comm ittee of Secretaries heade d by Cabinet 
Secretary may examine the draft in the first instance.  The Committee desire the Ministry 
of Steel  to provide  wider  publicity to the  draft National  Steel Policy in the  print  and 
visual media throughout the country.  The Committee also desire that keeping in view the 
importance of the matter a ti me fra me may be  prepared for the f inalisation of  the 
National Steel Policy.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in  
the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para No. 1.7) 
 
The Committee observe that th e steel is th e basic raw material for infrastructure. 
The consumption of steel has been identified as an indicator of ec onomic well being of 
the country. It reflects growth in infrastruc ture and the maturity of the m anufacturing 
industry of a nation. This indu stry has shown an im pressive turn around during the last 
two years. The Committee, theref ore, desi re that the G overnment should take all 
initiatives to str engthen all the wing s of  iron and stee l indu stry to en able th em to f ace 
international com petition in s teel s ector. Th e Governm ent should ens ure th at all the 
constituents of this sector carry out their a llocated duties and responsibilities with desired 
coordination and inter-P SUs cooperation and contribute on econom ic well being of the 
country significantly.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 
In a deregulated and liberalised environment, the Government will play the role of 
facilitator f or rem oving inf rastructural and  other bottlenecks and create an enabling 
environment for the optimum growth of the industry.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 2.5) 
 
The Committee hav e taken no te of  the  ap proved p lan outlay a nd actu al 
expenditure made during the first two years of  current F ive Year Plan and express their 
concern that as against the approved ou tlay of Rs.1,409 crore only Rs.442.90 crore were 
spent during 2002-2003 and during 2003-2004 ag ainst an approved outlay of Rs.1461.30 
crore only 606.40 crore has b een spent.  This shows only 36.51% o f fund utilizatio n 
during the first two years.  The reasons given by the Ministry of Steel for not utilizing the 
budgeted am ount like depressed m arket conditions, delay in obtaining 
forest/environmental clearances, acquisition of land and preparation of DPR etc.  by the 
different wings of the Minist ry an d are not acceptab le to the Comm ittee.  The cu rrent 
trend shows that the Ministry has not taken any lesson from the similar failures during the 
9th Five Year Plan and  the s ame trend is  continuing during the curr ent plan also.  The 
Committee note that the mid-term appraisal of 10 th Five Year Plan (2002-2007) exercise 
is underway.  The Committee, th erefore, strongly recomm end that the Governm ent 
should take all the possible in itiatives for full utilisatio n of plan outlay during the  
remaining years of current Five Year Plan so that the pro jects and pro grammes of the 
  

PSUs do not suffer and the current turn around in the steel sector is maintained during the 
current year and in the remaining period of the current plan. 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
The recomm endations/observations of  the Hon’ble Comm ittee are noted.   
Ministry of Steel would continue  with its ef forts to ensur e full utilisation of plan outlay  
during the remaining years of the current five year plan.  Ho wever, it may be pointed out 
that the plan outlays are only indicative and its operation is s ubject to the  availability of 
resources through the successive Annual Plan allocations for the 10th Plan period. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.8 and 1.9  Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 3.6(B) 
 
The Committee note that as against the proposed total Plan outlay of Rs. 1658.36 
crore including Budgetary Support of Rs .23.00 crores, the Pla nning Comm ission has 
approved an outlay of Rs.1461.40 crores with  a Budgetary S upport of Rs.15.00 crores. 
The Committee find that several plan schemes of MECON Ltd., HSL and BRL are going 
to be affected due to lower plan Budgetary Support than the proposed and similarly many 
important schem es of NMDC Ltd. MOIL and KIOCL are going to suffer due to 
allocation of lower Internal and Extra Budgeta ry Resources than the proposed. All these 
schemes may contribute significantly in improving the performance of these 
undertakings. The Committee, therefore, desire that sincere efforts should be make by the 
Ministry of Steel for getting allocation of additional funds at the Supplem entary/Revised 
Estimates stage with Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance as per requirement of 
those public sector undertakings.   
  
Action Taken 
 
 
The recommendations/observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.  
Against the BE 2004-2005 provision of Rs.15.00 crore this Ministry has already proposed 
Rs.19.00 crore for the PSUs in RE 2004-2005.  Mini stry of Steel has proposed additional 
amount of Rs.4.00 crore for MECON for the purchase of equipment etc. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para No. 3.12) 
 
  

The Committee do not find justification for the allocation of an amount of Rs.3.79 
crore in th e nam e of the office of the Development Comm issioner for Iron and Steel, 
Kolkata when it was closed w.e..f. 23.5.2003 based upon the recommendations of the 
Expenditure Reform s Comm ission constitute d by the Ministry of Finance. T hese 
functions have been transfe rred to th e Ministry of Steel and Joint Plan t Committee and 
they are doing it without any problem . The Comm ittee note that there were 226 
employees of DCI&S at the tim e of clos ure. Out of 215 staff declared surplus by 
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT), special VRS has been declared in case of 
8 persons and 82 persons have been redeployed/nom inated by DoPT leaving 125 surplus 
staff, awaiting redeployment. The Ministry of  Steel has made financial provisions for all 
226 employees in the budget of 2004-05 and they are m aking payments to them without 
any assignm ent. The Comm ittee, therefore, de sire that the Minist ry of Steel should 
undertake the m atter with DoPT for an earliest  completion of the re deployment process 
and save the expenditure allocated for the purpose. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The suggestions of the Comm ittee have been noted.  Rs. 3.79 crore covers th e 
establishment cost of  establishm ent of entir e 226 e mployees of DCI&S Kolkata.  This  
provision is an estimation of the expenditure at the time of finalization of RE 2003-04 in 
the month of October/Novem ber, 2003.  Howeve r, based on the status of redeployment, 
this provision has been recomm ended to be revised in RE 2004-05 to Rs.2.9195 crores 
for 125 surplus staff awaiting red eployment plus expend iture incu rred on 101 surplus  
employees who have been nom inated/redeployed/Spl. VRS/retired/died.  Unde r the 
scheme of redeployment of surplus staff, employees in the surplus cell would continue to 
receive full salary till they are redeployed.  Ministry of Steel is in constant touch with the 
DoPT for ensuring early redeployment of surplus staff of DCI&S. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.12  and 1.13  Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 3.16) 
 
 The Committee app reciate the f inancial loan  assis tance being g iven by the  
Government to Hindustan Steelworks Constr uction Limited for paym ent of outstanding 
salaries, wages and other statutory dues to the employees of a co mpany passing through 
tough phase of regular loss.  The Comm ittee, however, desire that the Minis try should 
ensure that the am ount is utilized only for the assigned purpose and there should not be 
any diversion of funds, delay in  payment of salary etc. to the em ployees of the company.  
The Commi ttee also desire that the Ministry should ensure that if there is any gap in 
financial requirement and loan assistance be ing given, this should be taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance at RE stage to ensure the regular payment to remaining employees of 
the company.    
  

 
Action Taken 
 
 Government of India has provided Rs.229.88 crores so far to HSCL as Non-Plan 
loan for paym ent of outstanding salaries & wages and other st atutory dues to the 
employees of the company. The entire amount has been utilized for the assigned purpose.  
No diversion has been made out of the said fund. 
 
 The Non-Plan loan of Rs.71.89 crore prov ided during the current year i.e. 2004-
05 will also  be utilized f or payment of outstanding sala ries & wages to  the em ployees. 
The com pany proposes to liquid ate rem aining liability  on account of outstanding 
wages/salaries through its own generation of funds. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para No. 3.21) 
 
 The Committee are h appy to note that during the year 2003-04 guidelines of the 
Ministry of Finance to eff ect 10% mandatory cut on non-Pla n, non-salary expenditure in 
respect of the administrative expenditure of the Ministry of Steel a nd its attached office 
viz. the office of Developm ent Commissioner for Iron & Steel was adhered to by the  
Ministry of Steel during  2003-04. The Comm ittee desires that Ministry should continue 
to undertake overall exercise to rationali ze the expenditure under Revenue Section to 
effect the same economy during the year 2004-05 also.  
 
Action Taken 
 
The observation of the Comm ittee has b een noted.  In RE proposal 2004-2005 
more than 10% cut in non-plan has been proposed by this Ministry. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.7, Para No. 3.26) 
 
The Comm ittee are happy to note that th rough the loan assistance from  the 
Government, HSCL has  been able to redu ce liability on account of statutory dues and 
wages/salaries of its employees.  This ha s helped a lot in re ducing the m anpower and 
manpower costs of  the  com pany and ultim ately resulting into m inimizing loss.  The 
Committee note that the total dues at present are Rs.89.37 crores and HSCL has got 
Rs.71.89 crores as loan assistance from the Government for this purpose. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the com pany should take  all possible initiative s to generate funds  
through their own means and if they fail to do so, they should take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance at Revised Estim ates stage to obtain the rem aining am ount for 
payment of salaries/wages of employees to boost the m orale and avoid any possibility of 
litigation on this account. 
  

 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The liab ilities of  the co mpany toward s outstanding salaries  & wages and other 
statutory dues have com e down to Rs.88.36 crores as on 1.8.2004. Governm ent has 
provided a non-plan loan of Rs.71.89 crore during the curre nt year i.e. 2004-05 for 
payment of outstanding salaries & wages of employees of HSCL.  
 
The com pany proposes to take all possible steps to generate funds f rom its 
business operation to bridge the gap between the actual f und requirement and the loan 
assistance granted by the Government.   
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para No. 3.33) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the HSCL have separated 11047 employees 
since im plementation of restructuring pack age and m anpower has been brought to the 
level of 2207 employees.  They have a target of bringing the number of employees to the 
level of 10 00.  The Comm ittee find that  reduction  in  num ber of em ployees has 
contributed significantly and company has m oved on the path of recovery after the 
implementation of revival package.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of 
Steel would facilitate HSCL by providing required assistance so that there is no hurdle in 
the path of recovery. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Rationalization of m anpower after implem entation of ‘Restructuring Package’ in 
July, 1999 has m ade the business operations of  the company m ore efficient and cost 
effective.  Further optimization of manpower has been planned to take the company to an 
irrevocable path of revival.  The employees strength as on 1.9.2004 is 2197.  This number 
is targeted to be brought down to 1000 by 2005-06. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.10, Para No.3.34) 
 
The Committee note that HSCL is outs ourcing labour of younger generation who 
are able to perform.  The Committee do not support this approach of the company for the 
reasons that they are paying high salary  to the regular em ployees without proper 
utilization of their services .  In addition, they are sp ending m oney by engaging young 
contractual labour.  The Comm ittee, therefore,  desire th at such regular workers of the 
company should not be paid for sitting idle .  HSCL should identify such workers who 
have attained an age of 54 years an d above and  prepare a s cheme to provide m ulti-skill 
training suitable to the m with a view to util ize their services to an op timum level.  The  
  

company should also analyse the expenditu re being m ade by engaging contractual  
labourers and should minimize it.   
 
Action Taken 
 
 The com pany will implem ent a dual str ategy of  separating idle workf orce 
combined with m ulti-skill tr aining o f rem aining em ployees to f acilitate their optim um 
use. This w ill also ena ble the  company to kee p expenditu re on con tract labou r a t the  
minimum required level.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.18 and 1.19  Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.12, Para No.3.44) 
 
 The Committee note that BSLC, KDCL and SSL are in the process of considering 
the revised restructuring proposals.  The Committee, therefore, desire that these proposals 
should be finalized immediately and the Ministry of Steel should consider these proposals 
seriously on  receipt so that these u ndertakings m ay be able to com e out of red like 
OMDC. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The comments of the Comm ittee have b een noted and revised restructuring 
proposal is being expedited. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.13, Para No.3.51) 
 
The Committee hope and this effort had helped the company in coming out of bad 
financial conditions and desire that they m ust take all initiatives to bring this reduction to 
the optimum level of 1000 by 200 5-06 so that the health of  the com pany may improve 
further.  The Comm ittee expect that this step may provide a strong base for su ccess of 
revival package  of the co mpany.  The Committee note that HSCL had proposed Rs.6.60 
crores subsidy for waiver of guarantee in the Revised Estimates of 2003-04 and Budget 
Estimates of 2004-05.  But in both cases they have got outlay of Rs.0.92 crores each time.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should pursue vigorously to obtain the 
required subsidy for waiver of guarantee at Revised Estimates stage.    
 
  

Action Taken 
 
 The Ministry has already projected this requirement in the RE of 2004-05 and has 
taken this up appropriately with Ministry of Finance during pre-budget discussions of RE 
proposals, 2004-05.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.14, Para No.3.61) 
 
The Committee are very happy to note that Bharat Refractories Limited has made 
a turnaround and earned a net profit of Rs.1.79 crores wit hout considering interest on 
Government loan of Rs .55 crores duri ng 2003-04.  W hen during 2002-03 com pany 
incurred a net loss of Rs.74.50 crores.  The recovery is im pressive and they have  
overcome the main hurdles in the w ay of physical and financial performance particularly 
the excessive manpower.  The Governm ent subsidies have helped a lot in the turnaround 
of the com pany.  The Comm ittee strongly reco mmend that the Minis try of Steel should  
undertake the m atter seriously wi th the Ministry of finance to review the high rates of 
interest on Government loans, particularly for the companies who are suffering losses for  
a long period and are recovering with the he lp of these loans.  The Comm ittee also 
recommend that the Ministry should make adequate arrangem ents for tim ely and proper 
implementation of revival package so that BRL  m ay be able to get more streng th in 
recovery process.    
 
Action Taken 
 
 Ministry of  Steel has taken up the m atter of reduction of  in terest r ate with  
Ministry of Finance and the matter is being pursued with them. 
 
 Ministry of Steel has been regularly reviewing the pro gress with regard to 
implementation of revival package by BRL as also of the overall physical and financial 
performance of the company.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.16, Para No.3.72) 
 
The Comm ittee are very happy to note that  after a consistent negative gross  
margin since 1998-99, MECON has earned gross margin of Rs.25.85 crores during 2003-
04.  In this  positive tu rnaround of the com pany, there is  a significant contribution of 
vigorous implementation of VRS in the company.   Due to this approach, now there is no 
surplus manpower in the  com pany.  At this poi nt of time there is a need to m aintain the 
same type of perform ance in future.  Th e Co mmittee, th erefore, d esire that ME CON 
should now focus on cost reduction through outsourcing and adopt austerity m easures 
and timely implementation of restructuring plan based on recommendation of consultants 
appointed b y them.  The Comm ittee also d esire that MECON should also pay sp ecific 
  

attention in diversif ied services like power, environm ental engineering, roads and 
highways, oil and gas pipelines, information technology, defence projects, etc. in addition 
to th eir tra ditional exp ertise in p roviding engineering an d consultan cy se rvices f or 
establishment of steel plants in the country.  The Committee hope that the substantial jobs 
contracted during the year 2003-04 would also contribute si gnificantly in im proving the 
financial performance of the company. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Based on the recommendations of the exte rnal consultant, MECON  Ltd. has  
already undertaken several measures as part of the restructuring initiative.  These are :- 
 
i) Strategic Business Units, with a  sectoral focus, have been formed.  Each SBU is 
being headed by a Director. 
 
ii) Closure of Hyderabad office, scaling down of Kolkata and Chennai offices where 
business volumes are low. 
 
iii) Reduction of manpower to 1561 through VRS. 
 
iv) Sub-contracting of low-end designing j obs and other non-core activities so as to  
contain operational costs. 
 
The company continues to show substantially improved performance on all fronts.  
The engineering and consultancy business s ecured by the com pany during the first six 
months of the current financial year is Rs.101 crores as against the annual  MoU target of 
Rs.90 crores for  2004-05.  The company is also showing improved performance as far as 
financial parameters are concerned.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.17, Para No.3.78) 
 
The Comm ittee find th at SAIL had lowe red the target of investm ents during 
2003-04 from Rs.600 crores to Rs.425 crores and actual amount spent through Internal 
and Extra Budgetary resources was Rs.454.32 crores only.  This was done due to 
reprioritization of schemes.  Similarly, during the year 2004-05, this target has been kept 
at Rs.650 crores.  Th e Committee have analyzed the plan t/unit-wise allocation and  find 
that m ost o f the schem es are es sential for the concern ed plan ts.  The Comm ittee, 
therefore, desire that the Government should ensure that there is no downward revision in 
the targets and all the schemes are completed in time with the help of Internal and E xtra 
Budgetary Resources allocated foe specific pur pose.  The Committee would appreciate if 
there is better internal resources avai lability during 2004-2005 and m ore and more 
schemes for upgradation/modernization are undertaken during this period.  
 
  

Action Taken 
 
The revised estim ate for 2004-05 for Pl anned Capital E xpenditure has been 
worked out and is being maintained at the original level of Rs.650 crores.  Hence, there is 
no downward revision compared to BE 2004-05. 
 
The schemes are funded primarily from internal resources of the Company. 
 
During the 10th Five Year Plan, essential schemes for Upgradation/modernisation 
worth Rs.842 crores have already been sanctio ned and schem es with anticipated cost of 
Rs.1255 crores have been approved “in-principle” by SAIL Board. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.18, Para No.3.92) 
 
 The Committee appreciate the achievements of SAIL in the financial performance 
and reduction in borrowings. The Comm ittee note that such significant im provement in 
the turnover and financial perform ance wa s due to improved production and sales 
volume, market oriented product mix, intensiv e cost control m easures, rationalization of 
manpower, reduction in borrowings supposed by external factors like  growth in steel 
demand and firming up of international and dom estic prices. The Mini stry has expressed 
their hope that buoyant demand conditions are likely to continue in 2004-2005 also on the 
basis of substantial investm ent in infrastruc ture and industrial projects in dom estic front 
and stability in global dem and. The company has now put thrust on debt reduction and 
fund management. Outstanding borrowings, as on 30.062004 is Rs.7728 crores and they 
propose to m ake the repaym ent by 2006-2007.  Th e Comm ittee, therefore, des ire that 
SAIL should work as per the road m ap proposed with specific short term  and long term  
targets to maintain the present performance and further strengthening of financial status 
of the company so that the sudden changes in national and international scenario may not 
affect them adversely.  
 
Action Taken 
 
SAIL has prepared a well-defined road  map, Corporate Plan – 2012, whi ch inter-
alia highlights the followings: 
 
In the short-term, the plan aims to remove bottlenecks in existing facilities such as 
introduction of alternative fuels, enhan cement of assets productivity, enhancing 
consistency in operations to maintain the current level of performance. 
 
Further, in the long-term, the plan envisages growth by enhancing the m arket 
share, along with Quality & Cost Com petitiveness. In this r egard, SAIL aims to produce 
about 20 million tonnes of Hot M etal by 2012 through value addi tion projects and 
capacity ad dition. Quality and Cos t Com petitiveness will be ensured by 100% steel 
making faci lity through  BoF route and near 100% continu ous casting with Secon dary 
  

Metallurgy facilities. Finishing facilities are also proposed to enhance value addition in 
line with the m arket requirem ents and for reduction of se mis. Strategic alliances 
including equity participation, long term tie-ups etc. in the areas of coal, power and iron 
ore are planned to ensure availability of critical inputs. 
 
The plan is under different stages of implementation. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.22  Chapter – I of the Report ) 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.20, Para No.3.97) 
 
The Committee are surprised to note that  RINL has spent Rs.24.28 crores only as 
against the Budget Estim ates of Rs .227 crores and Revised Estim ates of Rs.99 crores.   
The Committee do not favour this type of under utilization of funds because this directly 
affects the implem entation of i mportant schemes and ultim ately the perform ance of the 
company.  The Committee note that for the year 2004-05, there is an allocation of Rs.300 
crores. The Comm ittee strongly recommend that  the Governm ent should ensure that 
RINL utilized the full allocation made for the year 2004-05 so that the schemes for which 
the allocations have been made do not suffer due to poor utilizations of funds.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 The recommendations of the Comm ittee have been noted for com pliance.  It has  
been decided to monitor the utilization of the allocated f unds to VSP on various schem es 
on periodic basis and m onitor the progress made by the company thereon.  The company 
has been separately advised to furnish monthly reports on the utilization of these funds.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.21, Para No.3.100) 
 
The Committee exp ress the ir hap piness to  n ote that Rashtriy a Ispa t Nigam  
Limited (Vipakhapatnam Steel Plant) has im proved their financial perform ance and net 
profit soared to Rs.1547 cror es  in 2003-2004  from  Rs .521 crores in 2002-03. T his 
increase in profit of 192% from  the last y ear is supposed to be very impressive. The 
Committee hope that RINL would m aintain this perform ance in future also. The 
Committee also welcom e that the long term  policy being prepared by the com pany for 
expansion. The Comm ittee desi re that RINL should underta ke the work relating to 
expansion on priority and start the work in this direction after getting the approval of the 
Government without any delay.  The Committee also strongly desire that the Government 
should work as facilitator in the task of implementation of the prosperous expansion plan 
of RINL. 
  

 
Action Taken 
 
No com prehensive proposal for any expans ion so far has  been receiv ed in  the 
Ministry.  As recommended by the Committee the Ministry would take appropriate action 
on the expansion plan of RINL. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.28 Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.23, Para No.3.110) 
 
The Committee note that in v iew of order of Hon’ble Suprem e Court has 
permitted mining at Ku dremukh upto 31 st Decem ber, 2005 only, KIOCL has started  
looking for alternative mines and on account of additional investments, the allocation has 
been enhanced to the extent of Rs.54 crore.  The Comm ittee welcom e the im pressive 
performance of the company during 2003-04 an d hope that it will continue during 2004-
05 and in com ing years.   The Comm ittee desire that KIOCL should undertake the work 
vigorously to explore the possibility to id entify and develop new m ines to prepare 
themselves for continuance of the operat ion of the com pany beyond December, 2005 on 
the similar pattern. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Kudremukh Iron Ore Com pany Lim ited (K IOCL) had consulted the Attorney 
General of India and a senior Advocate of the Hon’ble Supreme court on the Judgem ent 
of the Apex Court.  With the legal view that the company should file a petition before the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court to get relief from the safety point  of view, the com pany should 
be perm itted to m ine in the unbroken area  which has about 35 m illion tonnes of 
weathered ore which will last for another 2 years. 
   
The com pany had also contacted the offi ce of the Director General of Mines 
Safety, who has opined that from  the slope stability and safety point of view, the 
company should m ine in the unbroken area.  M/s National Institute of Rock Mechanics, 
Kolar Goldfields, a Govt. Rese arch Institution, has carried out an independent study and 
given their views on the m atter regarding c ontinuation of the operations of Kudremukh 
area from s afety point of view.  Their findi ngs corroborate KIOCL’s view from  s afety 
and slope stability ang le.  They ha ve offered that the company should be given the 
unbroken area. 
   
A review petition has been filed in the Suprem e Court by KIOCL on 3 rd 
December 2003.  The Hon’ble Suprem e Court, after hearin g the parties on 02-08-2004, 
has directed the Monitoring Committee to examine the prayers of KIOCL. 
  

   
KIOCL has noted the recommendations of the Committee for guidance. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.31 Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.24, Para No.3.118) 
 
 The Committee note that during the year 2003-04, the Bird Group raised Rs.16.78 
crores through IEBR as against the non-plan  BE of 1.50 crores during 2003-04.  On the 
other side, the Plan budgetary support was only Rs.1 crore which was not found adequate 
for AMR schem es.  The  Committee also note that for the year 2004-05, an am ount of 
Rs.7.23 crores have been proposed to be appropriated for the AMR schem es.  The  
Committee expect that this budgetary support should be utilized appropriately so that 
through replacement/modifications of old plan t machinery, the com pany may be able to 
obtain better operational efficiency. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Comments of the Comm ittee have been noted.  AMR schem es funds are being 
utilized for replacement / modification of old plant and machinery of the company. 
 
 
Recommendation (SL.No.25, Para No. 4.11) 
 
 The Committee are surprised to note  that the Em powered Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of St eel have approved only 33 R&D projects since 
1998 and only 17 projects have been completed so far. The Government have reduced the 
allocation for R&D purpose from  Rs.95 cror es during 2002-03 to Rs.60 crores during 
2003-04 and 2004-05.  During 2003-04 only an  a mount of Rs.13.426 crores was 
disbursed. The Committee are not convinced  with the justifi cation given by the  
Government that they are not receiving th e sufficient number of R&D projects requiring 
high investments particularly when steel PSU s and private sector has been m aking good 
investments for this purpose. The Committee strongly criticized the neglecting approach 
of the Governm ent towards such a n important activ ity of steel sector.  The Comm ittee 
feel that  there is a  lot of scope of  R&D in  this sector but the G overnment is not paying 
desired attention to facilitat e the important and good projects , which m ay useful for the  
welfare of the steel sector.  The Committee, th erefore, desire that the Government should 
take up the m atter seriously in consultation with all the public and private sector players 
and invite projects which can benefit the industry in improving the cost of production and 
efficiency. 
 
  

Action Taken 
 
 The recommendations of the Standing Committee have been noted for appropriate 
action. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.34 Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.28, Para No. 4.36) 
 
 The Committee have been appris ed of the opinion of the Disinvestm ent 
Commission on the various steel PSUs status of disinvestment process undertaken by the 
Department of Disinvestm ent on the ba sis of Disinvestm ents Comm ission. The 
Committee have noted significant change in the view of the Governm ent pronouncement 
that profit making PSUs would not be disinvested.  The Committee have a view that India 
has m arched ahead with its econom ic refor ms and disinvestm ent being constituent of 
these reform s.  At this point of tim e, policy m akers should ev aluate the po licy of 
disinvestment by having a close exam ination and observation of the PSUs in their post 
divested ph ase and  ac cordingly de cide the  f uture of  cou rse of  action.   The Com mittee 
observe the perform ance of steel s ector PSUs and f ind tha t the  com panies like S AIL, 
MOIL, MSTC, FSNL and RINL have m ade a positiv e turnaround and they hav e again 
moved on a path of very good recovery.  Unde r these circum stances, there is a need to 
reconsider the disinvestment proposals of steel sector. 
 
Action Taken  
 
 Disinvestment of various PSUs etc. co mes under the purview of Ministry of  
Finance, Departm ent of Disi nvestment.  In view of this , the recomm endations of the 
Standing Committee on Coal & Steel  in this regard have been  conveyed to Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Disinvestment for their further necessary action. 
  
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.29, Para No.4.40) 
 
The Committee strongly criticize the lethargic approach of the Ministry of Steel in 
finalising the Steel Policy for the country. Th is policy was to be prepared essentially 
during the period when the steel industry was passing through very tough phase of 
recession. The Committee are happ y to no te that the steel sector has p assed that p hase 
and it has taken a positive turnaround during the past two year. Now in the changed 
situation there is an urgent need of a policy which can bring a stability in this sector and 
strengthened to f ight with the n ational an d inte rnational situa tions in f uture. The  
Committee, therefore, desire that Governm ent should adhere to their prom ise and bring 
  

out a Natio nal Stee l Policy with a n objective to prepare a road m ap for Indian Steel 
industry in the context if ongoing reforms, restructuring and globalisation.  
 
Action Taken 
The draft National Steel Policy was submitted to the C abinet Comm ittee on 
Economic affairs (CCEA) in September 2004. The CCEA considered the draft National 
Steel Policy in its meeting held on 13.10.2004 and has given the following directions: 
(a) The draft N SP may be poste d at the W ebsite of Ministry  of Steel to elicit public 
opinion. 
 
(b) A Committee of Secretaries und er the Cabinet Secretary may exam ine the draf t 
NSP in the first instance.  
Action is in progress accordingly. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.37 Chapter – I of the Report)
  

CHAPTER III 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   WHICH  THE    
COMMITTEE  DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW  
OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No.3.68) 
 
The Committee note that Steel Authority of India Lim ited (SAIL) have m ade an 
appreciable turnaround dur ing 2003-2004 by making a profit of Rs.2512 crore.  The 
Committee, however, find that as  against the target of downsizing the m anpower to the 
level of 1 lakh at present 130,854 employees are there in SAIL.  The com pany is facing 
difficulty in achieving the target since now there is lukewarm response due to better 
performance of the co mpany, falling rate of interes t o n savings  and bleak  job 
opportunities for VR optees.  The Comm ittee hope that SAIL would be able to adhere to  
its time frame as set in the MoU signed with the Ministry of rationalization of manpower.  
The Comm ittee also observe that as agains t the subsidy requirem ent of 54.65 crore as 
interest subs idy to SAIL  f or loans r aised from  banks for implem entation of VRS only 
18.60 crore has been allocated in budget estimates.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the m atter should be taken up seriously with the Ministry of Finance at the Revised 
Estimates stage so that the work relating to downsizing of  manpower may not suffer due 
to paucity of funds. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 As per the Mem orandum of Understanding entered into by Steel Authority of  
India Ltd. (SAIL) with Governm ent of I ndia, the m anpower of one lakh was to be 
achieved through voluntary retirement and divestment of some of the units in addition to 
the separation of manpower on account of natural attrition. 
 
 The m anpower of SAI L which was 176147 as on 31 st March, 1998 has com e 
down to a level of 130306 as on 31.8.04, thereb y achieving a reduction of 45841 inspite 
of absorption of 5000 manpower of Visvesvaraya  Iron & Steel Plant on  its m erger with 
SAIL in the year 1999.  Till da te since signing of MoU, SAIL  has operated five editions 
of VR Schemes through which 14324 number of employees have separated. Around 7639 
were expected to separate through divestm ent of som e of the units viz. Power Plants, 
Rourkela Fertilizer Plant, Salem  Steel Plan t, Alloy Steels Plant and VIS P which did not 
materialise except separation of about 450 employees in the Power Plants. The  
rationalization of manpower through divestment is expected to be rather limited. 
 
 Further, the response to the VRS has been lukewarm because of : 
 
(i) Improvement in financial performance of SAIL, 
(ii) Decreas ing interest rate on savings, and 
(iii) Bleak job opportunities 
  

 
 VRS is therefore, not a viable op tion for m anpower reduction anym ore.  
Meanwhile, the financial position of SAIL ha s improved and the interest subsidy support 
provided by the Government may not be a nece ssity anymore.  SAIL proposes to reach a 
strength of 1,20,000 by Septem ber, 2005 and use the m anpower over and above the 
present level of requirement by providing m ulti-skill training and utilizing them for their 
future requirement against enhanced capacity projected under the Corporate Plan 2012. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.22, Para No.3.107) 
 
The Committee note that as against th e allocation of Rs.481.55 crores at Budget 
stage,  the allocation was revised to  Rs.212.43  crores  and  actual  expenditure  wa s  
Rs.65.05 crores only d uring 2003-04. The Committee are surpris ed to note that as  
against, the allocation 150 crores for new schemes not a single penny was spent during 
the whole year. Sim ilarly, in continuing schemes also only 31.30 crores were spent 
against the allocation  of 252.74 cro res. The Co mmittee strongly disapprove this typ e of 
under utilization of funds allocated for inve stments and direct that they should adopt 
more practical approach at the budget stag e in allocation of f unds and later on at 
implementation stage also so that this type of under utilization of fund may not take place 
during 2004-05. The Ministry should also ensu re that the com pany m ay adhere to the 
projected estimates strictly so that the implementation of schemes do not suffer more.  
 
Action Taken 
 
NMDC faced various constraints w hich pr evented full utilization of th e funds  
available, namely:  
 
(i) Delay in iss ue of environmental/forest clearances for setting up iron o re projects 
in Bailadila and Donimalai regions by concerned State Governments. 
 
(ii) Technology provider of Rom elt Shop in respect of NISP has not com e up with a 
reasonable cost which resulted in NMDC looking for alternate technology. 
 
(iii) The politica l ins tability in Madag askar led to  suspension  of  the inv estigation 
works for Gold deposits. 
 
(iv) The investigation works at Nam ibia/Tanzania were suspen ded pending detailed 
analysis of the initial results which are not very encouraging. 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future guidance. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
  

Recommendation (Sl.No.26, Para No.4.20) 
 
 The Committee note that our per capita steel consumption in only 29 Kg. which is 
perhaps the lowest in the world.  The consumption in developed nations is about 400 Kg. 
with a world average of 150 Kg.  The Committee also note that the apparent consumption 
of Finished Steel cross ed 30 m illion tonnes in 2003-04 and there was a growth of 5. 2% 
over the year 2002-03.  The Comm ittee also note that the Governm ent have a target of 
enhancing the use to 65 m illion to nnes by 2011 and 100 m illion tonnes by 2020. The 
Committee, however, find that there is a wide scope for tr iggering the domestic demand.  
The Comm ittee find that the Mini stry of Steel has to pay a ro le ca talyst in tr iggering 
demand and as facilitato r for rem oving supply side constrain ts.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with the present growth trend of steel consum ption which was 21.3 m illion 
tonnes in 1995-96 and during 2003-04 it has reached to 3 0 m illion to nnes only.  The  
Committee find that the  target set to enha nce the consum ption to 65 m illion tonnes by 
2011 requires many assertive efforts on all fronts.   The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry of Steel should prepare a time bound programm e al ong-with year-wise 
targets to tap the tremendous domestic m arket.  They m ust play a role of effective 
facilitator in resolving the supply side constraints like ra w material, iron ore, coal wagon 
availability, etc.  The Committee exp ress their hope that these targets would be achieved 
because the steel industry is doing well during these years when several loss making steel 
sector com panies have m ade a positiv e turn around.  Moreover, the G overnment have 
promised a lot of investments in infrastructure in com ing years and there is upward trend 
in international market also. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
 The Governm ent is working towards a proposed target of enhancing steel 
production to 65 m illion tonnes by 2011 and over 100 million tonnes by 2020.  There is  
no doubt that there is a wide scope for increasing dom estic demand particularly in the 
rural areas.  In fact, one of the essentia l com ponents of the proposed National Steel 
Policy is to institute m easures for prom oting dom estic dem and in the rural areas.  A 
separate organisation jointly prom oted by the industry and the Government i.e. Institute 
for Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG) has been set up to bring awareness of the 
usage of steel and promote consumption throug h steel specific designs for various uses.  
Greater stress is also being laid on R&D for innovative application of  steel to boost the 
demand. The Minis try of Steel will be playin g a role of facilitato r and catalyst for 
removing supply side constraints.  
 
 [Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.27, Para No.4.31) 
 
 The Committee observ e that steel pric es have started increasing from  the  
beginning of 2002 prim arily due to increase in global dem and for steel.  Since then, the 
prices have been growing c ontinuously and during 3 years of  time span the prices have 
  

almost doubled.  Very surprisingly, despite va rious steps taken by the Governm ent, these 
steps have not controlled th e domestic prices  of steel. These steps have affected the 
imported steel prices but not the domestic pric es at all.  The comm ittee do not agree with 
the ju stification g iven by the M inistry that the nation al p rice hav e be en inc reasing in 
tandem with the inter national s teel pr ices are different that those prevailing in the 
country.  The Comm ittee, therefore, desire that the Govern ment should m ake a detailed  
study of factors responsible for continuous pri ce increase of steel item s and also analyse 
the impact of various duty exem ptions being given from time to tim e to contain the steel 
prices.  The Comm ittee have al so an appreh ension that th ere m ay be cartelisatio n of 
private sector steel companies in enhancing the prices continuously for profiteering.  The 
Government should seriously consider this while taking m easure to contain prices. The 
Committee also desire that the Government should take up the matter with private as well 
as public sector undertakings of steel sector  an d play a po sitive ro le o f facilitator in 
stabilising steel prices in the country and if necessary, th ey should also consider t o 
establish specific type of regulatory mechanism to control steel prices in future. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Economic Research Unit (ER U) under th e Joint Plan t Committee under th e 
Ministry of Steel has b een entrusted with the  task of making a detailed study of factors 
responsible for continuous pri ce increase of steel item s and also analyse the im pact of 
various duty exem ptions being given from  time to time to contain the steel prices. After 
the latest round of reduction in  import duties in August 2004 and other policy initiatives 
taken by the Governm ent the steel prices have generally remained stable. In view of the  
stability in prices an indepe ndent regulatory body at this st age is not f elt necessary. The 
price situation is being monitored regularly and Government may intervene if necessary.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
  

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECTS OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation (SL.No.8, Para No.3.28) 
 
The Comm ittee are surprised to note th at a huge am ount of Rs.218.74 crore is 
pending with steel sector PSUs since last several y ears.  It is very painful that steel sector 
PSUs have kept the paym ents pending/under dispute for such longer periods particularly 
under the condition wh en the HSCL is trying to revive with Government’s ass istance.   
The Committee have no hesitation in saying that the Ministry of Steel has not played its 
desired role of facilitator and regu lator.  The Comm ittee strongly recomm end that the 
Dispute Settlement Committee of the Ministry should undertake the matter on top priority 
with a v iew to decide the m atter a t the ear liest and direc t PSUs to settle  the  acco unts 
immediately.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Steel should now 
prepare a tim e bound s chedule for an earliest se ttlement of issues and the m atter should 
not be delayed any more.   
 
Action Taken 
 
Disputed dues have been taken up by th e Dispute Settlem ent Committee of  the 
Ministry and the Committee expects to settle the matters expeditiously. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please See Para 1.18 and 1.19 Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para No.3.93) 
 
 The Committee  find that after implementation of the f inancial and restructuring 
proposed for SAIL, m ajority of the tasks have been completed successfully. A few tasks 
like downsizing of manpower are still und er im plementation and they are also 
anticipating dif ficulties in decis ion of  di sinvestments of  SAIL units. The Comm ittee 
would like to draw the atte ntion towards the announced G overnment policy that profit 
making PSUs will not be consider ed for disinvestments. Now, SAIL is a prof it-making 
company in all term s and any disinvestm ents at this stage may crea te great difficulty on 
the path of recovery. The Comm ittee, theref ore, strongly recomm end that the issue of 
disinvestments of SAIL units should be rec onsidered in v iew of changed situation  and 
final decision should be taken as per the present policy. 
 
  

Action Taken 
 
SAIL will pursue its divestm ent proces s, as guide d by Governm ent 
decisions/policies. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.25 Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATINOS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL  
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No.3.40) 
 
 The Committee note that for survival of  BSLC and SSL, further rationalisation of 
manpower is essential and for this purpose they require gran t because they are not in a 
position to pay in terest on Plan loa n.  The Co mmittee, therefore, desire that Ministry of 
Steel should take up the m atter with Ministry of Finance so  that the company m ay get 
financial as sistance in the f orm of  Grants r equired f or the  im plementation of  VRS in 
these companies. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee for Grant for implementing VRS in BSLC 
and SSL is being considered for incorpora tion in the restructuring proposal of these 
companies. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M.No.110014(8)/2004 Parl., dated 17.12.2004] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      ANANTH KUMAR, 
21 March, 2005_____                                                                             Chairman, 
30  Phalguna , 1926 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
  

ANNEXURE I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2004-05) HELD ON 21ST MARCH, 2005  IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1700 hrs. to 1815 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar-In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
4. Shri Bikash Chowdhury 
5. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey 
6. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
7. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
9. Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
11. Shri Ramsewak Singh (Babuji) 
12. Shri Devdas Apte 
13. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
14. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
15. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad 
16. Shri G.K. Vasan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Director 
2. Shri Shiv Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following Draft Reports: 
 
(i) Action Taken Report on the r ecommendations contained in 
the Third Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Coal and 
Steel (2004-05) on Dem ands fo r Grants (2004-05) of the 
Ministry of Steel; and 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 
the Forty-S eventh Report  of the Standi ng Comm ittee on 
  

Energy (2004) on the subject “Safety in Coal Mines”. 
 
3. The Comm ittee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with m inor 
additions/deletions/amendments. 
 
4. The Comm ittee authoris ed the Chairm an to f inalise thes e Reports af ter m aking 
consequential change arising out of factual verification by the concerned Ministries and 
to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

  
ANNEXURE II  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT OF  
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made      29 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 22 
  
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,  9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 
20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 28 and 29) 
 
Percentage of total         75.86% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government's replies:       4 
(vide Recommendation at S1. Nos. 15, 22, 26 and 27) 
 
Percentage of total         13.79% 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which replies of the Government  
have not been accepted by the Committee:      2 
(vide Recommendation at S1.Nos. 8 and 9) 
 
Percentage of total         6.89% 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited:        1 
(vide Recommendation at S1.No.11) 
 
Percentage of total         3.44% 
 
 
 
 