 
21 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL(2006-2007) 
 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2006-07) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
TWENTY- FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

TWENTY - FIRST  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2006-07) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  
(Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2006 
          Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 
 

CC&S No.21   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.41.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by National Printers, 
New Delhi. 

CONTENTS 
  
              
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………………. 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………... …………………………………………. (v) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report   ………………………………………………….. 1 
   
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………………. 
11 
  
  
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies…………………………………. 
 
 
22
  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee………………………….. 
 
 
25
  
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited…… 
 
30
  
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
I. Statement showing the Scheme-wis e details of plan outlays and 
expenditure of NALCO in 10th Plan……………………………………… 
 
 
31 
II. Minutes of   Fifth sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2006-07) held on 14th  December, 2006……………………..….. 
 
 
33 
III. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Si xteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel……………………………………………. 
 
  
35 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2006-07) 
 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar      - Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha  
   
 2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
 3. Shri D.K.Audikesavulu  
 4. Shri Hiten Barman 
 5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury  
 6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey   
 7. Shri Chandrakant B.Khaire  
 8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
 9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
10. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon  
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
12. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
13. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
14. Shri Tarachand Sahu  
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
16. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
17. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
19. Shri Sugrib Singh 
20. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
21. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
24. Shri Surendra Lath  
25. Shri Ajay Maroo   
26. Shri B.J. Panda 
27. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
28. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh  
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri S.K.Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Bhandari  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  -  Under Secretary 
5. Shri R.K.Sharma  - Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and St eel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present th e Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel on “Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the 
Ministry of Mines”.  
 
2.  The Sixteenth Report  on the Standing Committ ee on Coal and Steel was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 23 rd May, 2006. Replies of t he Government to all the 
recommendations contained in t he Report were received on 21 st November,  
2006.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 14th   December, 2006.   
 
4. An analysis of the Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report  of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-III.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                             ANANTH KUMAR, 
18  December, 2006                                     Chairman, 
27 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
 
 

REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with  Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2005-06) on “Demands for 
Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Mines ” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
23.5.2006.    
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorised as follows:  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
   
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12 and 13. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
 
Sl. Nos.6 and 10. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl. No.2.  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
 Sl. No.11. 
 
1.3   The Committee desire that final reply in respect of the 
recommendation which has been categor ised as interim reply by the 
Committee should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest. 
   
1.4 The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given to the 
implementation of recommendations accepted by the Government.  In 
case, it is not possible for the Government to implement any 
recommendation(s) in letter and spirit  for any reasons, the matter should 
be reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations made in the Sixteenth Report. 

ALLOCATION OF FUNDS 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para No.3.15) 
 
1.6 The Committee noted that  the Budget Estimates of the Ministry of Mines 
for the year 2006-07 had been kept at Rs. 883.69 crore. During 2005-06, BE of 
Rs. 685.14 crore was reduced to Rs. 4 05.52 crore at RE st age but the actual 
expenditure would be Rs. 400.92 crore approximately. The Committee noted that 
there had been substantial increase in  BE 2006-07 primarily due to enhanced 
allocation for NALCO. The Committee expect ed the Ministry to strive to expend 
the same.  
 
1.7 The Committee also noted with conc ern that the Ministry had failed to 
utilize the approved 10 th Plan outlay of Rs. 8344.50 cr ore, later revised to Rs. 
4485.28 crore during the Mid–Term Apprai sal. The Committee were extremely 
dissatisfied to note that the total expenditure during the first four years of the plan 
has remained merely to Rs. 2042.95 crore, which was less than 50 % of the 
revised plan outlay. The Committee st rongly disapproved of the non-serious 
approach of the Ministry since budgetary proposals continued to be prepared in a 
reckless manner without any serious thought, proper scrutiny and long term 
vision.  
  
1.8 The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to utilize funds allocated in 
a productive way in the interest of balanced growth and development of the 
mining sector by streamlining the internal financial and administrative procedures 
with regular monitoring. The Committee also emphasi zed that the budgetary 
proposals should be prepared on realistic basis with minimal revision at RE 
stage.  
  
1.9 The Committee also desi red the Ministry to underta ke a study to pin point 
reasons for underutilization of funds and to suggest the corrective measures in 
this regard.  
 
              
1.10  The Ministry in its reply has stated that the revision of 10 th Five Year Plan 
outlay from Rs.8344.50 crore to Rs.4485.28 crore is mainly due to revision of 10th 
Five Year Plan outlay of National Al uminium Company Ltd (NALCO) from 
Rs.7056 crore to Rs.2864.25 crore. The less utilization of funds in the 10 th Five 
Year Plan is mainly due to less expenditur e by NALCO & GSI.   The reasons of 
revision of plan outlay and less utilization of funds in respect of NALCO & GSI 
are given below:  
 
NALCO 
 
1.11   NALCO’s Budget Estimate (2005- 06) of Rs.450.07 crore was reduced to 
Rs. 220.09 crore at Revised stage. The major drop in capital outlay from BE 

2005-06 to RE 2005-06 is in respect of 2 nd phase expansion from Rs.290.28 
crore to Rs.106.42 crore. The 2 nd phase expansion proposal with projected 
capital outlay of Rs.4091.51 crore was appr oved by the Government of India in 
October, 2004. Though the 2nd phase expansion  was approved in October 2004, 
the Company could not take up some of  the commitments pertaining to their  
“Improvement Proposal” between NALCO and M/s. Aluminium Pechiney, France, 
the technology supplier because it took considerable time to get CVC’s clearance 
for procurement of various item s on single vender basis for 2 nd phase expansion 
of NALCO for which Govt’s. approval was finally conveyed to NALCO in 
November,2005. This was the main r eason in drop of the provision for 2 nd phase 
expansion in RE 2005-06.  
          
1.12 There is an increase in plan outlay  in BE 2006-07 from Rs. 220.09 crore to 
Rs.622.14 crore.  The major incr ease is also in respect of 2 nd phase expansion 
from Rs.106.42 crore to Rs.520.97 crore.  
  
1.13 As far as spending is concerned, the company has exceeded the RE 
figure of Rs.220.09 by Rs.4.29 crore in 2005-06 and there is every likelihood that 
the company may meet the BE figure of Rs.622.14 crore as there is substantial 
progress in ordering under 2 nd phase expansion project. By August’06, the 
ordering has surpassed Rs.2000 crore i.e.  almost 50% of the approved project 
cost  and many packages are in advanced stage for ordering during the year.   
 
1.14 As against Plan Outlay  of Rs.7056 crore for the 10 th Plan, the same was 
revised to Rs.2864.25 crore during Mid-Term review and now assessed at 
Rs.1837.32 crore taking actual expenditure up to 2005-06  and BE:2006-07 into 
account.  The reason of reduction at the stage of Mid-term review are as follows: 
 
(A) 1st Phase Expansion:   The reduction in 1 st phase expansion is mainly    
due to substantial saving in the project cost because of following factors:- 
 
(a) NALCO finalized various major packages at competitive bidding 
instead of involving only parties nom inated by M/s Aluminium Pechiney, 
leading to large scale saving.  Be sides, there was substantial price 
reduction in various major packages in  comparison to DFR provision  
because of global recessionary conditions, 
 
(b) Placement of repeat  order on BHEL for 8 th Unit of CPP without any 
escalation, 
 
(c) Saving in financin g charges & margin money  as Company generated 
enough internal resources for meeting t he project cost.  Only debenture of 
Rs.300 crore was raised for 1 st phase expansion though debt equity ratio 
of 1:1 was envisaged. 
 

(d) Availment of CENVAT credit on capital goods which was not 
considered in the project cost earlier due to uncertainty in the CENVAT 
credit utilization. 
 
(B) 2nd Phase Expansion:    Major reduction in Plan Outlay during Mid-Term 
review is mainly on account of shifti ng of Zero date in commencement of the 
project after Government approval on 26.10.2004, which was envisaged for 
approval at the beginning  of 10th Plan earlier.  
 
(C) Qatar Project:   The project could not materi alize because of lack of interest 
shown by the Qatar authorities in our equity participation in the project. 
 
(D) Coal Mines:   Reduction in Plan Outlay  at the time of Mid-Term review due to 
delay in allotment of coal mine by Government of India to NALCO. 
 
(E) Addition, Modification & Replacement : Deferment of certain Addition, 
Modification & Replacements Schemes for want of adequate consultancy back 
up and lack of dedicated work force to execute these schemes. 
 
1.15 There is a shortfall of  Rs.1026.90 crore (Rs. 2864. 25 - Rs.1837.32 crore) 
with reference to the revised plan outlay in mid term review out of which Rs. 
995.77 crore is on account of 2 nd phase expansion. The pr oject wise details for 
reduction in outlay from 10 th Plan stage onwards is given at Annexure-I. It may 
please be noted that reduction in outla y from what was envisaged at 10 th plan 
stage was beyond the control. Now that  the relevant approvals have been 
obtained, it is expected t hat there will not be any mo re slippage on capital 
expenditure projected. The advice of Standing Commi ttee is noted to the effect 
that budgetary proposals would be prepar ed on realistic basis with minimum 
revision at RE stage.  
    
1.16 The Company is now fully geared up to regularly monitor capital 
expenditure to ensure that there is no slippage on capital expenditure projected. 
 
GSI 
 
1.17 The Planning Commission approved the budget allocation for GSI for Xth 
Five Year Plan per iod 2002-2007 at Rs. 1000 crore with a split of Rs. 800 crore 
under Domestic Budget Support(DBS) and Rs.200 as Aid Th rough Budget(ATB) 
( Rs. 110 crore as ATB support for Research Vessel and Rs.90 crore for low cost 
items like Laboratory Instruments, etc). 
 

Expenditure incurred by GSI during Xth Plan 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Period (2002-03, 
to 2005-06) 
Allotment 
(BE) 
Revised 
Estimate  
Actual 
Expenditure 
against the 
allotment  
Percentage 
utilization 
w.r.t.BE 
Percentage 
utilization 
w.r.t. RE 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Operational  317.85 287.45 254.44 80.05% 88.50% 
Modernisation* 335.15 212.92 184.24 54.93% 86.53% 
Total 653.00 500.37 438.68 67.18% 87.66% 
 
*includes Sub-heads, IT (OAE) Motor Ve hicle, Minor Works, Clothing & 
tentages, OAE,NER(Capital) etc. 
 
1.18 The actual plan expenditure during the first four financial years i.e. FYs 
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 & 2005-06 of X Plan is Rs.438.68 crore (Operational 
_ Rs. 254.44 crore and Modernisation – Rs.184.24 crore), which is about 67.18% 
of the budget allocation of BE of Rs.653.00 crore (Operational – 317.85 crore 
and Modernisation – Rs.335.15 crore) The operational expenditure stand at Rs. 
254.44 crore against the allocation Rs.317.85 crore i.e. almost 80.05 %, which is 
quite reasonable considering the depleted manpower situation (-50 %) in GSI. In 
modernization programme, the  expenditure stood at Rs.184.24 crore i.e. almost 
55% of the allotment Rs.335. 42 crore. This is because so far as modernization 
programme is concerned, only low cost items viz. laboratory, field, IT equipment, 
drill rigs and accessories have only materi alized .  In many cases the laboratory 
and drilling items were not considered fo r procurement due to lack of manpower.  
None of the high cost items has so far materialized during the first four years of 
the X Plan period due to high lead time s for acquisition of these items and 
administrative reasons. 
   
1.19 There has been no major gap betw een the BE and the RE during these 
four years attesting to the soundness of the basis for the plan projections. These 
variations between BE and RE range from  11 to 15 % except for the years 2002-
03 and 2003-04. During 2002-03, a bulk reduction of out lay from Rs.168.5 crore  
(BE) to Rs.90 crore had to be done at RE stage on a ccount of reassessment of 
the expenditure under modernisation head. 
  
1.20 The expenditure on motor vehicle was substantially hampered due to 
time-to-time ban on procurement of additional and replacement vehicles. 
 
1.21 Most of the Plan projections fo rmulated are based on the available 
manpower and planned induction during the plan period for achieving the targets 
of the Plan. There has been a steady dep letion in personnel strength as GSI is 
operating at around 50 % of sanctioned strengt h. This has had an adverse effect 
in terms of achievement of both financial and physical targets, both in operation 

and modernization. Ministry in this direction has taken steps to speed up process 
of recruitment of scientific personnel to desired level.  
  
1.22 In order to streamline the syst em in GSI and to expedite the 
implementation of the Plan Schemes, a Project Proposal Review Committee  
(PPRC) was constituted to monitor the project proposal of GSI and to remove the 
bottlenecks in procurement and funds utilization. 
 
1.23 The Committee had earlier recommended  to the Ministry of Mines to 
undertake a study to pin-point reasons fo r under-utilization of funds and to 
suggest the corrective measures in this regard as the expenditure by the 
Ministry  during  the first four years of 10 th Five Year Plan has remained 
less than 50% of the revi sed plan outlay.  The Mi nistry in its reply has 
stated that the revision of 10 th Five Year Plan outla y from Rs.8344.50 crore 
to Rs.4485.28 crore was main ly due to revision of 10 th Plan outlay of 
National Aluminium Company Ltd. (NALCO) from Rs.7056 crore to 
Rs.2864.25 crore but actual expenditu re was expected to be Rs.1837.32 
crore only. The less utilisation of funds was mainly due to less expenditure 
by NALCO and GSI. 
 
 The Committee are extremely dism ayed to note that NALCO would 
be able to utilize only Rs.1837.32 crore during 10 th Plan as against the 
revised outlay of Rs.2864.25 crore sh owing a shortfall of Rs.1026.90 crore. 
The Committee are convinced that the reasons listed by the Ministry for 
lesser utilisation of funds viz. delay in the approval of 2nd phase expansion, 
delay in allotment of coal min es, non-implementation of Addition, 
Modification and Replacement (AMR) schemes, etc were due to inept 
handling of the vital issues by the Ministry. The Committee strongly feel 
that the Ministry has utterly faultere d in its duty as a facilitator by not 
expediting the NALCO  2 nd phase expansion and early allotment of coal  
mine to it.  
 
The Committee also feel that NAL CO failed to implement the AMR 
schemes for want of adequate consul tancy back up and lack of dedicated 
work force to execute these sch emes. The Committee believe  that 
implementation of AMR schemes are sine-qua-non for the progress and 
sustenance of any organisation and failure of  NALCO to take up such 
schemes clearly demonstrates its non-seri ous attitude particularly when 
2nd phase expansion is underway.  
 
The Committee, therefore, woul d like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to undertake in-depth study to pin-point reasons for 
under-utilisation of funds and to s uggest corrective measures in this 
regard so as to ensure that such a situation  does not reoccur during the  
11
th Five Year Plan. The Committee also d esire the Ministry to apprise them 

about the reasons for non-implementation of AMR schemes by NALCO and 
its implications on the performance of the company.    
 
NALCO 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No.5.25) 
 
1.24 The Committee noted that NALCO had b een allotted “ Utkal-E’ coal block 
for its 9 th to 12 th units of CPP on 27.8.2004 by the Ministry of Coal. The 
production of coal theref rom, was scheduled to co mmence from September, 
2008. The Geological Report had been rece ived by NALCO from CMPDI on 
20.4.2005 and its application for mining lease was at present under consideration 
of the Orissa Government. The Committee were extremely unhappy to note that 
even after the lapse of nearly two years,  NALCO was yet to obtain the mining 
lease from the Government of Ori ssa. The Committee wh ile examining the 
Demands for Grants (2005-06) had desired the Ministry to activate the above 
project at the earliest and obtain the necessary clearance from the different 
authorities. The Committee are anguished to note the lack luster approach on the 
part on NALCO and feel that considerab le time had been lost by the company 
even for completion the preliminary formalities since the coal block was allotted 
in August 2004. The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to play a decisive 
role in overcoming the problems being faced by NALCO  prior to commencement 
of the production of coal from the Utkal-E Coal block.  
 
Utkal-E Block 
 
1.25 The Ministry in its reply has stated  that it may be noted that Utkal-E Coal 
block is a green field projec t and will require at least 3-4 years for completion of 
the project. The geological report was rece ived in April’05 and all activities such 
as Mining Plan etc could commence only after receipt of geological report. 
 
1.26 Project activities can start only on re ceipt of mining lease, land acquisition, 
environmental clearance and investment decisi on. Most of these activities are in 
sequence and are taken up on finalization of Mine Plan & Detailed Project Report 
(DPR).  
 
1.27 In last two years from the date of allotment of the coal block, NALCO has 
taken various steps such as environment al studies, preparation of mining plan, 
application for mining lease and land acquisiti on etc. Most of these activities are 
in sequence. All these activities are taken up on finalization of Mine Plan & 
Detailed Project Report (DPR). The receipt of Geological report is only  start of 
the preparation of Mining Plan & DPR. 
 
1.28 The present status of various activities for Utkal-E Coal block is given 
below: - 
 
Mining lease:- The Collector, Angul has re commended NALCO’s application for 
Mining lease to the Director of Mines, Govt  of Orissa. The Director of Mines has 

recommended the same to Department of Steel & Mines, Govt. of Orissa vide 
letter no. M-IV(R)-5/04/ 12838/DM dated 24.10.2005. The proposal for Mining 
Lease has been forwarded to Ministry of C oal, Govt. of India vide letter-dated 
12.06.06 by the Department of Steel & Mines of Govt. of Orissa.  
 
Socio-economic, Flora/Fauna a nd Socio-economic Study: -  Final reports of 
three studies have been received from M/s SS Envi ronics and comments have 
been sent. 
 
Biological monitoring and Green belt design: - Order for Biological monitoring 
and Green belt design have been placed on M/s OUAT. The matter of delay in 
submission of reports on Biological m onitoring and Green Belt design was taken 
up with Vice Chancellor, OUAT and with his intervention the final report on Green 
Belt Design has been submitted by M/ s OUAT on 29.05.06. It is expected that 
the report for biological monitoring will be submitted shortly. 
 
Mining Plan: - The Mine Plan has been approved by Ministry of Coal vide letter 
dated 31.07.2006.  
 
EIA/EMP Report: -  M/s CMPDI, Bhubaneswar has been appointed for 
preparation of EIA/EMP reports for th e Utkal-E coal block. M/s CMPDI, 
Bhubaneswar has submitted the EIA/EMP report and the Executive Summary for 
submission of application for Public  hearing. The EIA/EMP report has been 
modified by CMPDI based on comments by NALCO. 
 
Detailed Project Report: -  M/s CMPDI, Bhubaneswar has been appointed for 
preparation of Detailed Project Report for the Utkal-E Coal Block. The Draft DPR 
is being revised considering the changes in the Mine plan based on comments of 
technical appraisal committee of Ministry  of Coal. The revised draft report is 
expected shortly. 
 
Land acquisition: - The proposal for land acquisition for Utkal – E coal block 
has been recommended by M/s to M/s IDCO for going ahead with the land 
acquisition activities. Necessary document s as desired by M/s. IDCO have been 
submitted on 30.11.05. NALCO has also d eposited Rs.1.66 Crore to M/s IDCO 
towards their Administrative Charges and the Establishment Charges of the land 
acquisition officer. M/s IDCO have submitted the necessary documents for 
acquisition of Govt. lands to district authorities on 21st March’06. Similarly, the 
proposal for acquisition of private land has been submitted to  Department of 
Steel & Mines, Govt. of Orissa for givi ng the necessary permission to go ahead 
on 27th March’06. The same is being pursued. 
 
1.29 Since the coal production from Utkal -E Coal Block allotted to NALCO 
by the Ministry of Coal on 27.8.2004 could not be commenced for want of 
clearances required from various agen cies, the Committee had desired the 
Ministry  to play a decisive role in  overcoming the problems being faced by 

NALCO in this regard. The Ministry in its reply has stated that various steps 
such as environmental studies, preparation of mining plans, application for 
mining lease and land application ha ve been taken. The proposal for 
mining lease has been forwarded to Mini stry of Coal by the Government of 
Orissa on 12.6.2006. The Committee, however, note that the proposals on 
Detailed Project Report, Environmen tal Impact Assessment/Environmental 
Management Plan (EIA/EMP) Report and land acquisition are still in the 
preliminary stage.  
 
The Committee are unhappy at the w aste of considerable time since 
the Utkal-E coal block was allotted to  NALCO more than two years ago for 
which the various clearances are yet to be obtained. The Committee are 
dismayed to observe that delay in the commissioning of  the coal block 
which is very critical for the 9 th and 12 th units of CPP of NALCO would 
adversely affect the power supply of NALCO and its over all productivity 
and profitability. The Committee, therefor e, desire the Ministry to take up 
the matter with other agencies includi ng Ministry of Coal and accord 
highest priority for the early implementation of the project. 
 
 The Committee feel that allotment of coal block to NALCO without 
actually physical availability of land where mining is to be done does not 
carry any meaning. Then there are a nu mber of clearances which are to be 
sought to start mining. All this exercise is likely to take five to seven years 
before NALCO can start actual mining. The Committee feel that to base 
future expansion plans of NALCO on the coal from this mine is totally 
unrealistic for the present. The Committe e would like the Ministry of Mines 
to take up with the Ministry of Co al to make the process of obtaining 
clearances less cumbersome and time consuming. 
 
HCL 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No.6.13) 
 
1.30 The Committee noted that the financial restructuring proposal as 
submitted by HCL was delib erated and it was decided t hat the same should be 
formulated based on the detailed ‘Corpor ate Plan’. The basic objective of 
restructuring was to transform HCL into a vibrant and self- sustaining company 
with an adequate share of copp er business in the domestic market after taking 
into account of various important iss ues and current international scenario on 
copper as well as future trend. M/s A.T. Kearney Ltd. has been entrusted with the 
job of formulation of a detailed ‘Corporate Plan’ in  December, 2005.  Based on 
their findings, financial restructuring pr oposal of the company  was to be drawn 
and submitted to the BRPSE for consideration. The Committee felt that once the 
‘Corporate Plan’ of HCL wa s approved and implemented,  the HCL will have a 
turn-around and become a profit making co mpany. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the financial restructuring proposal bas ed on its ‘Corporate 
Plan’ should be approved wit hout any further loss of time for increased 
productivity and sustainable operations of HCL.  

1.31 The Ministry in its reply has stated that the restructur ing proposal of HCL 
has been sent to Board for Reconstruction of  Public Sector Enterprises(BRPSE).  
 
1.32 The Committee had recommended that  the restructuring proposal of 
Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL) based on its Corporate Plan should be 
approved without any further loss of time for its increased productivity and 
sustainable operations. The Committee note that the restructuring proposal 
of HCL has finally been sent to Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector 
Enterprises (BRPSE). The Committee feel that keeping in view the 
appreciable performance of the company for the past three years, the 
restructuring proposal becomes all the more imperative for further 
improvement in the performance of HCL. The Committee, therefore, would 
like to re-emphasise that the rest ructuring proposal of HCL should be 
expedited and mechanism put in place fo r its early implem entation to give 
boost to the company  which has mana ged turn around with devotion and 
dedication of its workforce. 
 
MECL 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para No.7.11) 
 
1.33 The Committee noted that allocation of outlay for Mineral Exploration 
Corporation Ltd. (MECL) for promotional  exploration had been hiked from Rs. 
11.00 crore at RE 2005-06 to  Rs.17.00 crore at BE 2006-07 to facilitate 
simultaneous exploration in more number  of mineral areas. The Committee also 
noted that MECL would be completing th e six on-going projects during 2006-07 
and would take up eight new projects only after the approval of SCPP. Two 
projects namely Dholamala copper, Ra jasthan and Muruda Gold, Kerala were 
likely to be taken up during 11 th Plan period subject to availability of forest 
clearance. The Committee felt that it was high time for MECL to realize its goals 
to complete the above projects as early  as possible. The Committee, however, 
observed that some of the projects c ould not be commenced for want of forest 
clearance and without the approv al of SCPP. The Committee, therefore, desired 
the Ministry of Mines to play a role of catalyst and ensure timely forest clearance 
for the Dholamala copper and Muruda Go ld projects. The Committee further 
desired the Ministry to facilitate early  approval of SCPP for the proposed new 
projects.   
 
1.34 The Ministry in its reply has stated  that presently, six mineral exploration 
projects of MECL are in  progress. Out of these, physical work has been 
completed in 4 projects namely, Dona Temple, Sipum, Sawar Bajtha and 
Ramachandrapahar and drilling at 2 projects i.e. Ko lari-Bhanri and Latio-ka-
Khera is in progress, SCPP in its m eeting held on 8.6. 2006, have given its 
approval to 8 new projects and the resour ces are being identified/mobilized and 
the work in these is likely to commence shortly.  MECL anticipate to utilize the 
entire allocation  of Rs.17.00 crores during  2006-07.  The proposal for forest 
clearance of Muruda Gold, Kerala and  Dholamala Copper, Rajasthan at the 

sanctioned cost of Rs.177.09 lakhs and Rs.130.94 lakhs respectively have been 
forwarded to Ministry of Environment & Forests by the respective State 
Governments.  Once the forest clearance is available, MECL shall take up these 
projects. 
 
1.35 The Committee appreciate that Standing Committee on Promotional 
Projects (SCPP) has given its approv al to 8 new projects of Mineral 
Exploration Company Ltd. (MECL) a nd work on these projects will 
commence shortly.  Six on-going mineral exploration projects are in 
progress and out of these, physical work in four projects has been 
completed.  The Committee note that the proposal for forest clearance of 
Muruda Gold, Kerala and Dholamala Copper, Rajasthan  has been 
forwarded to the Ministry of Envi ronment and Forests by the respective 
State Governments for approval. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry of Mines should 
make all out efforts to facilitate early forest clearance of above two 
significant projects by taking up the matter with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests at the highest level.  The Committee also desire 
that adequate funds may be made ava ilable to MECL for accomplishing the 
new projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para No.2.2) 
 
 The Committee hope that the Minist ry of Mines will implement the 
recommendations in a time bound mann er which the Committee commented 
upon their Action Taken Report. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Mines 
should furnish final replies to t he recommendations (No.12) which was 
categorized as of interim nature. The Co mmittee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
 
Action Taken 
 
On recommendation No.4 (Para 2.17 of Ninth Report) 
 
 As regards Committee’s recommendatio n that Ministry of Mines should 
take all possible measures to procure major equipments in a time-bound manner, 
the status of three major procurement proposals of GSI are as detailed below:- 
 
1. Procurement of Oc ean-going replacement vesse l for aging Research 
Vessel Samudra Manthan at a cost of Rs.448 crore- 
 
Expenditure Finance Committee approv ed the procurem ent of ocean 
going vessel on 10 th October, 2006. Approved minutes circulated. GSI 
has been requested to prepare Cabinet note for circulation. The same 
is awaited. 
 
2. Procurement of Geo-technical Research Vessel with shallow water 
drilling capacity- 
 
Ministry of Mines submitted the Detailed Project Proposal and 
Expenditure Finance Committee Me mo, prepared by GSI, for kind 
consideration and approval of Planning Commission, D/o Ocean 
Development and D/o Expenditure . D/o Ocean Development and D/o 
Expenditure have sent their comments on the EFC Memo. 
Clarifications from GSI on the comments on DOD have been received 
and sent to DOD. Clarifications on the comments of D/o Expenditure 
are awaited. 
 
3. Procurement of Heliborne Sensors- 
 
GSI has placed order for procurement of Helicopter from M/s. HAL 
during December, 2005. Order for s upply of essential spares and 

accessories  have also been placed during October, 2006. The 
procurement of geo-physical s ensors to be fitted on-board the 
helicopter is being procured. 
 
As regards Committees comment on shortage of staff in GSI, the 
Government is conscious of the need to  have full complement of staff 
in GSI and is taking all steps to ensure that there is no shortage of staff 
at different levels. In this regard, the Ministry of Mines has obtained the 
approval of the Cabinet for exempt ion of DR Posts in scientific and 
technical disciplines in GSI from the purview of the DoP&T order dated 
16/5/2001 [which stipulates abolition of 2/3 rd DR Posts in all 
Government Departments]. Accord ingly action has already been 
initiated to fill up all DR and DPC vacancies in GSI. Proposals for filling 
up 489 DR posts and 149 DPC posts have been already sent to 
UPSC. They are being constantly reminded for completing the 
recruitment/promotion process expeditiously. 
 
On recommendation No.7 (Para 3.13 of Ninth Report) 
 
 Ministry of Mines is taking pro-acti ve steps to prevent illegal mining. The 
Ministry of Mines has devised a three-pr onged action strategy to effectively curb 
illegal mining which is as follows: 
 
(i) Constitution of Task Forces/Flyi ng Squads at both State and District 
levels for taking effective action agai nst illegal mining. The Task Force 
at the State level is headed by the Secretary, Department of Mining & 
Geology of the State Governments and includes State Police 
Department, State Transport Departm ent, State Forest Department, 
Indian Bureau of Mines and State Pollution Control Board. 
 
At the District Level the Task Force is headed by the District Collector 
and comprises of Superintendent of Police, Deputy Collector (Revenue 
& Mining), District Mining Officer, Distr ict Forest Office r and officials 
from concerned districts of State Pollution Control Board and Transport 
Department. 
 
The Task Forces/Flying Squads are assigned the job of collecting 
information of the cases of illegal mi ning, taking action to curb such 
illegal activities and ensuring coor dination among various  agencies so 
that effective action is ensured against illegal mining. 
 
18 States have so far constituted Task Force. 
 
(ii) Framing of rules by the State Government s under section 23C of 
Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 to enable 
them to provide for inspection, checking & search of minerals at the 
place of excavation, storage and during transit. It also provides for 
establishment of check-post and weigh bridges. 
 

12 States have framed rules under Section 23-C of the MMDR Act, 
1957. 
 
(iii) Regular monitoring by the Centra l Government of instances of illegal 
mining, action taken by the State Governments against such activities 
and other steps taken by State Governments to curb illegal mining with 
the Secretaries of State Government s in the review meeting held for 
the purpose. State Governments have been asked to furnish quarterly 
returns in the prescribed proforma on instances of illegal mining and 
action taken by State Governments thereof to Indian Bureau of Mines, 
which are reviewed by the Central Government. 
 
2. Enforcement of Environment Protection Act (EPA) and Forest 
Conservation Act (FCA) is the responsibilit y of Ministry of Environment & Forest. 
Separate approval as required under the EPA & FCA is mandatory before 
commencement of mining operations. Minist ry of Environment & Forest has its 
own separate machinery to look into any violation of the pr ovisions of EPA & 
FCA. 
 
3. As a result of regular monitoring by  the Central Government in the last 
four quarters ending June, 2006, State Governments have detected 29382 cases 
of illegal mining of majo r/minor minerals involving an  area of 11057. 96 Hect. 
1047 FIRs have been lodged. 4961 numbers of court cases have been filed, out 
of which 3817 cases have been decided and a total of Rs.25.94 crore have been 
realized as fine. 
 
On recommendation No.12(Para 5.16 of Ninth Report) 
 
 The revival/restructuring propos al of HCL was sent to DPE for 
consideration by the BRPSE by this Ministry on 13/17 th October, 2006. In the 
said proposal HCL has sought cash plan support of only Rs.30 crore which has 
already been approved by t he Government for the fi nancial year 2006-07. The 
company has, however, sought non-cash support of Rs.637.26 crore. Amongst 
other thing, the company has mainly pr oposed restructuring of capital through 
reduction of face value of equity shares from Rs.10/- to Rs.5/- amounting to 
Rs.382.21 crore and writing off of preferential share of Rs.180.73 crore to set off 
an accumulated loss basically  to clean the balance sh eet of the company. The 
company has also sought for restoration of superannuation age to 60 years. 
 
On recommendation No.16 (Para 6.31 of Ninth Report) 
 
 The proposal for financial restruct uring of MECL was considered and 
approved by the Government in its m eeting held on 27.7. 2006. The approval 
includes (i) Financial Rest ructuring and (ii) wage revision in MECL. Necessary 
Government orders to the above effect have been communicated to MECL on 
8.8.2006. 
[M/o of Mines O.M.No.5(2)-IF dt. 21 November, 2006] 

Recommendation (Sl.No.3, Para No.3.16) 
 
The Committee note that the Planning Commission has drastically 
downsized the outlay in respect of Geolog ical Survey of India (GSI) from Rs. 
307.10 crore proposed by the Ministry of Mines to Rs. 165.50 crore. GSI had 
proposed the plan outlay of Rs. 307.10 crore during 2006-07 which included  
Rs.134.40 crore towards the part payment of Blue Water Research Vessel as a 
replacement for  R.V. Samudra Manthan. The Committee also note that the 
Planning Commission after ex amining the status of procurement process of the 
Blue Water Research Vessel had allocated only a token provision during 2006-07 
for hiring of consultant for the same. The reviewed EFC Memo with necessary 
modifications suggested by the Planni ng Commission has been submitted by 
GSI to the Ministry of Mines for approval. 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note the inordinate delay in 
preparation and submission of Detailed Project Report (DPR) and EFC Memo 
regarding purchase of Research Vessel had made the Planning Commission to 
believe that the above vessel is unlikely to be procured during 2006-07 resulting 
in reduction in the proposed outlay. The Committee feel that the laxity on the part 
of GSI has put the modernization programme of the organisation on the back 
seat. The Committee are apprehensive how the modernization of GSI, which was 
one of the major thrusts of 10 th Plan period, could be achieved given the 
procurement status of the vessel. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry 
to take necessary measures to ensur e that the vessel is procured in 10 th Plan 
periods itself and approach the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
for additional funds at RE stage.  
 
Action Taken 
 
The Modernisation Programme of GSI is  one of the major thrust areas of 
the X Five Year Plan and the Ministry of Mines and GSI have taken this 
programme in the right spir it from the beginning itself.  In principle approval for 
acquisition of a new research vessel for seabed survey, exploration of non – 
living resources for GSI as a replacement  vessel of R.V. Sa mudra Manthan was 
accorded by Planning Commission on 19
th July, 05. During the Plan discussions 
in the month of November 2005, Ministry of Mines pr oposed Rs.307.10 crore as 
the total outlay of GSI, which include d Rs.204.65 crore for Modernisation and 
Replacement.  Out of this Rs.134.40 crore pertaining to  part payment of vessel 
and rest for other modernization activities .  Thus, Ministry of Mines never put 
modernization of GSI on the backseat.  Ministry of Mines and GSI were 
anticipating that by the end of July 2007,  they will be able to process the case 
and make part payment for the research ve ssel.  However, during discussions in 
the Planning Commission it emerged that it is a specia lised research vessel and 
with Planning Commission’s experience with si milar exercise with Department of  
Ocean Development’s vessel its proc urement needed more time and would 
involve several steps which consist of appointment of Indian and foreign 

consultants and global bidding, etc. and thus Ministry of  Mines will not be able to 
make part payment during the financial year 2006-07.  Hence, Planning 
Commission provided only Rs.8.00 crore as a token provision towards 
consultancy charges for the research vesse l. In the EFC Memo sent to Planning 
Commission on 7.12.2005. GSI had projected that the procurement of vessel 
may be completed in Xth Plan period but could spill over by a year and few 
months after Xth Plan period.  However,  in the revised/modified EFC Memo sent 
to Planning Commission on 30.3.06, the tar get date for completion of project has 
been indicated as February 2009. After appr oval of EFC, a series of work 
programme with Indian and Foreign consult ants to negotiate relevant contracts 
would be undertaken by January 2007. After placement of orders, the vessel 
construction may take two years with the delivery of vessel likely by end of 
February 2009. EFC meeting for the research vessel was held under 
chairmanship of Finance Secretar y, Ministry of Finance on 10
th October, 2006.  
Approved minutes have been circulated.  Draft Cabinet Note is under preparation 
at GSI. 
 
Besides ocean going deep-water resear ch vessel, under modernization 
programme, order has been placed for proc urement of Helicopter from M/s HAL 
for heliborne geophysical survey system.  Process for procurement of four 
geophysical sensors is on.  EFC Memo for shallow water Geotechnical vessel 
has been circulated for comments. The mo dernization items are mostly imported 
items and are not “off the shelf items”.  Th e instruments are unique in nature and 
are generally manufactured according to the need or specifications enumerated 
by the department, which are generally finalized after threadbare discussions 
among the experts before inviting tenders.  As a consequence, it is not feasible 
to complete  many purchase procedures within the stipulated time. 
 
Acute shortage of manpower [GSI oper ating at around 50%  of sanctioned 
strength] has forced GSI to proceed at slower pace.  The procurement machinery 
had to consider this factor while prioriti zing the capital equipment for its optimal 
utilization. Ministry in this directi on has taken steps to speedup process of 
recruitment of scientific personnel to desired level. The Pl an Proposal Review 
Committee of the Ministry of Mines has closely monitored the major bottlenecks 
in modernization programme. Suitable st eps are being taken to remove the 
bottlenecks. 
 
[M/o Mines O.M.No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No.4.11) 
 
 The Committee note that IBM has  generated Rs.122.60 lakhs during 
2005-06 ( upto Feb.,2006) th rough consultancy services. The Committee also 
note that IBM has planned to take up 5 to 7 consultancy services and generate a 
revenue of Rs.1 crore through promot ional activities during 2006-07. The 
Committee desire that IBM should make all out efforts to bag more and more 

projects under consultancy services in order to exceed the target to enable it to 
become financially sound. 
 
Action Taken 
 
During the 13th meeting of the IBM Advisory Board held on 4th 
September, 2002, it was deci ded that IBM, being a regul atory authority, should 
not  fix any target for revenue generation.  IBM will continue to generate revenue 
during the course of its functional activi ties, so as to meet the demands of the 
industry. 
 
 IBM has generated revenue of Rs. 131.27 lakhs during 2005-06 mainly 
through Ore Dressing Investigations, Te chnical Consultancy, Mining Research 
Projects, sale of Inventory, Mining Lease Directory, Statistical data and IBM 
Publications and Training Programmes for Industry.  However, the observation of 
the Committee has been noted for future compliance and all efforts will be made 
to achieve the targets during 2006-07 through consultancy services. 
 
[M/o Mines O.M.No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para No.4.12) 
 
 The Committee further note that tw o projects namely, computerised 
Online Register of Mining Tenement System at an esti mated cost of Rs.20.00 
crore and Management of Solid Wa ste from Mining in India,  at estimated cost of 
Rs.14.12 crore were initially planned to executed by Aid Through Budget ( ATB) 
and were referred to the Planning Commi ssion for  “in principle” approval. 
However, the Planning Commission has ad vised that these projects may be 
taken up in the 11 th Five Year Plan. The Committ ee observe that both the above 
projects are very significant as they  proposed to provide information on mineral 
resources in the country and management  and regulation of Mine Waste. The 
Committee desire IBM to start preparatory work on the implementation of these 
projects and obtain necessary clearances, if any, required. The Committee also 
desire that these projects may be taken up in right earnest in the very first year of 
the 11th Plan and the completion schedule therefore is strictly adhered.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Out of Rs. 24.00 crore earmarked for  the year 2006-07 in the Budget, an 
amount   of    Rs. 3.00 cr ore and Rs.2.0 crore, respectively, has been kept in the  
Annual Plan 2006-07 for  (i) Computer ized On-Line Register of Mining 
Tenements System as sub-schemes under Scheme No. 4,  i.e. Collection, 
Processing, Dissemination of Data on Mines & Minerals through various  
Publications;  and   (ii) Management of Solid Waste from Mining in India under 
sub-scheme No.3 i.e.  Technological  Upgradation and Modernization,  
respectively.  IBM  has  proposed  to  utilize  Rs.5.00 crore in connection with  

preparatory work to be carried out in respect of these  two  projects.  But the  
Planning  Commission has suggested that these two projects may be taken up in 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan beginning 2007-08.   
 
Besides, in a Quarterly Performance Review (QPR) Meeting of IBM held 
on 15.6.2006, Secretary(Mines ) observed that while BRGM’s system may have 
many useful features, new systems which may have come into being in USA, 
Canada, Australia etc. should also be studied and if ne cessary, IBM official may 
visit Canada and Australia and see the systems prevalent there.  Secretary 
(Mines), on his visit to Canada, had s een the system in operation there and 
found it quite informative and useful .  The BRGM system should be compared 
with the Canadian and Wester n Australian systems and useful features should 
be incorporated in the system developed by IBM.   
 
[M/o Mines O.M.No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.7, Para No.5.24) 
 
The Committee note that the second phase expansion proposal of NALCO 
for its Bauxite Mines, Alumina Refinery Smelter and Captive Power Plant (CPP) 
with a project capital out lay of Rs.4091.51 cror e was approved by the 
Government in October 2004 to be completed in 50 months. While NALCO has 
taken a slew of measure for the implementation of the 2
nd phase expansion 
programme, it has engaged M/s Dastur  company, an independent agency for 
Time and Cost Monitoring (TCM) on mo nthly basis and cost monitoring on 
quarterly basis. The Committee note with satisfaction that the second phase 
expansion proposal of NALCO is pr ogressing as per schedule. However, 
considering the significance of the ex pansion proposal and t he huge investment 
involved therein, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should strictly 
monitor the progress of t he expansion plan at their le vel to ensure that the 
milestones of the projects are reached as per schedule.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 Implementation of the 2 nd phase expansion of NALC O is monitored by the 
administrative Ministry on regular basis. The progress was found to be 
satisfactory by and large. 
 
[M/o Mines O.M.No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No.5.25) 
 
The Committee also note that NALCO has been allotted  ‘Utkal-E’ coal 
block for its 9 th to 12 th units of CPP on 27.8.2004 by the Ministry of Coal. The 
production of coal therefrom, is schedul ed to commence from September, 2008. 
The Geological Report has  been received by NALCO from CMPDI on 20.4.2005 

and its application for mining lease is at present under consideration of the 
Orissa Government. The Committee ar e extremely unhappy to note that even 
after the lapse of nearly two years, NALC O is yet to obtain the mining lease from 
the Government of Orissa. The Commi ttee while examining the Demands for 
Grants (2005-06) had desir ed the Ministry to activate the above project at the 
earliest and obtain the necessary clearance from the different authorities. The 
Committee are anguished to note the lack luster approach on the part on NALCO 
and feel that considerable time has been lost by the company even for 
completion the preliminary formalities since the coal bl ock was allotted in August 
2004. The Committee, therefore, desire the Mi nistry to play a decisive role in 
overcoming the problems being faced by NA LCO  prior to commencement of the 
production of coal from the Utkal-E Coal block.  
 
Action Taken 
Utkal-E Block 
 
1. It may be noted that Utka l-E Coal block is a green field project and will 
require at least 3-4 years for completion  of the project. The geological report was 
received in April’05 and all activities su ch as Mining Plan etc. could commence 
only after receipt of geological report. 
 
2. Project activities can start only on re ceipt of mining lease, land acquisition, 
environmental clearance and investment decisi on. Most of these activities are in 
sequence and are taken up on finalization of Mine Plan & Detailed Project Report 
(DPR).  
 
3. In last two years from the date of allotment of the coal block, NALCO has 
taken various steps such as environment al studies, preparation of mining plan, 
application for mining lease and land acquisiti on etc. Most of these activities are 
in sequence. All these activities are taken up on finalization of Mine Plan & 
Detailed Project Report (DPR). The receipt of Geological report is only  start of 
the preparation of Mining Plan & DPR. 
 
4. The present status of various activi ties for Utkal-E Coal block is given 
below: - 
 
Mining lease:- The Collector, Angul has reco mmended NALCO’s application for 
Mining lease to the Director of Mines, Gov t. of Orissa. The Director of Mines has 
recommended the same to Department of Steel & Mines, Govt. of Orissa vide 
letter no. M-IV(R)-5/04/ 12838/DM dated 24.10.2005. The proposal for Mining 
Lease has been forwarded to Ministry of C oal, Govt. of India vide letter-dated 
12.06.06 by the Department of Steel & Mines of Govt. of Orissa.  
 
Socio-economic, Flora/Fauna and Socio-economic Study: - Final reports of 
three studies have been received from  M/s. SS Environics and comments have 
been sent. 

 
Biological monitoring and Green belt design: - Order for Biological monitoring 
and Green belt design have been placed on M/s. OUAT. The matter of delay in 
submission of reports on Biological m onitoring and Green Belt design was taken 
up with Vice Chancellor, OUAT and with his intervention the final report on Green 
Belt Design has been submitted by M/s.  OUAT on 29.05.06. It is expected that 
the report for biological monitoring will be submitted shortly. 
 
Mining Plan: - The Mine Plan has been approved by Ministry of Coal vide letter 
dated 31.07.2006.  
 
EIA/EMP Report: -  M/s. CMPDI, Bhubaneswar has been appointed for 
preparation of EIA/EMP reports for t he Utkal-E coal block. M/s. CMPDI, 
Bhubaneswar has submitted the EIA/EMP report and the Executive Summary for 
submission of application for Public  hearing. The EIA/EMP report has been 
modified by CMPDI based on comments by NALCO. 
 
Detailed Project Report: -  M/s CMPDI, Bhubaneswar has been appointed for 
preparation of Detailed Project Report for the Utkal-E Coal Block. The Draft DPR 
is being revised considering the changes in the Mine plan based on comments of 
technical appraisal committee of Ministry  of coal. The revised draft report is 
expected shortly. 
 
Land acquisition: - The proposal for land acquisition for Utkal – E coal block 
has been recommended by M/s. to M/s. I DCO for going ahead with the land 
acquisition activities. Necessary document s as desired by M/s. IDCO have been 
submitted on 30.11.05. NALCO has also d eposited Rs.1.66 Crores to M/s. IDCO 
towards their Administrative Charges and the Establishment Charges of the land 
acquisition officer. M/s. IDCO have submitted the necessary documents for 
acquisition of Govt. lands to district authorities on 21st March’06. Similarly, the 
proposal for acquisition of private land has been submitted to  Department of 
Steel & Mines, Govt. of Orissa for givi ng the necessary permission to go ahead 
on 27th March’06. The same is being pursued. 
 
[M/o Mines O.M.No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
  
   Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para No.5.26) 
 
The Committee further note that the Mi nistry of Mines is exploring the 
possibility of third phase expansion of NA LCO with regard to its bauxite mining, 
alumina refinery and aluminuim smelter. A team of officials visited UAE and 
Oman in April 2005 and he ld discussions with the Governments of these 
countries and report submitted by them  is under consideration. NALCO has 

engaged M/s. Engineers India Ltd. to prepare a pre-feas ibility report so that a 
decision could be taken on putting up an al uminium smelter in a third country. 
The Committee consider setting-up of smelter plant overseas a significant step in 
the expanding and diversifyi ng activities of NALCO. T he Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry to take necessary m easure for setting up of a smelter plant 
overseas. The Committee further desire t hat necessary groundwork for exploring 
the possibilities of third phase expansio n of NALCO may be accelerated without 
putting stress on the  ongoing 2nd phase expansion.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Setting up Smelter abroad: 
 
NALCO has appointed M/s. Engineers I ndia Limited for preparation of a 
Pre Feasibility Report (PFR) for se tting up a Aluminium Smelter along with 
required facilities in the Middle East Re gion. Report was submitted by EIL in 
March’06. 
 
In the Pre Feasibility Report EIL has selected t he following three probable 
sites for the Aluminium Smelter and other facilities: - 
 
• Ras Laffan, QATAR 
• Fujairah, UAE 
• Salalah,OMAN 
 
In the PFR, M/s. EIL has concluded that Establishing an aluminum smelter 
in Middle East Region is marginally attractive and the financ ial viability can be 
further improved if attractive deal can be struck with the local Governments for 
assured long-term supply of Gas at compet itive rates, Land lease rates, Rebates 
and Concessions, Lower interest rates for term loan, etc.  
 
Accordingly NALCO is taking up the matter with authorities of the three 
countries for proceeding further in the project by way of signing an MOU and 
discussions on the long-term supply of Gas at competitive rates, Land lease 
rates, Rebates and Concessions, Lower interest rates for term loan, etc. 
 
[M/o Mines O.M.No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Para No.7.10) 
 
The Committee note that the co mprehensive proposal of financial 
restructuring of MECL was circulated among the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments for their comments based on the recommendation of BRPSE. The 
Committee further note that the revised draft  cabinet note based on the 
comments/views of the Ministries/D epartments is under submission. The 
Committee are constrained to observe that  the failure of the Government to 

approve the financial restructuring proposal of MECL has deprived  the company 
to reap the benefits of capital restruct uring plan. The Committee in their 9 th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) also has recommended that the 
financial restructuring proposal of MECL should be approved without any further 
loss of time. The Committee feel that keepi ng in view the vital role being played 
by MECL is carrying out mineral exploration in the country, it becomes the utmost 
responsibility of the Ministry to strengthen it by way of financial restructuring. The 
Committee, therefore, would like to reit erate that the financial restructuring 
proposal of MECL pending with Government should be cleared as early as 
possible. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Government has approved  for financial restructuring of MECL on 
27.7.2006.  The approval includes(i) Fin ancial Restructuri ng and (ii) wage 
revision  in MECL.  Necessary Government orders to the above effect have since 
been communicated to MECL on 8.8.2006. 
  
[M/o Mines O.M.No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para No.7.11) 
 
The Committee note that allocation of  outlay for Mineral Exploration 
Corporation Ltd. ( MECL) for promotional exploration has been hiked from Rs. 
11.00 crore at RE 2005-06 to  Rs.17.00 crore at BE 2006-07 to facilitate 
simultaneous exploration in more number  of mineral areas. The Committee also 
note that MECL will be completing t he six on-going projec ts during 2006-07 and 
will take up eight new projects only afte r the approval of SCPP. Two projects 
namely Dholamala copper, Ra jasthan and Muruda Gold, Ke rala are likely to be 
taken up during 11 th Plan period subject to availabi lity of forest clearance. The 
Committee feel that it is high time for ME CL to realize its goals to complete the 
above projects as early as possible. The Committee, howev er, observe that 
some of the projects cannot be commenc ed for want of forest clearance and 
without the approval of  SCPP. The Committee,  therefore, desire the Ministry of 
Mines to play a role of catalyst and ensure timely forest clearance for the 
Dholamala copper and Mur uda gold projects. The Committee further desire the 
Ministry to facilitate early approval of SCPP for the proposed new projects.   
 
Action Taken 
 
 Presently, six mineral expl oration projects of MECL are in progress. Out of 
these, physical work has been completed in 4 projects namely, Dona Temple, 
Sipum, Sawar Bajtha and Ramachandrapahar and drilling at 2 projects i.e. 
Kolari-Bhanri and Latio-ka-Khera is in progress, SCPP in its meeting held on 
8.6.2006, have given its approval to 8 new  projects and the resources are being 
identified/mobilized and the work in these is likely to commence shortly.  MECL 

anticipate to utilize the entire allocation  of Rs.17.00 crores during  2006-07.  The 
proposal for forest clearance of Mur uda Gold, Kerala and Dholamala Copper, 
Rajasthan at the sancti oned cost of Rs.177.09 la khs and Rs.130.94 lakhs 
respectively have been forwarded to Minist ry of Environment & Forest by the 
respective State Governments.  Once th e forest clearance is  available, MECL 
shall take up these projects. 
 
[Ministry of Mines O.M.No.5(2)2006-IF dt. 21 November, 2006] 
 
    Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para No.4.13) 
 
 The Committee note that in the y ear 2004-05, IBM had inspected 2593 
mines against the target of 2450 mines  in pursuance of M CD Rules 1988 for 
approval of mining plans, schemes and mine closure plans. The Committee are, 
therefore, surprised to note that com paratively lower tar gets of 2300 and 2500 
inspections for year 2005-06 and 2006-07 re spectively were set-up by IBM. The 
Committee stress that the prime cause of massive illegal mining all over the 
country is delays in approval of mini ng plans/schemes apart from mine closure 
plans. The role of IBM assumes signi ficance as it is entrusted with 
responsibilities which involve inspections  of prospective and likely to be closed 
mines. The Committee, therefore, desire IBM to set a reasonably higher target 
every year in this regard so that more and more plans/schemes are inspected 
and approved and all the mines where mining operations have ceased are closed 
with proper mine closure plan to prevent illegal mining.  
 
Action Taken 
 
During the year 2005-06, there was a low target of 2300 inspections in 
IBM. This was due to the fact that Mining Engineers and Mining Geologists of 
mines control and Conservation of Minerals Division were engaged in the 
updation of National Mineral Inventory Data Sheet in respect of private lease 
holds in fields, in addition to their regul ar duties such as according approval for 
Mining Plans etc.  Therefor e no individuals targets for inspections were given to 
the officers. Updation of National Mineral  Inventory is done once  in five years, 
which is one of the import ant functions entrusted to IBM vide its Charter of 
Functions.  As a result, only 43 Mining Engineers and 31 Mining Geologists were 
available for inspections in 2005-06 which resulted in the lower target.   
 
The targets are fixed based on Ann ual Program of IBM for a particular 
year.  The target for the year 2006-07 has been fixed at 2500 as 41 Mining 
Engineers and 27 Mining Geologists are ava ilable for the inspections. Moreover, 
the updation of National Mineral Inventor y will be done in the office. Against the 
target of 2500, IBM has done inspections totaling  to  1090 upto August,2006 
 
  IBM carries out inspection in con nection with approval of Mining Plan and 
Schemes of mining as and when received on priority basis, and disposes the 
same within the statutory limit of 90 days as per the provisions of MCR, 1960 and 
MCDR, 1988.  Therefore, IBM cannot set any target for approval of Mining Plan 
and Schemes of Mining as the activity is initiated by the lessee and not by IBM. 

Likewise, the Priority is also acco rded to the disposal of Final Mine 
Closure Plan (FMCP) submitted to IBM.  Inspections are carried out immediately 
for disposal of the same and it is ensur ed that the lessee submits a proposal for 
reclamation, rehabilitation and prot ective measures as approved and 
implementing the same so that the mined out area does not pos e a threat to the 
environment and there is no scope for illegal mining activities from the closed 
mine sites. 
 
[M/o Mines O.M. No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para No.6.12) 
 
The Committee note that Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) was allocated 
Rs. 40.00 crore during 2005-06 for Replacement and Renewal (R&R) of its plants 
and equipments. The Committee further note that HCL in pursuance to the 
approval of Rs.40.00 crore at BE stage had gone ahead and ensured 
commitment of about 67 per cent of th e total fund by December, 2005 for 
replacement of the equipments, which were beyond economical repair. The 
Committee are anguished to note that the Ministry withdrew the entire sanctioned 
amount of Rs.40.00 core at  RE stage leaving the HCL with no opt ion but to 
retract its steps for replacement and renewal and cope-up with high cost of its 
operations. The Committee further note that  a plan outlay of Rs.30.00 crore has 
been provided to HCL for R&R activities in BE 2006-07. 
 
The Committee are convinced that the withdrawal of entire amount 
allocated for R&R during 2005-06 has ad versely affected the performance of 
company which is already struggling hard to come out of the financial crunch. 
Further, allocation of Rs.30.00 crore only for R&R activities during 2006-07 would 
be insufficient to accomplish the task gi ven the condition of equipments and 
machineries. The Committee deprecate the attitude of t he Ministry of Mines and 
its utter failure to strengthen HCL by not  forcefully pleading its case with the 
Ministry of Finance for allocating adequate funds and for not withdrawing the 
entire allocations meant for R&R acti vities during 2005-06. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Minist ry of approach the Ministry of Finance with sufficient 
justification for allocation for required additional funds to HCL at RE stage. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Ministry of Mines had taken up t he case with Ministry of Finance.  
Secretary (Mines) in his D.O. dated 12.12.2005 addressed to 
Secretary(Expenditure) apprised the positio n about the difficult ies faced by HCL 
in case of withdrawal of funds allocat ed  at BE stage and recommended to retain 
the allotted plan provision of Rs.40.00 crore for the year 2005-06. This matter 
was again raised by Hon’ble Mi nister of Mines vide  letter dated 16-01-2006     
with Hon’ble Finance Minister. 
 
[M/o Mines O.M. No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2  Para No.3.15) 
 
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates of the Ministry of Mines for 
the year 2006-07 have been kept at Rs. 883.69 crore. During 2005-06, BE of Rs. 
685.14 crore was reduced to Rs.405.52 crore at RE stage but the actual 
expenditure would be Rs .400.92 crore approximately.  The Committee note that 
there has been substantial increase in BE 2006-07 primarily due to enhanced 
allocation for NALCO. The Committee expect the Ministry to strive to expend the 
same.  
 
The Committee also note with concern that the Ministry has failed to utilize 
the approved 10th Plan outlay of Rs. 8344.50 crore, later revised to Rs.4485.28 
crore during the Mid–Term Appraisal. T he Committee are extr emely dissatisfied 
to note that the total expenditure during the first four years of the plan has 
remained merely to Rs.2042.95 crore, which is less that 50 % of the revised plan 
outlay. The Committee strongly disapprove of the non-serious approach of the 
Ministry since budgetary proposals continued to be prepared in a reckless 
manner without any serious thought, proper scrutiny and long term vision.  
  
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to utilize funds allocated in a 
productive way in the interest of balanc ed growth and development of the mining 
sector by streamlining the internal financial and administrative procedures with 
regular monitoring. The Committee also emphasize that the budgetary proposals 
should be prepared on realistic basis with minimal revision at RE stage.  
  
The Committee also desire the Ministry  to undertake a study to pin point 
reasons for underutilization of funds and to suggest the corrective measures in 
this regard.  
 
Action Taken 
              
The revision of 10th Five Year Plan outlay from Rs.8344.50 crores to 
Rs.4485.28 crore is mainly due to revisi on of 10th Five Year Plan outlay of 
National Aluminium Company Ltd (NALCO) from Rs.7056 crores to Rs.2864.25 
crores. The less utilization of funds in t he 10th Five Year Plan is mainly due to 
less expenditure by NALCO & GSI.   The r easons of revision of Plan outlay and 
less utilization of funds in respect of NALCO & GSI are given below:  
 

NALCO 
 
  NALCO’s Budget Estimate (2005-06) of Rs.450.07 crores was reduced 
to Rs.220.09 crores at Revised stage. Th e major drop in capital outlay from BE 
2005-06 to RE 2005-06 is in respect of 2nd phase expansion from Rs.290.28 
crores to Rs.106.42 crores . The 2nd phase expansion proposal with projected 
capital outlay of Rs.4091.51 cr ores was approved by the Government of India in 
October, 2004. Though the 2nd phase expa nsion  was approved in October 
2004, the Company could not take up some  of the commitments pertaining to 
their  “Improvement Proposal” between NALCO and M/s. Aluminium Pechiney, 
France, the technology supp lier because it took considerable time to get CVC’s 
clearance for procurement of various items on single vender basis for 2nd phase 
expansion of NALCO for which Govt’s. approval was finally conveyed to NALCO 
in November, 2005. This was the main reason in drop of the provision for 2nd 
phase expansion in RE 2005-06.  
          
        There is an increase in plan outlay in BE 2006-07 from Rs.220.09 crores 
to Rs.622.14 crores.  The major increas e is also in respect of 2nd phase 
expansion from Rs.106.42 crores to Rs 520.97 crores.  
  
      As far as spending is concerned, t he company has exceeded the RE 
figure of Rs 220.09 crore  by Rs.4. 29 crore in 2005-06 and there is every 
likelihood that the company may meet the BE figure of Rs.622.14 crores as there 
is substantial progress in ordering under 2nd phase expansion project. By 
August’06, the ordering has surpassed Rs .2000 crores i.e. almost 50% of the 
approved project cost  and many packages are in advanced st age for ordering 
during the year.   
 
       As against Plan Outlay of Rs.7056 crores for the 10th Plan, the same was 
revised to Rs.2864.25 crores during Mid-Term review and now  assessed at 
Rs.1837.32 crores taking actual expenditure up to 2005-06  and BE 2006-07 into 
account.  The reason of reduction at the stage of Mid-term review are as follows: 
 
(A) 1st Phase Expansion:   The reduction in 1st phase expansion is mainly    
due to substantial saving in the project cost because of following factors:- 
 
(a) NALCO finalized various major packages at competitive bidding 
instead of involving only parties  nominated by M/s. Aluminium 
Pechiney, leading to large scale  saving.  Besides, there was 
substantial price reduction in  various major packages in 
comparison to DFR provision  because of global recessionary 
conditions, 
 
(b) Placement of repeat order on BHEL for 8th Unit of CPP without  
any escalation, 
 

(c) Saving in financing charge s & margin money as Company 
generated enough internal resource s for meeting the project 
cost.  Only debenture of Rs.300  crore was raised for 1st phase 
expansion though debt equity ratio of 1:1 was envisaged. 
 
(d) Availment of CENVAT credit  on capital goods which was not 
considered in the project cost earlier due to uncertainty in the 
CENVAT credit utilization. 
 
(B) 2nd Phase Expansion:   Major r eduction in Plan Outlay during Mid-
Term review is mainly on account  of shifting of Zero date in 
commencement of the project after Government approval on 26.10.2004, 
which was envisaged for approval at the beginning  of 10th Plan earlier.  
 
(C) Qatar Project:   The project could not materialize because of lack of 
interest shown by the Qatar authorities in our equity participation in the 
project. 
 
(D) Coal Mines:   Reduction in Plan Outl ay at the time of Mid-Term review 
due to delay in allotment of coal mine by Government of India to NALCO. 
 
(E) Addition, Modificati on & Replacement: Deferment of certain Addition, 
Modification & Replacements Schemes  for want of adequate consultancy 
back up and lack of dedicated work force to execute these schemes. 
 
         There is a shortfall of Rs.1026.90 crores (Rs.2864.25 - Rs.1837.32 crores) 
with reference to the revised plan outlay in mid term review out of which Rs. 
995.77 crores is on account of 2nd phase expansion. The project wise details for 
reduction in outlay from 10th Plan stage onw ards is given at Annexure-I. It may 
please be noted that reduction in outlay fr om what was envisaged at 10th plan 
stage was beyond the control. Now that  the relevant approvals have been 
obtained, it is expected t hat there will not be any mo re slippage on capital 
expenditure projected. The advice of Standing Commi ttee is noted to the effect 
that budgetary proposals would be prepar ed on realistic basis with minimum 
revision at RE stage.  
    
        The Company is now fully geared up to regularly monitor capital 
expenditure to ensure that there is no slippage on capital expenditure projected. 
 
GSI 
The Planning Commission approved the budget allocation for GSI for Xth 
Five Year Plan period 2002- 2007 at Rs.1000 crore with a split of Rs. 800 crore 
under Domestic Budget Support(DBS) and Rs.200 as Aid Th rough Budget(ATB) 
(Rs.110 crore as ATB support for Research  Vessel and Rs.90 crore for low cost 
items like Laboratory Instruments, etc). 
 

Expenditure incurred by GSI during Xth Plan 
 
( Rs. in crore) 
Period  
(2002-03, to 2005-06) 
Allotment 
(BE) 
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditure 
against the 
allotment 
Percentage 
utilization 
w.r.t.BE 
Percentage 
utilization  
w.r.t. RE 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Operational  317.85 287.45 254.44 80.05% 88.50% 
Modernisation* 335.15 212.92 184.24 54.93% 86.53% 
Total 653.00 500.37 438.68 67.18% 87.66% 
*includes Sub-heads, IT (OAE) Motor Vehi cle, Minor Works, Clothing & tentages, 
OAE,NER(Capital) etc. 
 
The actual plan expenditure during the first four financial years i.e. FYs 
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 & 2005-06 of X Pl an is Rs.438.68 crore (Operational  
Rs.254.44 crore and Modernisa tion Rs.184.24 crore), which is about 67.18% of 
the budget allocation of BE of Rs.653.00 crore (Operational  317.85 crore and 
Modernisation  Rs.335.15 crore). The o perational expendit ure stand at Rs. 
254.44 crore against the allocation  Rs.317.85 crore i.e. almost 80.05 %, which is 
quite reasonable considering the depleted manpower situation (-50 %) in GSI. In 
modernization programme, the  expenditure stood at Rs.184.24 crore i.e. almost 
55% of the allotment Rs.335. 42 crore. This is because so far as modernization 
programme is concerned, only low cost items viz. laboratory, field, IT equipment, 
drill rigs and accessories have only materi alized .  In many cases the laboratory 
and drilling items were not considered fo r procurement due to lack of manpower.  
None of the high cost items has so far materialized during the first four years of 
the X Plan period due to high lead time s for acquisition of these items and 
administrative reasons. 
   
There has been no major gap between the BE and the RE during these 
four years attesting to the soundness of the basis for the plan projections. These 
variations between BE and RE range from  11 to 15 % except for the years 2002-
03 and 2003-04. During 2002-03, a bulk reduction of out lay from Rs.168.5 crore  
(BE) to Rs.90 crore had to be done at RE stage on a ccount of reassessment of 
the expenditure under modernisation head. 
  
The expenditure on motor vehicle was substantially hampered due to 
time-to-time ban on procurement of additional and replacement vehicles. 
 
Most of the Plan projections fo rmulated are based on the available 
manpower and planned induction during the plan period for achieving the targets 
of the Plan. There has been a steady dep letion in personnel strength as GSI is 
operating at around 50 % of sanctioned str ength. This has had an adverse effect 
in terms of achievement of both financial and physical targets, both in operation 
and modernization . Ministry in this di rection has taken steps to speed up 
process of recruitment of scientific personnel to desired level.  
  

In order to streamline the system  in GSI and to expedite the 
implementation of the Plan Schemes, a Project Proposal Review Committee  
(PPRC) was constituted to monitor the project proposal of GSI and to remove the 
bottlenecks in procurement and funds utilization.  
 
[M/o Mines O.M. No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.23 of Chapter I of the Report)

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No.6.13) 
 
The Committee also note that the financial restructuring proposal as 
submitted by HCL was delib erated and it was decided t hat the same should be 
formulated based on the detailed ‘Corpor ate Plan’. The basic objective of 
restructuring is to transform HCL into a vibrant and self- sustaining company with 
an adequate share of copper business in the domestic market after taking into 
account of various important issues and current international scenario on copper 
as well as future trend. M/s. A.T. Kear ney Ltd. has been entrusted with the job of 
formulation of a detailed ‘Corporate Plan’  in December, 2005. Based on their 
findings, financial restructuring proposal of the company would be drawn and 
submitted to the BRPSE for considerati on. The Committee feel that once the 
‘Corporate Plan’ of HCL is approved and implemented, the HCL will have a turn- 
around and become a profit making company. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the financial restructuring proposal based on its ‘Corporate Plan’ 
should be approved without any further loss of time for increased productivity and 
sustainable operations of HCL.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 The restructuring proposal of HCL has been sent to Board for 
Reconstruction  of  Public Sector Enterprises(BRPSE).  
 
[M/o Mines O.M. No.5(2)2006-IF dt.21 November, 2006] 
 
    Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                             ANANTH KUMAR, 
18  December, 2006                                     Chairman, 
27 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
 

 
ANNEXURE-I 
NATIONAL ALUMINIUM COMPANY LIMITED 
SCHEME-WISE DETAILS OF XTH PLAN OUTLAYS AND EXPENDITURE 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Scheme/ 
Project/ Programme 
Total 10th 
Plan 
Outlay 
MID 
TERM 
Review     
10th Plan
2002-03  
Actual 
Exp. 
2003-04  
Actual 
Exp. 
2004-05  
Actual 
Exp. 
2005-06 
RE 
2006-07 
BE 
Total of sl 
No 5 to 9
Difference 
1 2          3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
A Critical/ Ongoing Schemes  
1 Mines & Refinery     126.02     88.50     49.85     14.47       4.35       0.37     69.04        19.46 
2 Smelter & Power Plant     697.06    584.79    391.65    101.87     56.84     19.12    569.48        15.31 
3 VIII Unit of CPP     384.40    242.75     99.38     91.56     30.29       9.34    230.57        12.18 
4 Special Grade Alumina/ 
Zeolite 
      6.22     13.21       2.92       4.03       2.68       1.49     11.12         2.09 
5 Rolled Products Unit      34.00     65.00     34.35       3.74       2.87       1.95     42.91        22.09 
 Sub total of (A) :  1,247.70    994.25    578.15    215.67     97.03     32.27           -    923.12        71.13 
B Schemes aimed at 
maximizing Benefits 
(AMRs) 
    402.30    195.00     30.54     14.18     51.84     59.78     95.00    251.34        (56.34)
C   New Schemes
   
1 II-Phase Expansion  3,623.00 1,650.00       3.39    129.87    520.97     654.23      995.77 
   
2 Equity Participation in 
Quatar Project 
 1,573.00     10.00           -       1.00       1.00         9.00 
3 Coal Mines (One Block)     210.00     15.00           -       2.46       5.17       7.63         7.37 
 Sub Total ('C)  5,406.00 1,675.00           -           -       3.39    132.33    527.14    662.86   1,012.14 
 Total  :(A+B+C)  7,056.00 2,864.25    608.69    229.85    152.26    224.38    622.14  1,837.32   1,026.93 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FIFTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL ( 2006-07) HELD ON 14 TH DECEMBER 2006 IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘A’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1700  hrs. to 1730 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Karuna Shukla - In the Chair  
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu 
4. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey 
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
6. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
7. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
9. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
10. Shri Surendra Lath 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
13. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
14. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Director 
3. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
 
2. Since the Chairman could not att end the meeting, t he Members of the 
Committee requested Smt. Karuna Shukla to  preside over the meeting under 
Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 

3. At the outset, Chairperson, welcom ed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft 
Reports on Demands for Grant s(2006-07) of the Ministries of Coal, Mines and 
Steel:- 
 
(i) **  **  **  **  ** 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in 
the Sixteenth Report (F ourteenth Lok Sabha) of  the Standing Committee 
on Coal and Steel (2005-06) on “Dem ands for Grants (2006-07)” of the 
Ministry of Mines. 
 
(iii) **  **  **  **  ** 
 
4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor 
additions/deletions/ amendments. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairm an to finalise these Reports after 
making consequential change arising out of factual verification by the concerned 
Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________ 
** Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 

ANNEXURE- III 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH  REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made     13 
 
II. Recommendations that have been a ccepted by the Government   9 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12 and 13)   
 
Percentage of total                69.23% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committ ee do not desire to pursue in view  
 of the Government's replies        
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 6 and 10)    2 
         
Percentage of total                  15.38% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of whic h replies of the Government have  
 not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. No.2)     1 
    
 
Percentage of total            7.69% 
     
 
V. Recommendations in respect of whic h final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited  
 
(vide recommendation at Sl.No.11)        1 
    
Percentage of total        7.69% 
        