29
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF MINES
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Twenty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)


TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF MINES
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Twenty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.12.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 7.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)

CC&S No. 29
Price : Rs. 54.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 15
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................ 40
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee ......................... 41
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 42
ANNEXURES
I. Vision Document for future growth of Hindustan
Copper Limited (HCL) .......................................................... 43
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2007-08) held on 5th December, 2007 .... 45
III. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(2006-07) ..................................................................................... 47
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2007-08)
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu
4. Shri Hiten Barman
5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
12. Shri Brajesh Pathak
13. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
14. Shri Tarachand Sahu
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
16. Smt. Karuna Shukla
17. Shri Prabhunath Singh
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
19. Shri Sugrib Singh
20. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
21. Shri Anirudh Prasad a lias Sadhu Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar
23. Shri Devdas Apte*
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
25. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose

26. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
27. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
28. Shri B.J. Panda 
29. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
30. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh  
31. Shri Yashwant Sinha* 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K.Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Bhandari  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shrimati Madhu Tandan - Committee Assistan
t 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
___________________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 6.9.2007 Vice S/Shri Surendra Lath,MP and Ajay Maroo, MP.                        
      
 
 
 
(iv) 

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Twenty Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
on the “Demands for Grants (2007-08)” of the Ministry of Mines.
2. The Twenty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2007. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 7th November, 2007.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 5th December, 2007.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report of the
Committee is given at Annexure-III.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
 N EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December, 2007 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (2006-07) on “Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry
of Mines” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2007.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
NIL.
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. No. 16.
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No.15.
1.3 The Committee desire that final reply in respect of the
recommendation which has been categorised as interim reply by the
Committee should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.
1.4 The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, it is not possible for the Government to
implement any recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reasons,
the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons
for non-implementation.

2
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations made in
the Twenty-Fourth Report.
A. Procurement of New Research Vessel for Geological Survey of
India(GSI)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.24)
1.6 The Committee had noted that the Plan Budget Estimates of
the secretariat of the Ministry for the year 2007-08 had been kept at
Rs. 389.70 crore as against Rs. 448.67 crore for the year 2006-07. The
Ministry had explained that the primary reason for reduced estimates
was transfer of salary and establishment expenses of GSI and IBM
under Non Plan on the direction of Planning Commission. The other
reasons for reduced estimates were non-commencement of promotional
exploration schemes of MECL due to non-availability of forest clearance,
delay in the process of procurement of various equipments by GSI
and non-implementation of two new schemes of IBM due to non-
availability of external aid linked with these projects.
1.7 The Committee were unhappy to note that the modernization
of Geological Survey of India (GSI) had been going on for a long time
but there is no significant progress as their main proposal for
procurement of research vessel was not likely to fructify in 2007-08
also. Since the detailed Project Report (DPR) and Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) Memo regarding purchase of research vessel for GSI
could not be submitted in time, the Planning Commission reduced the
outlay during 2006-07, though a provision of Rs.8 crore had been kept
in the budget for the year 2007-08 towards the payment of consultation
charges for the research vessel. The Committee in their 16th Report
had desired the Ministry to take necessary measures to ensure that
vessel was procured in 10th Plan itself so that exploration efforts to
unearth mineral wealth in deep sea and ocean bed did not suffer any
more. The Committee reiterated that the procurement of research vessel
as a replacement vessel for ageing R.V . Samudra Manthan needed to
be speeded-up for accelerating the exploration of mineral wealth to
give desired boost to the economic development of the country. The
Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to complete all the
formalities for the procurement of above vessel in a time-bound manner.
1.8 The Ministry of Mines in its reply has stated the following:
GSI:GSI had submitted an Annual Plan Budget of Rs. 187.00 crore
for FY 2007-08, which was provisionally pegged at Rs. 181.00 crore

3
by the Planning Commission after Member-level discussions. The
approved Annual budget for FY 2007-08 (BE) was, however, fixed
at Rs.123.00 crore, with curtailment of Rs.35.00 crore under several
establishment expenses heads such as Salary, DTE, FTE, OE(V),
etc. under Plan head. No matching grant under these sub-heads
was provided under Non Plan. Request for re-allocation of these
establishment expenses under Plan Head has been made and the
proposal is now under consideration by the MOF/Planning
Commission.
There has been some reduction also in the allotted funds for
modernization in the BE for FY 2007-08 from that originally
proposed by GSI for FY 2007-08. Only token provision towards
consultancy charges, etc. has been kept for some of the high-cost
equipment (Research Vessel, Geotechnical Vessel) during FY 2007-
08, as their procurement is unlikely to be completed during the
current financial year due to longer time required for procurement.
The Modernization Programme is one of the most ambitious
programmes of GSI and has been taken up with utmost priority
during the X Plan period. Significant progress has been made in
terms of procurement of low cost items (Laboratory, field and
drilling). However, the procurement process in respect of some of
the high cost items, such as research vessel, geotechnical vessel
and heliborne survey systems, etc has progressed at a slower pace
due to the intricate procedural steps (both administrative and
technical) involved in such purchases. Like all other procurements,
acquisition action for the Marine Research vessel was also taken
up in right earnest, but considerable time was consumed to
complete several essential steps, such as formulation of the work
programmes and requirement of the various marine survey
instruments, finalisation of specifications at expert level, interactions
with the other survey organizations of both national and
internationals levels, submission of formal proposals (DPR, EFC)
to the concerned departments/ministries, replying to the queries
raised by the competent authorities at various levels, etc. The
progress achieved so far since receipt of ‘In Principle Approval’
from Planning Commission, is given below, sequentially:
• “In Principle Approval” was received for acquisition of a
new research vessel for GSI as a replacement vessel of R.V .
Samudra Manthan for seabed survey, exploration for non-
living resources on 22.7.05.

4
• GSI submitted the Detailed Project Report (DPR) to MOM
on 31.8.05 incorporating the necessary details.
• Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memorandum
submitted by GSI on 14.9.05 to Ministry of Mines.
• GSI was advised to revise the cost estimate and incorporate
the comments of the Financial Advisor Planning Commission
on 9.1.2006.
• GSI submitted the revised EFC Memo to MOM on 27.2.2006.
• GSI submitted para-wise replies to comments of Deptt. Of
Expenditure on 27.9.2006.
• EFC Meeting was held on 10.10.2006.
• The EFC document, submitted by GSI was approved by the
Ministry of Mines and as a follow up action of the EFC
Meeting, held on 10.10.2006, GSI submitted three documents,
viz. (a) A Cabinet Note, (b) 10 years programme and
(c) Cost comparison between procurement and chartering,
on 18.12.2006.
• “In Principle” permission conveyed by MOM on 14.12.2006
regarding engagement of Shipping Corporation of India as
an Indian Consultant and permission to search for foreign
consultant from internationally reputed institutes. The
consultation rates/fee quoted by SCI is Rs.8.00 crore (to be
paid as interest free advance) .
• Cabinet meeting regarding procurement of a new research
vessel as replacement of the present aging research vessel
‘Samudra Manthan’ of GSI was held on 1.10.2007. The
Cabinet has approved the procurement. GSI has been
requested to take urgent follow up action in the matter.
• GSI has also been requested to confirm the consultation
charges/rates furnished by SCI [Indian Consultant], as the
rates pertain to financial year 2006-07.
IBM: It is a fact that the reduced Plan allocation for the financial
year 2007-08 is due to implementation of the guidelines of the
Planning Commission that establishment and administrative related
expenditure will be transferred from Plan to Non-Plan. As a result
of implementation of this policy decision, no grant pertaining to
the object heads coming under establishment and administrative
expenses like Salary, Wages, DTE, FTE, OE and RRT has been
received for the year 2007-08. The proposed Plan Outlay of Rs.23.70

5
crores in respect of IBM has, therefore, been downsized to
Rs. 17.00 crores in the approved Outlay. Whereas the proposed
Outlay included demands for establishment and administrative
expenses, no grant has been received in the sanctioned Plan Outlay
under the object heads pertaining to establishment and
administrative expenses. Therefore, these expenses were booked
under Non-Plan. With the re-appropriation of Rs. 8.11 crore within
Plan the establishment expenses will now be met within the Plan
funds. Thus the revised estimates for 2007-08 in respect of IBM is
Rs. 18.49 crore. This includes Rs. 2.00 crore for the project—Solid
Waste Management from mining in India and Rs.1.00 crore for the
project—Computerized On-line Register of Mining tenement system.
MECL: This Ministry had taken up the matter for necessary forest
clearances in respect of five exploration projects of MECL with
State Governments of Rajasthan, Kerala and Jharkhand. MECL is
also vigorously pursuing the proposals and every effort will be
done to get these forest clearances at the earliest.
1.9 The Committee had expressed their concern over inordinate
delay in procurement of research vessel, a key component of ongoing
modernization programme of Geological Survey of India (GSI). The
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should
complete all the formalities for the procurement of vessel in a time
bound manner. The Ministry in its reply has stated that the
procurement process in respect of some of the high cost items, such
as research vessel, geo-technical vessel and heliborne survey systems
etc. has progressed at a slower pace due to the intricate procedural
steps involved in such purchases. The Ministry has further stated
that Cabinet at the meeting held on 1.10.2007 has approved the
procurement of vessel and GSI has been requested to take urgent
follow up action in the matter. The Committee feel that the
procedural wranglings involved in the procurement of research vessel
and heliborne survey system has already put the modernization
programme of GSI behind schedule and any further delay in the
matter would adversely affect the functioning of the organization.
The Committee, therefore, desire that since the proposal has been
cleared by the Cabinet, the GSI should procure research vessel and
heliborne survey system in a time bound manner to avoid further
cost and time over-run. The Committee also desire the Ministry to
closely monitor the modernisation programme of GSI.

6
The Committee also note that in BE 2007-08 only Rs. 8 crore has
been allotted to GSI towards the payment of consultation charges
for research vessel. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance to allocate additional
funds to GSI to meet the expenditure.
B. Utilization of Surplus Staff in GSI
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.25)
1.10 The Committee had noted that 2176 group C and D employees
of GSI had been identified as surplus by the Expenditure Reforms
Commission. During the course of examination of the Demands for
Grants (2005-06), the Committee were informed that there was a
shortage of manpower in GSI. The Committee in their 9th Report had,
therefore, desired that shortage of staff in GSI should be met
immediately to obviate the adverse affects on its functioning. The
Ministry in its action taken reply had stated that the Government is
conscious of the need to a full compliment of staff in GSI and was
taking all steps to ensure that there was no shortage of staff at different
levels. Now the Ministry had come out with a statement that these
were 2176 surplus employees in GSI. The Committee were unable to
understand as to how shortage of staff in GSI had turned into surplus
of 2176 persons in two years. The Committee strongly disapprove the
attitude of the Ministry which provided them with contradictory
information. The Committee hardly needed to emphasize that adequate
manpower was imperative for accomplishing the ongoing and new
projects by GSI and also for its modernization programme. The
Committee, therefore, recommended that as far as possible the surplus
staff in GSI should be utilized in the various wings/units after
imparting them appropriate training and upgrading their skills.
1.11 The Ministry of Mines in its reply has stated that it would
like to clarify that there exists an acute shortage of personnel in
Scientific and Technical streams (Group A & B) in GSI. It may be
mentioned that the Ministry of Mines had constituted an Expert
Committee to go into the staff requirement as well as to suggest a
revised Charter of Functions for GSI. The Committee had recommended
a revised strength of 3820 for Group A&B Scientific & Technical Officers,
against which there are 1969 incumbents at present. The shortage of
these officers has been highlighted in successive Five-Year Plan
documents, and other fora from time to time. Necessary measures are
being taken vigorously to induct Scientific & Technical officers, and it
is expected that a substantial number of officers will be in position in

7
near future. In this regard a perspective plan for the recruitment of
Group A & B Officers in GSI is also being formulated, which will
expedite recruitment of officers in GSI in the coming years.
1.12 As regards the staff being surplus in GSI, it may be mentioned
that while the Expert Committee recommended increase in Group A
& B S &T posts, it recommended reduction in Group C & D staff, viz.
from 13155 to 7600. In view of increase in the number of Group A &
B S & T and reduction in Group C & D Posts, the ratio between
Group A & B S&T personnel to the Group C & D has drastically
changed from 1: 4.4 to 1:2. As a consequence, 2176 posts of various
Group C and D streams were identified as surplus.
1.13 Keeping in view the need for retention of staff, a proposal
with the approval of Hon’ble MOM was forwarded to the M/o Finance
seeking their approval for permanent retention of 1301 Group C & D
staff alongwith retention of 646 staff till the natural depletion of the
present incumbent. The M/o Finance has agreed for retention of 646
staff till the natural depletion of the incumbents. It is proposed to
seek retention of the remaining 1301 Group C & D staff on the same
lines as 646 staff agreed by the M/o Finance earlier. The GSI has been
asked to furnish certain relevant information in this regard, after which
a proposal will be referred to the M/o Finance.
1.14 In order to improve career prospects of the GSI officers, the
Ministry of Mines moved a proposal for introduction of the Flexible
Complementing Scheme (FCS) for scientific and technical steams in
GSI, which envisages time-scale promotions to them. Accordingly, a
proposal was referred to the Department of Personnel and Training
(DOPT). The DOPT accorded its approval in principle to the proposal
in July, 2006. The drafts RRs based on the principle of the (FCS) were
referred to the DOPT for approval. However, the DOPT has returned
the RRs saying that the extension of the FCS to new Ministries is
being reviewed, and asked us to wait. The matter has been taken up
with the DOPT again at Secretary’s level for expediting decision in
this regard. This scheme will be very useful as the vacancies at junior
scale are filled en masse.
1.15 Since there were 2176 surplus staff in the Geological Survey
of India (GSI), the Committee had recommended that as far as
possible the surplus staff should be utilized in the various wings/
units after imparting them appropriate training and upgrading their
skills. Now the Ministry in its reply has stated that there is shortage
of personnel in scientific and technical streams (Group A&B) in

8
GSI. The Ministry has further stated that it had constituted an Expert
Committee to go into the staff requirement as well as to suggest a
revised charter of functions for GSI. The Expert Committee
recommended a revised strength of 3820 for Group A & B Scientific
and Technical Officers, against which there are 1969 incumbents at
present. The Committee note that while Expert Committee
recommended increase in Group A&B posts, it recommended
reduction in Group C&D staff, from 13155 to 7600. The Committee
have been informed that the Ministry of Mines in order to improve
career prospects of GSI officers moved a proposal to the Department
of Personnel and Training (DOPT) for introduction of the Flexible
Complementing Scheme (FCS) for scientific and technical streams in
GSI, which envisages time scale promotions to them. The DOPT
accorded its approval in principle to the proposal in July, 2006 but
when draft recruitment rules based on FCS were referred to DOPT
for approval, they returned the proposal saying that extension of
FCS to new Ministries is being reviewed and asked the Ministry to
wait.
The Committee while appreciate that the Expert Committee has
recommended an increased strength of 3820 for group A&B scientific
and technical officers against 1969, they are extremely anguished to
note the decrease in staff of Group C&D from 13155 to 7600 which
accounts for more than 42.2%. The Committee are of the strong view
that the proposed of FCS to improve the career prospects of officers
will not only boost up their moral but reduce the attrition rate apart
from attracting more talents in GSI.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to vigorously
pursue the FCS scheme with DOPT and to ensure that the services
of the surplus staff are best utilized to the maximum level after
providing them with proper orientation in various units of GSI.
C. Utilization of 11th Plan Outlay
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 5.25)
1.16 The National Aluminium Company Ltd. (NALCO) is Asia’s
largest integrated aluminium complex, encompassing bauxite mining,
alumina refining, aluminium smelting and casting, power generation,
rail and port facilities. NALCO had emerged to be a star performer
and now a ‘Nav-Ratna’ company engaged in production and export of
alumina and aluminium and more significantly, in propelling self
sustained growth. The NALCO had planned to invest Rs.1158 crores

9
during 2007-08 for accomplishing various projects and some of the
schemes included in second phase expansion. The Committee hoped
that it would justify the Government’s faith in the company by
achieving set target in a time bound manner.
1.17 The Committee had been informed that first phase expansion
of National Aluminium Company Ltd.(NALCO), covering Mines and
Refinery, Smelter and Power Plant and 8th unit of CPP , Special Grade
Alumina/Zeolite Plants and Rolled Product Unit, was completed during
10th Five Year Plan. It was further stated that the equity participation
in Qatar Project involving an outlay of Rs.1573 crores could not be
taken up during 10th Plan since the authorities in Qatar were not
interested in pursuing with this project. Further, the Utkal coal mine
project involving an outlay of Rs. 210 crores during 10th Plan period
became partially operational because the approval for the same could
materialize only in 2004. Thus a number of projects slated for
completion during 10th Plan could not come up and 10th Plan outlay
was reduced from Rs. 7056 crores to Rs. 2864.25 crores and it has
utilized only Rs. 1840.27 crores.
1.18 The Committee were concerned to note that NALCO has yet
not firmed up the new projects and programmes to be taken up during
the 11th Plan, though the company had identified a few schemes for
debottlenecking of Alumina Plant, Pottangi Bauxite Mine and setting
up of Smelter Plant in Middle-Cost. The Committee believed that such
a lackadaisical attitude on the part of NALCO did not augur well at
a time when its second phase expansion programme was in full swing.
The Committee, therefore, desired that NALCO should clearly come
out with viable schemes for implementation with in a time frame
during 11th Plan in order to sharpen its competitive edge in the
international market. The Committee desired that NALCO should make
all out efforts to fully utilize the 11th Plan outlay of Rs.9454 crores
which it has projected.
1.19 The Ministry of Mines in its reply has stated that  during
year 2007-08, the company has projected capital outlay of Rs. 1158
crores to be spent on various ongoing & new projects including 2nd
phase expansion. There is every likelihood of availing the full plan
outlay set for the year 2007-08 as company has a very good internal
system to monitor physical as well as financial progress of various
plan schemes backed by renowned engineering consultants namely,
M/s M N Dastur & Company, EIL, MECON particularly for 2nd phase
expansion. The Company has focused on timely completion of 2nd
phase expansion project during 11th plan, together with other smaller

10
schemes approved and initiated. The main reason for delay in progress
of Pottangi Bauxite mine and Utkal-E block coal mine has been long
time being taken in awarding mining leases by State Government of
Orissa. The matter for both mining leases is being vigorously pursued
by the Company and by Ministry of Mines together.
1.20 For taking a focused line for new major projects for growth,
consultants are being engaged for advising on strategic planning.
Considering all these factors, the proposed outlay for 11th plan has
been revised to Rs.6,926 crores.
1.21 The Committee had desired that National Aluminium
Company Ltd. (NALCO) should clearly come out with viable schemes
for implementation within a time frame during 11th Plan and should
make all out efforts to fully utilize the 11th Plan outlay of Rs.9454
crores. The Ministry has informed the Committee that NALCO has
projected capital outlay of Rs.1158 crores during 2007-08 to be spent
on various ongoing and new projects including 2nd phase expansion.
It has further been stated that proposed outlay for 11th Plan has
been revised to Rs. 6926 crores but the Ministry has not furnished
any cogent reason for such revision except that mining leases are
pending with the State Government of Orissa.
The Committee are surprised to note that NALCO has reduced
its 11th Plan outlay from Rs. 9454 crores to Rs. 6926 crores in the
first year itself of the Plan. The Committee believe that NALCO
had either prepared inflated outlay for the 11th Plan or failed to
take up the new schemes for implementation to justify the allocation
of the outlay. It is beyond the comprehension of the Committee
how the outlay has been reduced in the first year of the plan which
is normally done at the time of mid-term appraisal. The Committee
are apprehensive about the timely completion of 2nd phase expansion
of NALCO given the position of fund utilization and tardy progress
in the implementation of projects/schemes. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Ministry to take corrective measures to ensure that 11th
Plan outlay is fully utilized so that expansion of NALCO is
completed well in time. The Committee also desire the Ministry to
apprise them the reasons for reduction of 11th Plan Outlay.
D. Allotment of Utkal E-Coal Block
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 5.26)
1.22 The Committee had noted that NALCO was facing problem
of various clearances in operation of bauxite mines like Pottangi and

11
Kodingamali and coal mine at Utkal-E. If these clearances were delayed
NALCO might not be able to utilize the allocations made for these
projects. All these cases were pending for various clearances/agreements
with the Government of Orissa. The Committee desired that the
Ministry of Mines must settle these issues with the Government of
Orissa at the earliest on mutually agreed terms, otherwise the
Committee felt the second phase expansion would be adversely affected
as the work on these projects was painfully slow.
1.23 In Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Mines has informed
the Committee as follows:
UTKAL-E COAL BLOCK:
Mining Lease Application : Applied
Mining Plan : Completed
Detailed Project Report : Completed
Land Acquisition : In progress
*Mining lease:-
The award of Mining lease for Utkal-E Coal block is yet to be
recommended by Govt. of Orissa to Ministry of Coal.
*Forest Clearance:—
NALCO has submitted the proposal for diversion of 234.745 hectares
of forestland on 29.01.2007. The proposal has been forwarded to the
Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Angul vide letter-dated 15.02.2007. Based
on the recommendation of the DFO, proposal will be forwarded by
PCCF, Orissa to Ministry of Environment & Forest for clearance. The
matter is being taken up with Forests Deptt. of Orissa Govt.
*Acquisition of Land:—
Application for allocation of Private and forestland has been
submitted. Part allotment of non forest Govt. Land has been received.
Allotment of balance land is being expedited.
POTTANGI BAUXITE DEPOSIT, DISTRICT – KORAPUT
The in-principle recommendation was given by Government of
Orissa on 30.07.2004 with 5 conditions which were suitably clarified
by NALCO on 27.02.2006 after several rounds of discussions. The issue
of payment of arrear water rate/tax to State Government was linked

12
with this case and NALCO had to deposit an adhoc amount of
Rs. 10 crore without prejudice to pending writ petition in Orissa High
Court. The Chief Secretary , Government of Orissa convened a meeting
on 06.02.2007 to resolve the issue but the proceeding of the meeting
is yet to be circulated for further action.
In the meantime, Ministry of Mines, Government of India has
reserved this deposit for 10 years in favour of NALCO through
Gazettee of India publication dtd.27.04.2007. The mining lease
application pending with Collector, Koraput since 1992 shall be revised
based on physical survey of the deposit by NALCO.
KODINGAMALI BAUXITE DEPOSIT, DISTRICT KORAPUT
The Mining lease application of NALCO is pending with Collector,
District Koraput since 1992. The in-principle grant of lease for Pottangi
deposit vide letter dtd. 30.07.2004 of State Govt. has stipulated a
condition that NALCO shall not make any claim on Kodingamali
Bauxite Deposit since the Pottangi Bauxite Deposit was being granted
in NALCO’s favour. Thus the final decision is pending with
Government of Orissa for further activities.
1.24 The Committee had desired the Ministry of Mines to settle
the issues of allotment of Utkal-E coal block and bauxite deposits
like Pottangi and Kodingamali pending with State Government of
Orissa for a long time as these were essential for the ongoing
expansion programme of National Aluminium Company Ltd.
(NALCO). Regarding mining lease application of NALCO for
Kodingmali bauxite deposit, the Committee has been informed that
the matter is pending with collector, Koraput District since 1992.
While granting of lease for Pottangi deposit to NALCO, the State
Government has stipulated a condition that NALCO shall not make
any claim on Kodingamali bauxite deposit since the Pottangi bauxite
was being granted and the final decision is pending with the State
Government. The Committee are surprised at the inaction on the
part of the State Government and its failure to take decision in the
matter for nearly 12 years. The Committee also express their
displeasure at the lackadaisical attitude of Ministry of Mines and
their inability to put proper justification for early allotment of the
above mines to NALCO. The Committee feel that grant of mining
lease is need of the hour for smoothful implementation of ongoing
expansion programme and any further delay would adversely affect
the growth and development of NALCO. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Ministry to take up the issue at the highest level with the

13
State Government of Orissa and ensure early allotment of not only
Utkal E-coal block but also Kodingamali bauxite mine deposit to
NALCO.
E. To amend the National Mineral Policy and MMDR Act
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 8.8)
1.25 The Committee found that no preference was being given to
any PSU for the grant of mineral concession unless the area was
reserved for exploitation by PSUs. The Committee in their 17th Report
had desired that National Mineral policy(NMP) and Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act (MMDR) Act should be suitably
amended in order to give due preference to the Steel PSUs in grant/
renewal of mining lease. The Committee observed that Hoda Committee
had not come up with a categorical recommendation for reservation to
PSUs in the grant/renewal of mining leases and they were
apprehensive to find that empowering the State Government in
deciding the deserving applicant, in case of more than one applicant,
the genuine concern of the companies particularly PSUs may not get
attention of the State Government.
1.26 The Committee felt that since the PSUs were vehicle of
economic growth and discharging social responsibilities in greater way
they deserved priority in the grant of mineral concessions. The
Committee, therefore, reiterated their earlier recommendation that NMP
and MMDR Act should be suitably amended to give priority to the
PSUs in grant/renewal of mining lease.
1.27 The Ministry of Mines in its Action Taken Reply has submitted
that the MMDR Act, 1957, adequately provides that the Central
Government may in consultation with the State Government, reserve
any area not already held under any prospecting licence or mining
lease, for undertaking prospecting or mining operations through a
Government company or corporation owned or controlled by it and
where it proposes to do so, it shall, by notification in official Gazette,
specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in
respect of which such area will be reserved.
1.28 The Committee had recommended specifically that National
Mineral Policy(NMP) and Mines and Minerals Development and
Regulation (MMDR) Act, 1957 should be suitably amended to give
priority to the PSUs in grant/renewal of mining lease since they are
considered to be vehicles of economic growth. Although the Ministry
in its reply has stated that MMDR Act, 1957 has adequate provision

14
that the Central Government in consultation with State Government
may allot mining lease but it has not come out with categorical
reply for giving preferential grant/renewal of mining lease. The
Committee strongly deprecate that the Ministry is still harping on
the existing provisions in the MMDR, Act for allotment of mining
leases to PSUs which have proved to be ineffective as most of the
PSUs are still struggling for grant/renewal of mining leases.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that
the Ministry should bring necessary amendments immediately in
NMP and MMDR Act to give priority to the PSUs in grant/renewal
of mining lease. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken by the Ministry in this regard.

15
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee hope that the Ministry of Mines will implement
the recommendations in a time bound manner which the Committee
commented upon in their 21st Action Taken Report. The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Mines should furnish final replies to the
recommendation (No. 11) which was categorized as of interim nature.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
Action Taken
Recommendation (No. 2 of Para 3.15 of 16th Report)
So far as NALCO is concerned, the actual expenditure of Rs.224.38
crores exceeded the RE: 2005-06 provision of Rs.220.09 crores marginally.
There has been substantial increase in BE: 2006-07 on account of
ongoing 2nd phase expansion, and the Company had spent Rs. 649.77
crores against its RE: 2006-07 figure of Rs. 625.09 crores.
The 10th Five Year Plan was prepared in the year 2001-02 with an
anticipation that the proposed projects i.e. 2nd phase expansion, Qatar
projects, coal mines will start as per the proposed schedule and 1st
phase expansion will be completed within the approved project cost.
In November, 2002, Deptt. of Expenditure informed that they did
not support the proposal of 2nd Phase Expansion of NALCO in view
of the then proposed disinvestments of NALCO. Accordingly, the matter
was processed in Deptt. of Mines and it was decided in March,2003
not to pursue the proposal till issues regarding disinvestments were
resolved. When the proposal was re-mooted, various clearances were
also required for consideration of the proposal, and after obtaining the
same, approval was accorded by the Government in October, 2004.
After approval of the project, getting CVC’s clearances for procurement
of various items on single vendor basis was another reason for delay
in starting the works on 2nd Phase Expansion.

16
For allotment of Utkal-E Coal Block, initially, Department of Coal
suggested to form a JV as NALCO’s requirement was 6 million tonnes
per annum (MTPA) whereas Department of Coal was of the view that
at least 10 MTPA should be the requirement for captive coal block
allotment. NALCO tried to form JV which could not materalise. Later
on, the proposal was being opposed by Coal India Ltd. and Mahanadi
Coalfields Ltd. (MCL) in the Screening Committee on the grounds of
disposal of ash, backfilling of de-coaled mines, investment made by
MCL for developing new dedicated mines, etc. Department of Mines
took up these issues at higher levels regularly by writing DO letters
and having discussions/meetings at Joint Secretary / Secretary level.
Ultimately, due to such efforts, the coal block could be provisionally
allotted in August, 2004.
In addition, there was substantial savings in the 1st phase expansion
project, resulting in revision of plan figure during mid-term appraisal
and also resulting in less spending during the plan period.
There was less expenditure due to above mentioned reasons.
The activities of 2nd phase expansion has taken off with
momentum. There is every-likelihood that the project will be completed
within the scheduled time.
The company has an internal system to monitor physical & financial
progress of various plan schemes. Regular review is being undertaken
at the plant level as well as at corporate level on monthly basis. For
2nd phase expansion project, the company has taken the help of
renowned engineering consultant, M/s M N Dastur, for both time &
cost monitoring purpose. A status report on actual progress versus
various milestones set for each segment of the projects are being
submitted to Ministry of Programme Implementation, Government of
India. Review is also being conducted in Quarterly Progress Review
(QPR) meeting at the Ministry level. For 2nd phase expansion, a status
report on actual report versus target/ milestones is being submitted to
every Board Meeting.
The Government has impressed upon NALCO management to
ensure that realistic requirements should be projected for expenditure
under Plan. Regular reviews will be conducted to see that NALCO is
following the instructions.
At Government level also, regular assessment and monitoring will
be done to ensure that realistic plan provisions are made and then to
ensure to achieve the targets of the expenditure.

17
However, the Company has noted the advice of the Standing
Committee to the effect that the budgetary proposals would be prepared
on realistic basis.
Recommendation (No. 11 of Para 6.13 of 16th Report)
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 26.07.2007 and has partly
approved the restructuring proposal in respect of Hindustan Copper
Ltd., which includes the following
(i) Conversion of non-plan govt. loan amounting to Rs. 50.00
crore in to equity.( Rs. 25 crore each released in 2005-2006
and 2006-2007)
(ii) Waiver of 7.5% non-cumulative redeemable preference share
amounting to Rs. 180.73 crore and its adjustment against
accumulated losses.
(iii) Restructuring of capital through reduction of face value of
equity share from Rs. 10 to Rs. 5 amounting to Rs. 382.21 crore
and its adjustment against accumulated losses.
(iv) Restoration of superannuation age to 60 years to preserve
skills and provide a breathing time to the organization of
formulation of proper succession plan.
(v) Creation of post of Director (Mining) to drive the growth
agenda in the mining domain.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No.1 Para No. 3.23)
The Committee note that for the year 2007-08, the Planning
Commission has approved an amount of Rs. 1380.29 crores for the
Ministry of Mines and its PSUs as against their proposed outlay of
Rs. 2027.34 crores. Though there has been a reduction of Rs. 645.05 crores
in the Annual Plan outlay , the Ministry is quite confident that sufficient
funds have been allocated for the ongoing projects. The Committee
are perplexed to find that though the outlays proposed by the Ministry
and its PSUs are being approved with major reduction, it is intriguing
that they are complacent with reduced allocation. The Committee
strongly deprecate the inherent flaws in the budgetary planning in the
Ministry whereby year after year the inflated outlays are proposed
which are drastically downsized by the Planning Commission. The
Committee have little doubt that these reductions would have adverse
impact on ongoing as well as new projects. The Committee, therefore,

18
desire the Ministry and its PSUs to prepare realistic estimates which
stand the scrutiny of the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance
and thereby obviate a major post allocation exercise or managing the
various projects/schemes with reduced allocations.
Action Taken
NALCO:
It is a fact that there has been a reduction of Plan outlay for the
year 2007-08 at the Planning Commission level. As against NALCO’s
budget proposals of Rs. 1633.02 crores, the approval was reduced by
Rs. 475.02 crores comprising of Rs. 351 crores for 2nd phase expansion,
Rs. 50 crores for Utkal E-Coal Mines, Rs. 4 crore for Greenfield Smelter
project and Rs. 70.02 crores on account of Additions, Modifications &
Replacements.
As all the approved projects are funded through internal sources
only, the Company is confident that there would be no adverse impact
due to reduction. However, as suggested by the Committee, the
company will take sufficient care in preparing realistic budget estimates.
MECL:
During 2007-08, the total value of promotional work envisaged to
be carried out on the ongoing schemes as well as on new schemes
works out to around Rs. 16 crores. Keeping in view the performance
of promotional projects in the recent past and the value of the work
to be carried out in the approved schemes, 11 crores for 2007-08 (BE)
only has been proposed by this Ministry for MECL. After review of
performances in these projects, additional allocation will be requested
at RE stage.
IBM:
The proposed Plan Outlay in respect of IBM for the financial year
2007-08 was Rs. 23.70 crores and as against this amount Rs. 17.00
crores was sanctioned as Plan Outlay for IBM. The proposed Plan
Outlay for 2007-08 included estimates for establishment and
administrative expenses like Salary, Wages, DTE, FTE, OE and RRT.
However, in the sanctioned Plan Outlay, no grant has been received
under these object heads relating to establishment and administrative
expenses. This is due to the guidelines of the Planning Commission
for transfer of salary and establishment expenses from Plan to Non-
Plan. It is, therefore, evident that the downsizing of the proposed Plan

19
Outlay of IBM from Rs. 23.70 crores to Rs. 17.00 crores is a result of
the policy decision of the Planning Commission where by no allocation
for Salary and Establishment expenses has been made in the Plan side
for the year 2007-08 unlike the previous years. In this view of the
matter, the Budget Estimates prepared by IBM is realistic.
Establishment and Administrative expenses earlier included in the
‘Object Head Plan’ for implementation of continuing schemes, were
transferred to Object Head ‘Non-Plan’ as per the guidelines of Planning
Commission. It is resulted in major reduction of Plan Outlay from
Rs. 23.70 crores to Rs. 17.00 crores. IBM expressed its difficulty in
operation of continuing schemes without receiving funds for
Establishment & Administrative Expenditure. In case of continuing
schemes where establishment expenditure are integral part of the
scheme, in that case it would continue to be provided under Plan.
Accordingly the earlier revised estimate was reviewed and Plan Outlay
for 2007-08 to the tune of Rs. 23.70 crores was again proposed.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF dated 7.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2 Para No. 3.24)
The Committee further note that the Plan Budget Estimates of the
secretariat of the Ministry for the year 2007-08 has been kept at
Rs. 389.70 crore as against Rs. 448.67 crore for the year 2006-07. The
Ministry has explained that the primary reason for reduced estimates
was transfer of salary and establishment expenses of GSI and IBM
under Non-Plan on the direction of Planning Commission. The other
reasons for reduced estimates were non-commencement of promotional
exploration schemes of MECL due to non-availability of forest clearance,
delay in the process of procurement of various equipments by GSI
and non-implementation of two new schemes of IBM due to non-
availability of external aid linked with these projects.
The Committee are unhappy to note that the modernization of
Geological Survey of India (GSI) has been going on for a long time
but there is no significant progress as their main proposal for
procurement of research vessel is not likely to fructify in 2007-08 also.
Since the detailed Project Report (DPR) and Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) Memo regarding purchase of research vessel for GSI
could not be submitted in time, the Planning Commission reduced the
outlay during 2006-07, though a provision of Rs. 8 crore has been kept
in the budget for the year 2007-08 towards the payment of consultation
charges for the research vessel. The Committee in their 16th Report

20
had desired the Ministry to take necessary measures to ensure that
vessel is procured in 10th Plan itself so that exploration efforts to
unearth mineral wealth in deep sea and ocean bed do not suffer any
more. The Committee reiterate that the procurement of research vessel
as a replacement vessel for ageing R.V . Samudra Manthan needs to be
speeded-up for accelerating the exploration of mineral wealth to give
desired boost to the economic development of the country. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to complete all the formalities
for the procurement of above vessel in a time-bound manner.
Action Taken
GSI:
GSI had submitted an Annual Plan Budget of Rs. 187.00 crore for
FY 2007-08, which was provisionally pegged at Rs. 181.00 crore by the
Planning Commission after Member-level discussions. The approved
Annual budget for FY 2007-08 (BE) was, however, fixed at Rs. 123.00
crore, with curtailment of Rs. 35.00 crore under several establishment
expenses heads such as Salary, DTE, FTE, OE(V), etc. under Plan head.
No matching grant under these sub-heads was provided under Non-
Plan. Request for re-allocation of these establishment expenses under
Plan Head has been made and the proposal is now under consideration
by the MOF/Planning Commission.
There has been some reduction also in the allotted funds for
modernization in the BE for FY 2007-08 from that originally proposed
by GSI for FY 2007-08. Only token provision towards consultancy
charges, etc. has been kept for some of the high-cost equipment
(Research Vessel, Geotechnical Vessel) during FY 2007-08, as their
procurement is unlikely to be completed during the current financial
year due to longer time required for procurement.
The Modernization Programme is one of the most ambitious
programmes of GSI and has been taken up with utmost priority during
the 10th Plan period. Significant progress has been made in terms of
procurement of low cost items (Laboratory, field and drilling). However,
the procurement process in respect of some of the high cost items,
such as research vessel, geotechnical vessel and heliborne survey
systems, etc. has progressed at a slower pace due to the intricate
procedural steps (both administrative and technical) involved in such
purchases. Like all other procurements, acquisition action for the Marine
Research vessel was also taken up in right earnest, but considerable
time was consumed to complete several essential steps, such as

21
formulation of the work programmes and requirement of the various
marine survey instruments, finalisation of specifications at expert level,
interactions with the other survey organizations of both national and
international levels, submission of formal proposals (DPR, EFC) to the
concerned departments/ministries, replying to the queries raised by
the competent authorities at various levels, etc. The progress achieved
so far since receipt of ‘In Principle Approval’ from Planning
Commission, is given below, sequentially:
• “In Principle Approval” was received for acquisition of a
new research vessel for GSI as a replacement vessel of R.V .
Samudra Manthan for sea bed survey, exploration for non-
living resources on 22.7.05.
• GSI submitted the Detailed Project Report (DPR) to MOM
on 31.8.05 incorporating the necessary details.
• Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memorandum
submitted by GSI on 14.9.05 to Ministry of Mines.
• GSI was advised to revise the cost estimate and incorporate
the comments of the Financial Advisor Planning Commission
on 9.1.2006.
• GSI submitted the revised EFC Memo to MOM on 27.2.2006.
• GSI submitted para-wise replies to comments of Deptt. of
Expenditure on 27.9.2006.
• EFC Meeting was held on 10.10.2006.
• The EFC document, submitted by GSI was approved by the
Ministry of Mines and as a follow up action of the EFC
Meeting, held on 10.10.2006, GSI submitted three documents,
viz. (a) A Cabinet Note, (b) 10 years programme, and
(c) Cost comparison between procurement and chartering,
on 18.12.2006.
• “In Principle” permission conveyed by MOM on 14.12.2006
regarding engagement of Shipping Corporation of India as
an Indian Consultant and permission to search for foreign
consultant from internationally reputed institutes. The
consultation rates/fee quoted by SCI is Rs. 8.00 crore (to be
paid as interest free advance) .
• Cabinet meeting regarding procurement of a new research
vessel as replacement of the present aging research vessel
‘Samudra Manthan’ of GSI was held on 1.10.2007. The
Cabinet has approved the procurement. GSI has been
requested to take urgent follow up action in the matter.

22
• GSI has also been requested to confirm the consultation
charges/rates furnished by SCI (Indian Consultant), as the
rates pertain to financial year 2006-07.
IBM:
It is a fact that the reduced Plan allocation for the financial year
2007-08 is due to implementation of the guidelines of the Planning
Commission that establishment and administrative related expenditure
will be transferred from Plan to Non-Plan. As a result of
implementation of this policy decision, no grant pertaining to the object
heads coming under establishment and administrative expenses like
Salary, Wages, DTE, FTE, OE and RRT has been received for the year
2007-08. The proposed Plan Outlay of Rs. 23.70 crores in respect of
IBM has, therefore, been downsized to Rs. 17.00 crores in the approved
Outlay. Whereas the proposed Outlay included demands for
establishment and administrative expenses, no grant has been received
in the sanctioned Plan Outlay under the object heads pertaining to
establishment and administrative expenses. Therefore, these expenses were
booked under Non-Plan. With the re-appropriation of Rs. 8.11 crore within
Plan the establishment expenses will now be met within the Plan
funds. Thus the revised estimates for 2007-08 in respect of IBM is
Rs. 18.49 crore. This includes Rs. 2.00 crore for the project—Solid Waste
Management from mining in India and Rs. 1.00 crore for the project—
Computerized On-line Register of Mining tenement system.
MECL:
This Ministry had taken up the matter for necessary forest
clearances in respect of five exploration projects of MECL with State
Governments of Rajasthan, Kerala and Jharkhand. MECL is also
vigorously pursuing the proposals and every effort will be done to get
these forest clearances at the earliest.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 1.9 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.25)
The Committee note that 2176 group C and D employees of GSI
have been identified as surplus by the Expenditure Reforms
Commission. During the course of examination of the Demands for

23
Grants (2005-06), the Committee were informed that there was a
shortage of manpower in GSI. The Committee in their 9th Report had,
therefore, desired that shortage of staff in GSI should be met
immediately to obviate the adverse affects on its functioning. The
Ministry in its action taken reply had stated that the Government is
conscious of the need to a full compliment of staff in GSI and is
taking all steps to ensure that there is no shortage of staff at different
levels. Now the Ministry has come out with a statement that these are
2176 surplus employees in GSI. The Committee are unable to
understand as to how shortage of staff in GSI has turned into surplus
of 2176 persons in two years. The Committee strongly disapprove the
attitude of the Ministry which provided them with contradictory
information. The Committee hardly need to emphasize that adequate
manpower is imperative for accomplishing the ongoing and new
projects by GSI and also for its modernization programme. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that as far as possible the surplus
staff in GSI should be utilized in the various wings/units after
imparting them appropriate training and upgrading their skills.
Action Taken
The Ministry would like to clarify that there exists an acute shortage
of personnel in Scientific and Technical streams (Group A & B) in GSI.
It may be mentioned that the Ministry of Mines had constituted an
Expert Committee to go into the staff requirement as well as to suggest
a revised Charter of Functions for GSI. The Committee had
recommended a revised strength of 3820 for Group A&B Scientific &
Technical Officers, against which there are 1969 incumbents at present.
The shortage of these officers has been highlighted in successive
Five-Year Plan documents, and other fora from time to time. Necessary
measures are being taken vigorously to induct Scientific & Technical
officers, and it is expected that a substantial number of officers will be
in position in near future. In this regard a perspective plan for the
recruitment of Group A&B Officers in GSI is also being formulated,
which will expedite recruitment of officers in GSI in the coming years.
As regards the staff being surplus in GSI, it may be mentioned
that while the Expert Committee recommended increase in Group A
& B S&T posts, it recommended reduction in Group C&D staff, viz.
from 13155 to 7600. In view of increase in the number of Group
A&BS&T and reduction in Group C&D Posts, the ratio between Group
A&B S&T personnel to the Group C&D has drastically changed from
1: 4.4 to 1:2. As a consequence, 2176 posts of various Group C and D
streams were identified as surplus.

24
Keeping in view the need for retention of staff, a proposal with the
approval of Hon’ble MOM was forwarded to the M/o Finance seeking
their approval for permanent retention of 1301 Group C&D staff
alongwith retention of 646 staff till the natural depletion of the present
incumbent. The M/o Finance has agreed for retention of 646 staff till
the natural depletion of the incumbents. It is proposed to seek retention
of the remaining 1301 Group C&D staff on the same lines as 646 staff
agreed by the M/o Finance earlier. The GSI has been asked to furnish
certain relevant information in this regard, after which a proposal will
be referred to the M/o Finance.
In order to improve career prospects of the GSI officers, the
Ministry of Mines moved a proposal for introduction of the Flexible
Complementing Scheme (FCS) for scientific and technical steams in
GSI, which envisages time-scale promotions to them. Accordingly, a
proposal was referred to the Department of Personnel and Training
(DOPT). The DOPT accorded its approval in principle to the proposal
in July, 2006. The drafts RRs based on the principle of the (FCS) were
referred to the DOPT for approval. However, the DOPT has returned
the RRs saying that the extension of the FCS to new Ministries is
being reviewed, and asked us to wait. The matter has been taken up
with the DOPT again at Secretary’s level for expediting decision in
this regard. This scheme will be very useful as the vacancies at junior
scale are filled en masse.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 1.15 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.3)
The Committee are distressed to note that the performance of GSI
during 10th Plan has not shown any significant improvement. Except
in the year 2002-03 during which it has completed a total of
404 activity in survey & mapping, mineral exploration, specialized
investigation, etc. and thereafter no perceptible improvement has been
noticed. The Committee are pained to note that despite rapid
advancement and modernization of mineral exploration technology in
the world, the GSI is still persisting with obsolete and inefficient
technology. Needless to say that GSI being a premier organization for
earth sciences, the Committee desire that it should set example by
accelerating its activities in the field of scientific survey and research
for locating mineral resources and geological studies during 11th Plan.

25
Action Taken
Geological Survey of India is the principal provider of geo-scientific
information and knowledge-based services to the government, industry
and general public. GSI is engaged in various geological studies,
including mineral exploration, multi-elemental geochemical mapping
of the country, aerogeophysical multi-sensor surveys and ground
geophysical mapping of prioritized areas to locate undiscovered and /
or deep-seated/concealed prospects/deposits. GSI carries out
preliminary assessment of economic minerals in seabed surveys in
Territorial Waters and EEZ. In addition to mineral prognostication, the
organization has been systematically updating its geoscientific database
in digital format to provide reliable and relevant information on mineral
and other natural resources to the public and private sector
entrepreneurs to sustain investment in mineral sector. GSI also carries
out various special investigations under different themes to provide
services to various government/PSU organizations and also generates
value added products to cater to the needs of the society. The various
themes covered under Special Investigations are Engineering Geological
Studies; Landslide Hazard Studies; Shallow Subsurface Geology;
Earthquake Geology and Seismology; Environmental Geology;
Glaciological Studies; Geothermal Studies.
In all these endeavours, GSI is equipped with state-of-the-art
equipment to cater to its needs. Sophisticated analytical instruments
provide ultra-precise chemical analysis for the geochemical mapping
programmes, which will help in locating new mineral deposits. Under
the modernization programme, GSI is systematically upgrading its data
generation capabilities to international standards. A heliborne
geophysical survey system, now under procurement, will usher in a
new era of high-end technology in its equipment arsenal and
significantly enhance GSI’s capabilities for locating deep-seated hidden
mineral deposits. A new Research Vessel, Geotechnical Vessel, for
undertaking Marine surveys is also being procured. Newer and
technologically advanced models of drilling rigs are being introduced
to give a cutting edge to the organization’s exploration programmes.
More such equipments are planned to be inducted during the XI Plan.
GSI has a modern Training Institute which, besides providing
professional training for the new recruits, also arranges for periodic
exposure of scientists to the latest scientific developments to refresh
and update their knowledge as they progress in the organization,
shouldering higher responsibilities. With rapid advancement in science
and technology and concomitant diversification and modernization of
activities in geological surveys and exploration, GSI’s scientific

26
workforce is equipped appropriately for acquisition and application of
innovative techniques/methods/concepts for earth resource evaluation
and management. With this, GSI will be fully capable, both in terms
of equipment and knowledge-base, to cater to all its future programme
needs.
During successive Five Year Plan periods, GSI has been relentlessly
occupied in this geoscientific endeavour without toning down its
activity over the years in spite of its steadily declining manpower and
machinery resources (drilling rigs etc.). Since mid-sixth plan, there has
been no addition of S&T professionals in GSI and in addition, there
has been reduction in sanctioned strength due to executive decisions/
orders. The sanctioned strength of personnel has come down from
16,302 (at the end of IX plan) to 11,420 whereas activities and
responsibilities have increased. GSI is at present functioning with
< 50% of its sanctioned strength of S&T personnel (Gr. A & B).
Notwithstanding the steady decline in the available scientific personnel,
GSI has endeavoured to maintain the tempo if its exploration and
geoscientific activities. The following table enumerates the above facts
i.e. the number of investigations taken up by GSI in different
geoscientific fields during the X Plan period has been maintained to
a large extent:
Year No. of Investigations taken up in Survey & No of Using
Mapping, Mineral Exploration, R&D, Spl. Geoscientists Drilling
Investigations and Dissemination Rigs/Auger
(excluding (including
Marine Marine
cruises) cruises)
2002-03 404 (excluding 22 cruises 426 1630 105
2003-04 373 (excluding 20 cruises) 393 1515 101
2004-05 381 (excluding 22 cruises) 403 1474 92
2005-06 392 (excluding 23 cruises) 415 1356 99
2006-07 400 (excluding 22 cruises) 422 1306 89
Significant achievements in Mineral Exploration during the X Plan:
GSI has intensified its exploration efforts for various metallic and
non-metallic minerals, manganese ore, rare minerals, limestone , clay,
diamond and many others during the X Plan period. The significant

27
achievements in mineral exploration activities during this period are
summarized below:
Sl.No. Ore/Mineral Augmentation of Mineral resources
during the X Plan (Sept. ’06)
 1. Coal 14.168 billion tonnes
 2. Lignite 1249 million tonnes
 3. Gold ore 42.49 million tonnes
 4. Copper 8.20 million tonnes
 5. Lead-Zinc 0.80 million tonnes
 6. Iron Ore 37.42 million tonnes
 7. Manganese ore 14.38 million tonnes
 8. Bauxite 5.704 million tonnes
 9. Limestone 1883.53 million tonnes
10. Cesium bearing pegmatite 0.03 million tonnes
11. Clay 5.83 million tonnes
12. PGE Ore 0.294 million tonnes
13. Dimension stone 1.09 million cu. m of black,
6.60 million cu. m of white and
15.34 million cu. m of green
varieties
14. Diamond Several diamond pipes
discovered/identified in different
parts of Andhra Pradesh and
many isolated exposures of KCR
detected within a tectonic
corridor in Chhattisgarh.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 4.4)
The Committee note that exploration of minerals presently being
carried out mainly by Geological Survey of India (GSI) and Mineral
Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) is likely to gain momentum
during 11th Plan period since the Ministry is expecting more
investments from multinational and domestic private companies in

28
mineral exploration and exploitation. The Committee desire that both
the organizations should fix their plan and annual targets and
implement them in a time-bound manner. The Committee should be
informed of the action taken in the matter.
Action Taken
GSI:
Exploration efforts up to the end of the X Plan has significantly
augmented its mineral resources and India is now ranked 2nd in
production of chromite and barite, 3rd in coal & lignite, 4th in Iron
ore and kyanite, 6th in bauxite, 8th in manganese and mica (sheets)
and 9th in magnesite. These developments have moved India to a
position among the top dozen countries in the field of mineral resources
and production. Introduction of high-end technologies and higher
investments in this sector is expected to lead to further improvement
in the situation. However, there remains a substantial gap in supply
and demand for several mineral commodities, necessitating import for
these items. While India is comfortable placed with regards to the
resource position of mineral like iron-ore, metallurgical grade bauxite,
manganese ore, limestone & dolomite (excluding low silica grade),
etc., deficiency continues in large number of minerals like fertilizer
minerals, diamond, nickel, copper, gold, Platinum Group Metal and
rare metals, etc. Furthermore, with the near exhaustion of exposed ore
bodies, the need for locating hidden deposits based on such conceptual
exploration techniques had been recognized earlier and has been
included as a thrust area in the XI Plan. In addition to mounting
intensive search for such minerals in which the country is deficient,
exploration efforts are planned to be continued towards augmentation
of the existing resources in respect of those minerals which play a
key-role in sustaining industrial growth, or have high potential for
export or attractive investment from the private sector.
In course of surveys carried out over its long history, Geological
Survey of India has identified a number of domains with favourable
geological signatures in order to prospect for mineral resources through
exploration. Commodity-wise identification and demarcation of these
domains have now been made and have been summarized in the
different mineral belt maps. Although many mineral discoveries are
currently being exploited, there are still substantial areas within the
potential geological domains which need systematic exploration for a
proper assessment of their potential for different mineral commodities.
A major part of the exploration activities during the XI Plan period

29
will be concentrated in these known mineral belts. GSI will intensify
its exploration efforts for various metallic and non-metallic minerals,
manganese ore, rare minerals, limestone, clay diamond and many
others. Further, efforts would be made at identifying new areas with
favourable signatures on the basis of improved geological
understanding. This will be aided by heliborne multi-sensor airborne
survey systems which are proposed to be procured in the XI Plan. GSI
has formulated well defined action Plan for its exploration activities
during the XI Plan, to be implemented through successive Annual
Plans.
MECL:
Ministry of Mines has approved the pricing policy for sale of
geological reports of the potential mineral prospects explored under
promotional programmes by MECL. MECL will be having a shelf of
reports for perusal of the prospective buyers/investors. MECL has
envisaged an annual growth of around 10% in its promotional
exploration programme. Keeping the proposed annual growth and the
performance of promotional projects in the recent past, an allocation
of outlay for Rs. 83.00 crore have been provided for the 11th Plan
period. MECL has also made an assessment of Rs. 44.00 crore for
replacement of old plant and machineries, in phased manner, during
the 11th Plan period. Due to replacement of old machines, the down
time is expected to reduce with improvement in productivity, thereby
enabling MECL to provide cost effective mineral exploration services
as per the need of the client. To monitor the targets, review of
promotional projects is being done in quarterly performance review
meetings and technical evaluation of the schemes is taken up by the
Technical Sub Committee of SCPP.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.5)
The Committee note that while GSI is carrying out surveys for all
minerals with focus on regional surveys involving preliminary part of
exploration, the private companies are actively involved in detailed
exploration and mining of high value minerals like gold, diamond,
base metals, etc. where preliminary geological information is available.
The Committee feel that considering the investments required on the
large scale work involved in exploration activities, the participation of
private sector would accelerate the rate of exploration and benefit the
growth of mining sector and economy of the country. The Committee,
are, however, of the strong view that since the present day mineral

30
prospecting is undertaken with special emphasis on deficient mineral
and ore of high value minerals, GSI should redefine its approach in
tune with the emerging markets and strengthen its presence in the
exploration sector.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that GSI should accord high
priority to precious minerals and ores and expanding its areas of
activities from reconnaissance, prospecting and preliminary exploration
to include detailed exploration as well. The Committee also desire the
Ministry to intensify exploration efforts for additional resources in
known areas, in potential region, unexplored, inaccessible territories
and ocean beds with special thrust on north-east and other remote
areas. The Committee also recommend that GSI should strive to attain
global benchmark in all spheres in order to increase its contribution to
the economic health of the country. The Committee also recommend
the Ministry to allocate adequate funds to GSI to upgrade their
capabilities through modernization of equipments and acquiring of
state-of-the-art technology and expertise through training in all related
fields of mineral exploration.
Action Taken
GSI carries out mineral exploration right from its discovery to
preliminary exploratory work of P-I, P-II and E-I & E-II categories on
regional scale, in areas where mineral occurrences have been located
from preliminary surveys, in accordance with its mandated charter of
functions. Exploratory agencies like MECL carry out detailed
exploration in potential areas identified by GSI through regional
exploration. Further detailed work, as required for investment decisions
and final exploitation is normally undertaken by the exploiting agencies
(Public and private sectors). GSI has carried out detailed exploration
on demand from specific agencies. GSI undertakes detailed exploration
projects on commercial/sponsorship terms on demand. Further taking
up of detail exploration may be considered at a later date when the
human resource position improves, for which all out efforts have been
initiated by the Ministry of Mines. The increasing investment by the
private sector in the mineral industry has justifiably led to
intensification of exploration efforts, especially for those minerals which
have the potential to attract private investment. GSI has focused its
exploration activities accordingly.
The principal thrust of GSI in the mineral exploration remains on
noble metals, precious stone, base metal, coal and lignite. Keeping in
view the market driven demand, appraisal is carried out for ferrous

31
and non-ferrous (bauxite), fertilizer, strategic, refractory and high-tech
minerals. In addition, to the mineral prognostication, the organization
is systematically updating the data base in digital format to provide
reliable and relevant information on mineral and other natural resources
to the public and private sector entrepreneurs to sustain investment in
mineral sector.
GSI has already given emphasis on search of deficient and high
value minerals. During the X Plan period exploration thrust for deficient
and high value minerals got momentum and the same tempo has
been proposed to be continued during the XI Plan period also. The
field season programme for 2006-07 reflects the thrust of GSI for
deficient and high value minerals. Leaving aside coal and lignite
exploration, out of 92 mineral investigation items, programmes on
basemetals, gold, diamond, strategic minerals and platinum group of
elements are 21, 27, 8, 3 and 8 respectively which amounts to 23%,
29%, 8%, 3%, 8% totaling 71% of the total exploration items.
GSI has also accorded special priority to exploration programmes
in the Northeastern region. During the Field Season 2006-07, GSI is
carrying out two mineral investigations for PGE & Nickel and limestone
in Meghalaya. Other mineral exploration programmes proposed to be
taken up during the XI Plan in NER include basemetals, gold, REE,
RM and other minerals like clay, etc. Further programmes will be
taken up subject to improvement of the ground condition and human
resource position.
During XI Plan period GSI has planned to accord highest priority
for precious and deficient minerals with areas of activities from
reconnaissance to prospecting and preliminary exploration. Exploration
activities will be intensified in known areas, unexplored and inaccessible
territories and in the territorial water and with special thrust on north-
east.
The GSI will continue to plan its vital role in the mineral sector
for search and evaluation of mineral resources on regional scale by
increasingly adopting modern concepts and techniques. Airborne survey
through helicopter will be introduced and low altitude survey is
expected to provide data which can effectively act as “first stop shop”
for all the prospective investors. Training of the GSI personnel to hone
their technical skill and utilize the modern technical facilities being
acquired has been planned to ensure maximum output in terms of
earth science database.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]

32
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 5.25)
The National Aluminium Company Ltd. (NALCO) is Asia’s largest
integrated aluminium complex, encompassing bauxite mining, alumina
refining, aluminium smelting and casting, power generation, rail and
port facilities. NALCO has emerged to be a star performer and now
a ‘Nav-Ratna’ company engaged in production and export of alumina
and aluminium and more significantly , in propelling self sustained
growth. The NALCO has planned to invest Rs.1158 crores during 2007-
08 for accomplishing various projects and some of the schemes included
in second phase expansion. The Committee hope that it would justify
the Government’s faith in the company by achieving set target in a
time bound manner.
The Committee have been informed that first phase expansion of
National Aluminium Company Ltd.(NALCO), covering Mines and
Refinery, Smelter and Power Plant and 8th unit of CPP , Special Grade
Alumina/Zeolite Plants and Rolled Product Unit, was completed during
10th Five Year Plan. It was further stated that the equity participation
in Qatar Project involving an outlay of Rs.1573 crores could not be
taken up during 10th Plan since the authorities in Qatar were not
interested in pursuing with this project. Further, the Utkal coal mine
project involving an outlay of Rs. 210 crores during 10th Plan period
became partially operational because the approval for the same could
materialize only in 2004. Thus a number of projects slated for
completion during 10th Plan could not come up and 10th Plan outlay
was reduced from Rs.7056 crores to Rs.2864.25 crores and it has utilized
only Rs.1840.27 crores.
The Committee are concerned to note that NALCO has yet not
firmed up the new projects and programmes to be taken up during
the 11th Plan, though the company has identified a few schemes for
debottlenecking of Alumina Plant, Pottangi Bauxite Mine and setting
up of Smelter Plant in Middle-Cost. The Committee believe that such
a lackadaisical attitude on the part of NALCO does not augur well at
a time when its second phase expansion programme is in full swing.
The Committee, therefore, desire that NALCO should clearly come out
with viable schemes for implementation with in a time frame during
11th Plan in order to sharpen its competitive edge in the international
market. The Committee desire that NALCO should make all out efforts
to fully utilize the 11th Plan outlay of Rs.9454 crores which it has
projected.
Action Taken
During year 2007-08, the company has projected capital outlay of
Rs.1158 crores to be spent on various ongoing & new projects including

33
2nd phase expansion. There is every likelihood of availing the full
plan outlay set for the year 2007-08 as company has a very good
internal system to monitor physical as well as financial progress of
various plan schemes backed by renowned engineering consultants
namely, M/s M N Dastur & Company, EIL, MECON particularly for
2nd phase expansion
The Company has focused on timely completion of 2nd phase
expansion project during 11th plan, together with other smaller schemes
approved and initiated. The main reason for delay in progress of
Pottangi Bauxite mine and Utkal-E block coal mine has been long
time being taken in awarding mining leases by State Government of
Orissa. The matter for both mining leases is being vigorously pursued
by the Company and by Ministry of Mines together.
For taking a focused line for new major projects for growth,
consultants are being engaged for advising on strategic planning.
Considering all these factors, the proposed outlay for 11th plan has
been revised to Rs.6,926 crores.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(please see Para 1.21 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para No.5.26)
The Committee note that NALCO is facing problem of various
clearances in operation of bauxite mines like Pottangi and Kodingamali
and coal mine at Utkal-E. If these clearances are delayed NALCO may
not be able to utilize the allocations made for these projects. All these
cases are pending for various clearances/agreements with the
Government of Orissa. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Mines
must settle these issues with the Government of Orissa at the earliest
on mutually agreed terms, otherwise the Committee feel the second
phase expansion would be adversely affected as the work on these
projects is painfully slow.
Action Taken
UTKAL-E COAL BLOCK:
Mining Lease Application : Applied
Mining Plan : Completed
Detailed Project Report : Completed
Land Acquisition : In progress

34
*Mining lease:—
The award of Mining lease for Utkal-E Coal block is yet to be
recommended by Govt. of Orissa to Ministry of Coal.
*Forest Clearance:—
NALCO has submitted the proposal for diversion of 234.745 hectares
of forestland on 29.01.2007. The proposal has been forwarded to the
Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Angul vide letter-dated 15.02.2007. Based
on the recommendation of the DFO, proposal will be forwarded by
PCCF, Orissa to Ministry of Environment & Forest for clearance. The
matter is being taken up with Forests Deptt. of Orissa Govt.
*Acquisition of Land:—
Application for allocation of Private and forestland has been
submitted. Part allotment of non forest Govt. Land has been received.
Allotment of balance land is being expedited.
POTTANGI BAUXITE DEPOSIT, DISTRICT – KORAPUT
The in-principle recommendation was given by Government of
Orissa on 30.07.2004 with 5 conditions which were suitably clarified
by NALCO on 27.02.2006 after several rounds of discussions. The issue
of payment of arrear water rate/tax to State Government was linked
with this case and NALCO had to deposit an adhoc amount of Rs.10
Crore without prejudice to pending writ petition in Orissa High Court.
The Chief Secretary, Government of Orissa convened a meeting on
06.02.2007 to resolve the issue but the proceeding of the meeting is
yet to be circulated for further action.
In the meantime, Ministry of Mines, Government of India has
reserved this deposit for 10 years in favour of NALCO through Gazette
of India publication dtd.27.04.2007. The mining lease application
pending with Collector, Koraput since 1992 shall be revised based on
physical survey of the deposit by NALCO.
KODINGAMALI BAUXITE DEPOSIT, DISTRICT KORAPUT
The Mining lease application of NALCO is pending with Collector,
District Koraput since 1992. The in-principle grant of lease for Pottangi
deposit vide letter dtd. 30.07.2004 of State Govt. has stipulated a
condition that NALCO shall not make any claim on Kodingamali
Bauxite Deposit since the Pottangi Bauxite Deposit was being granted

35
in NALCO’s favour. Thus the final decision is pending with
Government of Orissa for further activities.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 1.24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No.5.27)
The Committee have been informed that NALCO has proposed to
set up a green field smelter project in middle-east region. The
Committee view setting up of green field smelter plant abroad a step
in the right direction for diversification and value addition by NALCO.
The Committee desire NALCO to take serious and effective measures
for setting up smelter project in Middle-East, learning from their failure
to set up a similar project in Qatar. Keeping in view the massive
acquisition and merger by private aluminium company world over,
the Committee also desire NALCO to seriously consider the proposals
for acquisition/merger of viable aluminium companies in India and
abroad to consolidate its position in the world market.
Action Taken
NALCO is exploring possibilities to set up Refinery and Aluminium
Smelter at various places in India and abroad.
In India, NALCO is in process of engaging consultant for preparing
pre-feasibility report to set up Plant in Orissa/Chhattisgarh.
As regards efforts abroad, NALCO has sent a draft MOU to Indian
Embassy in Jakarta, Indonesia for forwarding it to Indonesian authority
for coal deposits. The in-house pre-feasibility report indicates, project
to be viable there. Details of the proposal are being worked out.
Parallely, NALCO has also been approaching some of the Gulf
countries with the proposal to set up Smelter there, based on gas
supplies.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No.6.13)
The Committee note that the Mineral Exploration Corporation
(MECL) had taken up 36 mineral exploration programmes during the

36
10th Plan period under the promotional scheme on behalf of the
Ministry of Mines. Out of these 36 projects, 26 projects has since been
completed and the remaining 10 projects are in progress and will spill
over to 11th Plan. Keeping in view, the increased private participation
in the mineral exploration activities, the Committee are of the strong
view that MECL being the sole Government agency in the field of
detailed exploration has to strive hard to remain competitive. The
Committee, therefore, feel that the performance of MECL during the
10th Plan particularly its failure to complete as many as one third of
the mineral exploration projects taken up by it, does not commensurate
with its brand image. The Committee, therefore, desire that MECL
should make all out efforts to achieve the targets during 11th Plan for
mineral exploration to improve its image as a performer. The
Committee are unhappy to note that MECL could not spend its budget
during the year 2006-07 and the same was reduced from Rs. 25 crores
to Rs. 22 crores at RE stage. The committee desire that all out efforts
be made to utilize the budgetary outlays during the year 2007-08. The
Committee also desire that the projects that spilled over to 11th Plan
should be completed during 2007-08 itself.
Action Taken
During the Xth Plan period, exploration on 36 schemes/projects
was taken up by MECL. Out of these, exploration on 26 schemes/
projects were completed and exploration in the remaining 10 schemes
was taken up during 2006-07, and is being continued as per the
approved time schedule and would be over during 2007-08 except one
project where exploration has been abandoned due to adverse law
and order situation. MECL would make all out efforts to achieve the
targets for promotional exploration during XIth plan period.
For the year 2006-07, the allocation for promotional exploration
programme by MECL which was subsequently revised to Rs. 14 crores
has been fully utilised. During 2006-07, performance of promotional
exploration by MECL has been affected due to want of forest clearance
and also due to law and order situation in the area.
For the year 2007-08, an outlay of Rs. 11 crores has been proposed
for promotional exploration by MECL and Rs. 8 crores IEBR for capital
expenditure. MECL has already drawn action plan for full utilization
of the budgetary allocations, both for promotional exploration and
capital expenditure. Further, the exploration schemes spilled over to
XIth plan would also be completed during 2007-08.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]

37
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11 Para No.6.14)
The Committee note that MECL could not commence promotional
exploration in respect of five projects viz., Ghatkuri East, Timaran Mata,
Maruda, Dholamala and Intervening Block (between Ramachandrapahar
& Bayanbil) for want of forest clearance and law and order situation
in the area. As a result of this, the outlay of Rs.17 crores during the
year 2006-07 for promotional exploration, reduced to Rs.14 crores at
RE stage was subsequently pegged at Rs.11 crore at BE stage during
the year 2007-08. The Committee feel that unless forest clearance is
obtained for executing the above schemes even the reduced fund
earmarked for this purpose during 2007-08 would not be utilized. The
Committee are of the view that this has not only retarded the financial
performance of the company but became a stumbling block in the
mineral exploration activities of the company. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry of
Environment and Forests at the highest level for expediting the forest
clearances for the above projects so as to ensure their timely completion.
Action Taken
As submitted in ATN of para 3.24, this Ministry has taken up the
matter of necessary forest clearances with respective State Governments
of Rajasthan, Kerala and Jharkhand. Government of India has also
constituted a Committee to review the guidelines for norms for survey
and investigation in forest areas. The first meeting of the said
Committee was held on 3-4-2007 and it is felt that the guidelines for
exploration may be revised to facilitate mineral exploration in forest
areas.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 6.15)
The Committee are unhappy to note that MECL spent only
Rs. 19 crores on modernization and desire that it should draw up a
time bound programme to take up modernization and technological
upgradation for which sufficient funds should be made available. The
Committee should be informed of the action taken in the matter.
Action Taken
MECL has drawn up plan for modernization and technological
upgradation and the old plant and machinery are proposed to be
replaced with high tech high capacity drill/equipment for improvement

38
in performance as well as productivity . For this purpose, an outlay of
Rs.44 crores (IEBR) is proposed for capital expenditure during the
XIth Plan.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 7.16)
The Committee note that the Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL), a
Government of India enterprise is engaged in exploration and
exploitation of copper deposits, including smelting and refining. The
Committee further note that HCL, which was running losses till 2003-
04, has started posting profits since 2004-05 which reached Rs. 265.14
crore approximately (till December,2006) during the year 2006-07. The
financial support of Rs. 40 crore was altogether withdrawn in the year
2005-06. The Committee are happy to note that HCL has not only
shown improvement in its performance but also generated enough
financial resources to meet the expenditure on its project/schemes.
The Committee feel that since HCL has turnaround and started making
profits, a comprehensive road map for all-round growth of the company
becomes imperative. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry
to prepare a ‘Vision Document’ for a sustainable growth of HCL for
the next 20 years.
Action Taken
‘Vision document’ for a sustainable growth of HCL for the next 20
years has been approved to the Ministry. A copy of the Vision
Document for future Growth of HCL as in  Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 7.17)
The Committee note that a provision of Rs. 50 crores has been
made for the year 2007-2008 for HCL for carrying out replacement/
renewal of various equipments for the next five years to be generated
through internal resources of the company. The Committee further
note that a financial restructuring proposal of the company has been
pending with the Ministry for a long time which has not only affected
the overall performance of the company but has deprived it from
becoming a self sustaining company. The Committee in their 16th
Report had recommended that the financial restructuring proposal of
the company based on the detailed Corporate Plan should be approved
without any further loss of time. The Committee are unhappy to note

39
that the proposal is still kept pending which required immediate action.
Such delays in fact lead to avoidable deterioration in the performance
of HCL. The Committee take a serious view of the matter and desire
that the financial restructuring of the company be done in a time-
bound manner. The Committee should be kept informed of the action
taken in the matter.
Action Taken
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 26.07.2007 and has partly
approved the restructuring proposal in respect of Hindustan Copper
Ltd, which includes the following :
(i) Conversion of non-plan govt. loan amounting to Rs. 50.00
crore into equity.( Rs.25 crore each released in 2005-2006
and 2006-2007)
(ii) Waiver of 7.5% non-cumulative redeemable preference share
amounting to Rs. 180.73 crore and its adjustment against
accumulated losses.
(iii) Restructuring of capital through reduction of face value of
equity share from Rs. 10/- to Rs. 5/- amounting to
Rs. 382.21 crore and its adjustment against accumulated
losses.
(iv) Restoration of superannuation age to 60 years to preserve
skills and provide a breathing time to the organization of
formulation of proper succession plan.
(v) Creation of post of Director (Mining) to drive the growth
agenda in the mining domain.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]

40
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

41
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 8.8)
The Committee find that no preference is being given to any PSU
for the grant of mineral concession unless the area is reserved for
exploitation by PSUs. The Committee in their 17th Report had desired
that National Mineral policy and MMDR Act should be suitably
amended in order to give due preference to the Steel PSUs in grant/
renewal of mining lease. The Committee observe that Hoda Committee
has not come up with a categorical recommendation for reservation to
PSUs in the grant/renewal of mining leases and they are apprehensive
to find that empowering the State Government in deciding the
deserving applicant, in case of more than One applicant, the genuine
concern of the companies particularly PSUs may not get attention of
the State Government.
The Committee feel that since the PSUs are vehicle of economic
growth and discharging social responsibilities in greater way they
deserve priority in the grant of mineral concessions. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that National Mineral
Policy and MMDR Act should be suitably amended to give priority to
the PSUs in grant/renewal of mining lease .
Reply of the Government
The MMDR Act, 1957, adequately provides that the Central
Government may in consultation with the State Government, reserve
any area not already held under any prospecting licence or mining
lease, for undertaking prospecting or mining operations through a
Government company or corporation owned or controlled by it and
where it proposes to do so, it shall, by notification in official Gazette,
specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in
respect of which such area will be reserved.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 1.28 of Chapter-I of the Report)

42
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 8.7)
The Committee note that the present National Mineral Policy was
enunciated in 1993 after which a lot of changes in the mining sector
have taken place. Recognizing the need to further improve the
investment climate for mining sector in the country, the Planning
commission set up a high level Committee under the chairmanship of
Shri Anwarul Hoda to review the National Mineral Policy and
recommend possible amendments to the Mines and Minerals
(Development & Regulation) Act (MMDR). The Hoda Committee has
recommended, inter-alia, that the State Government may grant the
mining lease to a value added who is willing to set up the downstream
industry within the territorial limits of the State and in case of more
than one applicant the State Government may grant the mining lease
to the most deserving applicant. The Hoda Committee has also
recommended that the PSUs be treated at par with private sector
companies in the grant of mineral concessions and the reservation
provisions for PSUs for exploration and mining should be modified so
as to limit the scope of such reservations to specified purposes such
as to meet the requirement of small and medium enterprises for raw
material. The Ministry has informed the Committee that these issues
have been taken up in the National Mineral Policy 2007 which is
under consideration of the Group of Ministers. The Committee desire
that the new policy should be finalised at the earliest in consultation
with State Governments so that it can lead to optimal exploitation of
the resources.
Action Taken
A Group of Ministers under the Chairmanship of Shri Shivraj V .
Patil, Hon’ble Home Minister has given its approval for placing the
draft National Mineral Policy, 2007 before the Cabinet.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 5(1)/2006-IF, dated 7.11.2007]
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December, 2007 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

43
ANNEXURE-I
VISION DOCUMENT FOR FUTURE GROWTH OF
HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL)
Present Status and Prospects
HCL in 2006-07 for the third consecutive year registered net profits
after having previously incurred continuous losses for more than 8
years. This turnaround is not only based on the upward movement of
world prices of copper but also on certain fundamental initiatives taken
by the Company to reduce costs and improve operational efficiencies.
The process of turnaround is however, distinct from the growth process
that the company has planned to step into. The present business and
economic environment is highly favorable for the metals industry,
particularly copper besides other non- ferrous metals. This presents a
window of opportunity for HCL to shed its past burden and focus on
growth and development.
Approach
Formation of growth strategy requires detailed analysis and
identification of the thrust areas followed by meticulous planning and
execution through support from all stakeholders. It will be based on
creating technology , suitable infrastructure, efficient use of resources,
an effective R&D and a rolling business plan. Forging of suitable
business alliances and strategic partnerships will also be necessary to
leverage resources & technologies.
Analysis
HCL have intensively analyzed its strengths, weakness,
opportunities and threats. The biggest strength that HCL possesses is
its positioning in the value chain—it enjoys a unique and monopoly
position in respect of mining of copper in India. The other producers
of refined copper in the country have no mining operations in India—
their smelters rely entirely on supplies of imported raw material,  i.e.
copper concentrate. HCL’s competitive edge, therefore lies in harnessing
and exploiting country’s copper mineral resources. From a national
perspective also, there is need to augment indigenous availability
towards achieving self sufficiency in this non-ferrous mineral

44
particularly because of its potential to not only exploit country’s known
mineral reserves and resources out also to prospect for additional
cooper deposits and open up new mines all of which confirms the
future growth path of mining that HCL needs to adopt.
Growth Strategy and Strategic Plans ( 2007-15)
Having identified mining as the potential thrust area for Company’s
growth, a long term strategic plan until the year 2015 has been drawn
up which broadly addresses the following goals and objectives:
1. Enhancing mining output through optimizing operations at
existing mines, opening of new mines as well as reopening
of closed mines.
2. Discovering and acquiring new copper deposits non-ferrous
metals in India and abroad, for commercial exploitation.
3. Forging strategic alliances with world-class mining
companies through joint ventures and/or other mutually
agreed business models.
4. Restructuring business activities and human resources to
improve accountability and efficiency which accelerating
value enhancement.
5. introducing adequate IT interventions in business process,
such as ERP , e-procurement, e-banking, etc.
6. Institutionalizing concerns for environment preservations,
energy conservation workers’ safety, community
development and steadfast attention to customer satisfaction.
7. Formulating appropriate risk management strategies to
specifically address volatility of commodity prices and
currency exchange rates.
8. Implementing good corporate governance and an
enlightened corporate culture.
Beyond 2015, HCL will consolidate its presence across globally
and all non–ferrous metal category.

45
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2007-08) HELD ON
5TH DECEMBER 2007 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya— Chairman
Members
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Hiten Barman
4. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
5. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
6. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
7. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
9. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla
11. Shri Ali Anwar
12. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
13. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri B.J. Panda
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted
the following Draft Reports:

46
(i) ** ** ** **
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twenty-fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2006-
07) on “Demands for Grants (2007-08)” of the Ministry of
Mines
(iii) ** ** ** **
3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor
additions/deletions/amendments.
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports
after making consequential change arising out of factual verification
by the concerned Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses
of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Does not pertain to this Report.

47
ANNEXURE III
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 16
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 14
Government:
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14)
Percentage of total 87.5%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not Nil
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Nil
Percentage of total Nil
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of 1
the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
(vide recommendations at Sl. No. 16)
Percentage of total 6.25%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final  1
replies of the Government are still awaited:
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. 15)
Percentage of total 6.25%