30
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STEEL
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Twenty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
THIRTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)


THIRTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STEEL
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Twenty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.12.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 7.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


CC&S No. 30
Price : Rs. 64.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 10
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................ 37
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ................................... 42
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 45
ANNEXURES
I. Target and achievement of IEBR of Steel PSUs during
10th Plan ................................................................................... 47
II. Schemes/Projects of PSUs spilling over to 11th Plan
from 9th/10th Plan and likely to be completed after
2008-09 ....................................................................................... 50
III. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee
on Coal and Steel (2007-08) held on 5.12.2007 .............. 54
IV . Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report
of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ......................................................... 56
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2007-08)
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu
4. Shri Hiten Barman
5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
12. Shri Brajesh Pathak
13. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
14. Shri Tarachand Sahu
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
16. Smt. Karuna Shukla
17. Shri Prabhunath Singh
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
19. Shri Sugrib Singh
20. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
21. Shri Anirudh Prasad a lias Sadhu Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar
23. Shri Devdas Apte*
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
25. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose

(iv)
26. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
27. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
28. Shri B.J. Panda
29. Shri Jesudas Seelam
30. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
31. Shri Yashwant Sinha*
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
4. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T. Mathivanan — Senior Committee Assistant
* Nominated w.e.f. 6.9.2007 Vice S/Shri Surendra Lath, MP and Ajay Maroo, MP

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirtieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty
Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2007-08)” of the Ministry of
Steel.
2. The Twenty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on
27th April, 2007. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 26th November, 2007.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 5th December, 2007.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-IV .
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December, 2007 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (2006-07) on the Subject “Demands for Grants (2007-08)” of
the Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2007.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 21, 23,
25, 26 and 27.
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 15, 16, 17 and 19.
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. Nos. 6, 22 and 24.
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. 20.
1.3 The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations which have been categorised as interim replies by
the Committee should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.
1.4 The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, it is not possible for the Government to
implement any recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reasons,
the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons
for non-implementation.

2
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations made in
the Twenty Fifth Report.
Implementation of Schemes
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.1)
1.6 The Committee noted that outlay of the Ministry of Steel in
10th Five Year Plan had been scaled down by 24 per cent in Mid-
Term Appraisal from Rs. 11044 crore (Internal and Extra Budgetary
Resources (IEBR) of Rs. 10979 crore and Budgetary Support (BS) of
Rs. 65 crore to Rs.8476.88 Crore (IEBR of Rs. 8411.68 crore and BS of
Rs. 65 crore) based on the trend of expenditure and progress of
schemes/projects. Though the Ministry could spend BS of Rs. 106.73
crore, higher than the allocation, the Committee were constrained to
note that it could expend IEBR of Rs. 5158.37 crore only , leaving
39 per cent of funds earmarked in Mid-Term Appraisal unspent.
1.7 The Committee were anguished to note that steel Public Sector
Undertakings (PSUs) had failed to utilize even the reduced allocation
which was bound to have an adverse impact on their performance.
Non-utilisation of IEBR also indicates to the fact that various PSUs
had not been able to generate the enough internal resources as much
as they were expected to raise. The Committee would, therefore, be
informed as to what were IEBR targets for each of PSU and how
much resources each of them could raise IEBR and the reasons for the
shortfall.
1.8 The Committee were extremely concerned about the adverse
impact on the PSUs owing to non-utilisation of funds even after
reduction in Mid-Term Appraisal. The Committee noted that some of
the schemes/projects of PSUs sanctioned in 9th and 10th Plans had
been spilling over to 11th Plan. The Committee in their 13th Report
had recommended that those schemes should be completed before the
end of 10th Five Year Plan or in the early part of 11th Five Year Plan.
The Committee were unhappy to note the casual approach of the
Ministry/PSUs in completion of the schemes as no progress had been
made in this regard.
1.9 The Committee observed that delay in implementing the
schemes by Steel PSUs for example, supply of equipments to Steel
Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) units, development of Rawghat-
Jagadalpur Railway Line by National Mineral Development
Corporation (NMDC), setting up of Ductile Iron Spun Pipe Plant by

3
Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd. (KIOCL) and Ore Based Activities
(Mineral Exploration) by Bird Group of Companies had been hampering
in utilisation of funds earmarked under IEBR. The Committee were
anguished to note that the Ministry had failed to pay attention to the
Committee’s earlier recommendations that the Ministry/PSUs should
identify the constraints in implementing the schemes and utilisation of
funds and strived to achieve the targets fixed in 10th plan.
1.10 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the steel
PSUs should take all steps to complete the schemes/projects sanctioned
in 9th and 10th Plans and those spilling over to 11th Plan in 2007-08
itself. The Committee also recommended the Ministry to facilitate PSUs
in identifying the constraints and formulate the strategy for
implementation of schemes/projects and better utilisation of funds.
1.11 In Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated that the
shortfall in utilization of IEBR by the PSUs is not due to shortfall in
IEBR generation during the 10th Plan. All the PSUs except Hindustan
Steelworks Construction Ltd. (HSCL), Bharat Refractories Ltd. (BRL)
and MECON generated adequate IEBR to fund their approved IEBR
expenses during the 10th Plan. A tabular statement on target for
generation of IEBR during the 10th Plan, 10th Plan approved
component of outlay to be financed through IEBR of the PSUs, actual
utilization during the 10th Plan and reasons for shortfall in utilization
is given in Annexure-I.
1.12 The Committee’s recommendation regarding taking of all steps
by the steel PSUs to complete the schemes/projects spilling over to
the 11th Plan from the 9th and 10th Plans in 2007-08 itself has been
communicated to all the concerned PSUs for their information and
compliance. In this context it is mentioned that out of the 41 schemes/
projects spilling over to the 11th Plan from 9th & 10th Plans, 24 schemes
will be/are likely to be completed during 2007-08 itself. Another 10
schemes are likely to be completed by 2008-09. Many of these spill
over schemes were taken up in the latter part of the 10th Plan period
and their expected completion during the first two years (2007-09) of
the 11th Plan is as per the original schedule. The details of the
remaining 7 spill over schemes that cannot be completed even by
2008-09 are given in Annexure-II.
1.13 As regards the Committee’s recommendation for the Ministry
to facilitate the PSUs in identifying the constraints and formulate
strategy for implementation of schemes/projects and better utilization
of funds, the matter has been discussed with the PSUs in the quarterly

4
review meeting held in the Ministry to review inter alia their utilization
of Plan outlays during the 10th Plan. Based on the discussions, an
internal committee comprising of representatives of PSUs like SAIL,
NMDC, Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), etc. has been set up to
identify common major constraints faced by PSUs in the implementation
of schemes and to suggest mechanism/strategy for better
implementation of schemes and utilization of funds. First meeting of
the internal Committee was held at SAIL, New Delhi, on 3rd August,
2007.
1.14 The Committee had recommended the Ministry of Steel to
facilitate Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) in identifying the
constraints and formulate the strategy for implementation of schemes/
projects sanctioned during 9th and 10th Plans and spilling over to
11th Plan and to ensure better utilisation of funds. The Ministry in
its reply has informed that out of 41 schemes/projects spilling over
to 11th Plan, from 9th and 10th Plans, 24 schemes will be/are likely
to be completed during 2007-08 and 10 schemes are likely to be
completed by 2008-09. The Committee now hope that the remaining
schemes will be completed as per schedule without any further time
and cost overrun. The Committee are extremely dissatisfied to note
that the National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC) could
utilize barely 17.25 per cent of the approved outlay during 10th Plan.
The Committee are not convinced with the reasons advanced therefor
by NMDC viz. delay in getting forest/environment clearance. The
Committee strongly deprecate the callous and inefficient approach
on the part of PSU/Ministry for their failure to overcome the
procedural problems and desire the Ministry to immediately identify
the specific issues involved therein and take urgent remedial
measures.
The Committee have time and again been recommending to the
Ministry to facilitate its PSUs to overcome various procedural
problems adversely hampering the implementation of the schemes /
projects but no visible improvement is discernible in this regard.
The Committee would like that the exercise, initiated by the Ministry
to identify major constraints being faced by the PSUs in the
implementation of schemes and utilisation of funds, be taken up
with due seriousness to ensure timely completion of ongoing projects
and fullest utilisation of allocated funds.
Strategy to Achieve Goals of National Steel Policy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.5)
1.15 The Committee noted that the Ministry of Steel had set the
targets for Finished Steel, Alloy Steel and Stainless Steel, etc. for

5
11th Plan based on certain assumptions like 9 per cent GDP growth
during 11th plan, progress of expansion projects, etc. The Committee
further noted that demand and availability of Flat product of Finished
steel for the year 2007-08 would be 27.56-28.40 million tonnes (mt)
and 25.60 mt respectively, leaving a marginal shortfall in availability
of around 3 mt. It was also projected that export of Finished Steel by
2011-12 would be between 10-14 mt, higher than the growth rate of
13 per cent per annum envisaged in the National Steel Policy (NSP).
But the Ministry had no plan of action to achieve the export target
during 11th Plan.
1.16 The Committee were in agreement with the contention of the
Ministry that since the steel sector was cyclical and being driven by
market forces, it was difficult to set the targets. But they were of the
view that steel sector could capitalize the growing potential of domestic
economy, if there was a suitable mechanism to execute the goals
envisaged in NSP in true spirit.
1.17 The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry
should prepare a comprehensive strategy for each year of 11th Plan to
achieve the ambitious goals of NSP . The Committee also desired that
the Ministry should take corrective measures at the appropriate time
and ensure that there was no shortfall in achievement of target fixed
for 11th Plan.
1.18 The Ministry of Steel in its Action Taken Reply has stated
the followings:—
“Export Projection:  The export projections given in the Eleventh
Plan document are not ‘targets’ but are export possibilities given
a domestic demand ranging between 72 and 78 million tonnes. In
India, exports always take place after meeting the domestic
demand. The 10-14 million tonnes of exports are shown merely as
possible exportable surplus and not ‘targets’. As a matter of fact,
in the last three years as domestic demand grew by 10%, 14% and
11%, net exports (Exports-Imports) fell from a high of 3.5 Million
Tonnes (2003-04) to a mere 0.5 Million Tonnes (2006-07). This
happened because exports stagnated while imports increased almost
four-fold. The primary goal of the Indian steel industry is to meet
the requirements of a fast paced growth in the domestic steel-
consuming sectors.
Moreover, export are taking place because of the inherent cost
competitiveness of Indian steel and not because of any specific
export promotion programmes. This is in keeping with the
provisions of the multilateral trading regime such as the WTO”.

6
1.19 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Steel
should prepare a comprehensive strategy to achieve the ambitious
objectives of National Steel Policy (NSP). The Committee fail to
understand as to why the Ministry has chosen to not to respond to
the Committee’s specific recommendation for achieving the goals of
NSP and strongly feel that a detailed action plan is imperative for
focused attainment of the goals. The Committee are unhappy that
the Ministry has displayed utter lack of application towards the
avowed objectives of NSP which is vital to transform the country
into a vibrant economic power. The Committee are of the considered
view that unless the Ministry has a well defined course of action
for each of the component of NSP for each year of 11th plan it
would be difficult to achieve the goals of NSP .
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that
the Ministry should prepare a comprehensive strategy for 11th Plan
to achieve the ambitious goals of NSP .
1.20 The Committee had observed that the Ministry of Steel has
no plan to achieve the projected export of finished steel of 10-14
Million Tonnes (MT) by 2011-12. The Ministry in its reply has stated
that the primary goal of the Indian steel industry is to meet the
domestic demand and exports are taking place because of cost
competitiveness of Indian Steel and not because of any specific export
programme. The Ministry has also stated that net exports fell from
a high of 3.5 MT in 2003-04 to a mere 0.5 mt in 2006-07.
The Committee appreciate for the priority is being given to meet
the domestic demand but are equally concerned to note the drastic
fall in exports. The Committee would like to draw the attention of
the Ministry to the National Steel Policy (NSP) which, inter-alia, has
envisaged that although the focus of Indian steel industry is on the
domestic market, export will be another window on the demand
side. It has been further stated that Government would focus on
regional trade agreements to broaden the export base and encourage
dedicated export production through 100 per cent export-oriented
units.
The Committee are of the view that continuous presence of
Indian steel industry in the global market would not only help them
at times of fall in the domestic demand but also enable them to
utilize the abundant opportunities available in the global market.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to encourage the
Indian steel industry to perform well at the global market also by
realization of measures outlined in the NSP .

7
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 6.12)
1.21 The Committee noted that the National Steel Policy (NSP) set
out a road map for the domestic steel sector towards reform, restructure
and globalisation. The domestic steel sector had two sub-sectors namely,
the large scale integrated units and small size secondary steel units
includes Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). SMEs produced
finished steel products from semis were meeting the local demand as
they were widely dispersed. The Committee also noted that some of
the SMEs which were closed down in later 90’s had been refurbished
and proliferated following upswing in the steel sector.
1.22 The Committee further noted that the Ministry of Steel had
proposed a token amount of Rs.10 crore for a new scheme viz.
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for SMEs in the 11th
Plan. But the Planning Commission had not approved due to pending
finalisation of scheme by the Ministry.
1.23 The Committee observed that the SMEs were occupying a
central place in fulfilling the local demand considering their wide
geographical dispersion. The Committee also observed that the growing
competitiveness in steel sector with the latest technology, massive
capacity addition and expanding network would force a formidable
threat to SMEs. The Committee felt that keeping in view the role
being played by SMEs in the country by meeting the local demands,
they desired the Ministry to strengthen them by providing necessary
infrastructure and fulfilling their various requirements like raw material
through Small Scale Industries Corporation to derive the benefits of
proposed technology upgradation.
1.24 The Ministry of Steel has replied that in pursuance of the
recommendations made by the Working Group on Iron & Steel for the
11th Five Year Plan, the Ministry of Steel has proposed formation of
a Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs) with the proposed token outlay of Rs.10 crore over
the 11th Five-Year Plan Period i.e. 2007-2012. Planning Commission is
of the view that replication of the scheme on the pattern of TUFS
would not be encouraged in other sectors of the industry.
1.25 Keeping in view the role being played by Small and
Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in meeting the local steel demand, the
Committee had desired the Ministry of Steel to strengthen them by
providing necessary infrastructure to derive the benefits of proposed

8
technology upgradation. The Committee had also noted that the
Ministry had proposed a token amount of Rs.10 crore in BE 2007-08
for a new scheme called “Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme
(TUFS)” for SMEs which was not approved by the Planning
Commission.
The Ministry in its reply has stated that the Planning Commission
has finally rejected the TUFS stating that “TUFS would not be
encouraged in other sectors of the industry”.
The Committee are distressed to note that while the National
Steel Policy (NSP) has contemplated that the Government would
proactively assist the SMEs in shifting to processes that are more
environment-protective, absence of direct policy support for the same
would not only defeat the purpose of NSP but also retard the growth
of SMEs. The Committee feel that benchmarking technology of SMEs
is the need of hour so as to enable them to meet the local demand
with quality products and avoid environmental damage and not
succumbing to the emerging market forces.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the schemes like TUFS
should be implemented in steel sector to give further boost to SMEs.
The Committee, therefore, like the Ministry to again approach the
Planning Commission with ample justification for introduction of
TUFS in steel sector.
Fiscal Incentives to Steel Industry
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24, Para No. 6.15)
1.26 The Committee noted that steel was one of the six sectors
that figure in the index of industrial production for “infrastructure”
but the fiscal incentives available to the infrastructure projects were
not available to the steel industry. The Committee felt that providing
suitable fiscal incentives to the steel industry was absolutely necessary
to mobilize vast resources to achieve the strategic goal of 110 mt of
steel production by 2019-20. The Committee were surprised to note
that the Ministry of Steel had not proposed any schemes for providing
fiscal incentives to the steel sector during 11th Plan.
1.27 The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to
approach the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission with the details
of schemes to provide suitable fiscal incentives for steel industry during
11th Plan itself.

9
1.28 In Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated that
it has made several attempts to get steel industry classified as an
‘Infrastructure’ industry so that this industry also get accelerated
benefits accorded to the infrastructure industries. But its proposals have
not found favour with the Finance Ministry.
1.29 The Committee felt that providing suitable fiscal incentives
to the steel industry was absolutely necessary to mobilize vast
resources to achieve the strategic goal of 110 Million Tonne (MT) of
steel production by 2019-20 envisaged in National Steel Policy (NSP).
The Committee had, therefore, recommended the Ministry of Steel
to approach the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission with the
details of schemes to provide suitable fiscal incentives for steel
industry during 11th Plan itself. The Ministry in its reply is silent
about the schemes to provide fiscal incentives to the steel industry
but has stated that despite its several attempts, the Ministry of
Finance has not favoured the proposal to give infrastructure status
to the steel industry.
The Committee are distressed to note that the fiscal incentives
available to the infrastructure projects are not offered to the steel
industry though the NSP has highlighted the fact that steel is one
of the six sectors that figure in the index of industrial production
for ‘infrastructure’. The Committee are of the strong view that like
other infrastructure industries, the steel industry is also capital
intensive and play an important role in the growth of economy. The
Committee are sanguine that there could be no two opinion on the
steel sector being the kernel of Infrastructure Industries and,
therefore, fail to comprehend the dilemma on the part of the
Government to declare it as “Infrastructure Industry”.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that
the suitable fiscal incentives should be provided to steel industry at
the earliest in order to achieve the goals of NSP . The Committee
also desire the Ministry to take up the matter with the other
concerned Ministries/Planning Commission to declare the steel
industry as “Infrastructure Industry”.

10
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.7)
The Committee noted that the steel industry had an important
role to play in the development of economy. The Steel sector’s sustained
growth was one of the vital prerequisites for attaining the level of
GDP growth envisaged in the 11th Plan. The Committee observed that
with rising GDP growth, steel consumption and production were
expected to grow further. The Committee were happy to note that the
Government had given due emphasis to the achievement of the
objectives of the National Steel Policy (NSP) 2005 in the 11th Plan to
make India globally competitive in terms of cost, quality and product-
mix.
The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to take appropriate
measures such as removing procedural bottlenecks in implementing
the goals envisaged in NSP particularly the areas of critical raw
material, creation of infrastructure and to explore and adopt alternative
technologies to use indigenous coal. The Committee also desired the
Ministry to monitor the implementation of NSP in close coordination
with other Central Ministries and the State Governments.
Action Taken
The Policy on minerals is presently being dealt with by a Group
of Ministers (GoM) under the Chairmanship of Shri Shivraj Patil, Home
Minister. The views of the Ministry of Steel have been communicated
to the GoM.
In an effort to develop an adapt technology which have synergy
with natural resource base of the country Ministry of Steel has
established the Steel Research and Development Mission (SRDM) for
carrying out path breaking research in this area. Further, Ministry of
Steel is undertaking a study of the status of infrastructure as well as
augmentation requirements in terms of road and rail networks, ports
and the water sectors in various steel producing states. As regards,
monitoring of the implementation of NSP in close coordination with
other Central Ministries and State Governments. Prime Minister has

11
approved constitution of an Intra-Ministerial Group (IMG) under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Steel) to monitor and coordinate issues
concerning major steel investments in the country. The other members
of the IMG are Secretaries of Ministries/Departments of Mines, DIPP ,
Environment & Forests, Road Transport & Highways, Shipping and
Member (Traffic) Railway Board as well as Chief Secretaries of the
concerned State Governments.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee hoped that the Ministry of Steel would implement
the recommendations in a time-bound manner which the Committee
made in their Action Taken Report. The Committee desired that the
Ministry should furnish final replies to the recommendation (Nos.4, 10
and 15) which were categorized as of interim nature. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Action Taken
As regards recommendation No.4(of 17th Report) i.e.  the
restructuring proposal of MECON Ltd., the proposal had been approved
and necessary orders issued in February , 2007. Regarding Para 10 of
the 17th Report (restructuring of HSCL and BRL), the cases for merger
of BRL with SAIL is being progressed. Regarding HSCL, a revised
proposal for its restructuring has been prepared and is under
consideration.
The matter regarding National Mineral Policy and amendments to
MMDR Act is under consideration of the Govt.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.8)
The Committee noted that Budgetary Support (BS) was being
provided to some of the financially weak and loss making PSUs and
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) were being raised by
profit making PSUs for implementing their schemes. The Committee
also noted that the Ministry had proposed the annual plan outlay of
Rs. 6420.20 crore including BS of Rs. 121.00 crore for the year 2007-08.
The Planning Commission, however, approved an outlay of Rs. 6203.70
crore with BS of Rs. 66.00 crore and IEBR of Rs. 6137.70 crore.

12
The Committee further noted that in the year 2006-07 the total
outlay of Rs. 3201.80 crore in BE was reduced to Rs. 2660.61 crore at
RE stage involving a reduction of IEBR to Rs. 2240.87 crore from
Rs. 3172.30 crore. But the steel PSUs could utilize IEBR of Rs. 1702.44
crore only. Similarly in the year 2007-08, IEBR of NMDC, KIOCL and
MOIL had been reduced from Rs. 333.00 crore to Rs. 250.00 crore,
Rs. 150.00 crore to Rs. 75.00 crore and Rs. 68.50 crore to 65.00 crore
respectively. BS had also been reduced in respect of BRL and HSCL
substantially from Rs. 24.00 crore and Rs. 7.00 crore respectively to
Rs. 1.00 crore each due to pending approval of their restructuring
proposals.
Further, in 2007-08 the outlay for new scheme on R&D had been
reduced from Rs. 20.00 crore to Rs. 1.00 crore and no budgetary support
had been approved by the Planning Commission for two new schemes
viz. Scheme for Institution & Manpower Development in steel sector
and Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for Small and
Medium Enterprises (SMEs) pending finalization of details of the
schemes by the Ministry.
The Committee were constrained to observe that as compared to
BE of Rs. 3172.30 crore, steel PSUs were able to utilize Rs. 1702.44
crore barely 53.66 per cent of allocated IEBR during the year 2006-07.
Ironically in the year 2007-08 again, steel PSUs prepared inflated
estimates without ample justifications which were subsequently reduced
by the Planning Commission. The Committee in their earlier reports
had been reiterating that the Ministry should make realistic estimates
and allocate funds at BE stage instead of resorting to provision of
funds at RE.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry/PSUs
should propose realistic estimates with viable schemes to ensure full
utilization of funds. The Committee also desired the Ministry to finalise
the proposed new schemes at the earliest and approach the Ministry
of Finance/Planning Commission to allocate required funds at RE stage.
The Committee further recommended the Ministry to provide
sufficient budgetary support to HSCL and BRL to fund their Addition,
Modification and Replacement (AMR) schemes till their restructuring
proposals were finally approved.
Action Taken
As per the budgetary practice, the initial projections for the Budget
Estimates are finalized before the beginning of the financial year and
are, therefore, often indicative only. These projections of the outlay are

13
made keeping in view the trend of expenditure incurred, status of
ongoing as well as proposed projects and programmes and based on
the inputs from the PSUs. Planning Commission finalises the Plan
outlay of the Ministry and the PSUs after making their own assessment,
as has been done in the case of reduction in 2007-08 (BE) outlay of
NMDC, KIOCL, MOIL, BRL and HSCL. However, with clarity on trends
of expenditure and actual fund requirements towards the end of the
year, necessary revisions are made by the Ministry/PSUs as part of
the Revised Estimates (RE) exercise.
Of the 3 new schemes proposed by the Ministry for implementation
during the 11th Plan, a token provision of Rs.1.00 crore in 2007-08
(BE) has been approved by the Planning Commission for only one
scheme viz. Scheme for Promotion of R&D in the Iron & Steel sector.
Since the details of this scheme are still being worked out in
consultation with the various stakeholders and experts in the field, the
provision of Rs.1.00 crore for the scheme has been proposed to be
retained in RE 2007-08. As regards the other two new schemes proposed
i.e. Scheme for Institution & Manpower Development in steel sector
and Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for Small and
Medium Enterprises (SMEs), neither of the two schemes has so far
been approved by the Planning Commission.
The issue of providing sufficient budgetary support to HSCL and
BRL to fund their AMR schemes till their restructuring proposals are
finally approved was taken up by Secretary (Steel) with the concerned
Member, Planning Commission. The matter was also taken up in the
meeting held in the Planning Commission on 4.6.2007 on the Annual
Plan 2008-09 and 11th Plan proposals of the Ministry of Steel. Planning
Commission has recently conveyed a tentative allocation of Gross
Budgetary Support (GBS) of Rs.217.00 crore for the 11th Plan for
Ministry of Steel. Based on this tentative allocation, Plan budgetary
support of Rs.35.00 crore each for HSCL and BRL for the 11th Plan
has been proposed by this Ministry to the Planning Commission.
Decision of the Planning Commission as to the actual allocation of
GBS for 11th Plan is awaited.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.1)
The Committee noted that outlay of the Ministry of Steel in
10th Five Year Plan had been scaled down by 24 per cent in Mid-
Term Appraisal from Rs. 11044 crore (IEBR of Rs. 10979 crore and
BS of Rs. 65 crore) to Rs. 8476.88 crore (IEBR of Rs. 8411.68 crore and

14
BS of Rs. 65 crore) based on the trend of expenditure and progress of
schemes/projects. Though the Ministry could spend BS of Rs. 106.73
crore, higher than the allocation, the Committee were constrained to
note that it could expend IEBR of Rs. 5158.37 crore only , leaving
39 per cent of funds earmarked in Mid-Term Appraisal unspent.
The Committee were anguished to note that steel PSUs had failed
to utilize even the reduced allocation which was bound to have an
adverse impact on their performance. Non-utilisation of IEBR also
indicates to the fact that various PSUs had not been able to generate
the enough internal resources as much as they were expected to raise.
The Committee would, therefore, be informed as to what were IEBR
targets for each of PSU and how much resources each of them could
raise IEBR and the reasons for the shortfall.
The Committee were extremely concerned about the adverse impact
on the PSUs owing to non-utilisation of funds even after reduction in
Mid-Term Appraisal. The Committee noted that some of the schemes/
projects of PSUs sanctioned in 9th and 10th Plan had been spilling
over to 11th Plan. The Committee in their 13th Report had
recommended that those schemes should be completed before the end
of 10th Five Year Plan or in the early part of 11th Five Year Plan. The
Committee were unhappy to note the casual approach of the Ministry/
PSUs in completion of the schemes as no progress had been made in
this regard.
The Committee observed that delay in implementing the schemes
by Steel PSUs for example, supply of equipments to SAIL units,
development of Rawghat-Jagadalpur Railway Line by NMDC, setting
up of Ductile Iron Spun Pipe Plant by KIOCL and Ore Based Activities
(Mineral Exploration) by Bird Group of Companies had been hampering
in utilisation of funds earmarked under IEBR. The Committee were
anguished to note that the Ministry had failed to pay attention to the
Committee’s earlier recommendations that the Ministry/PSUs should
identify the constraints in implementing the schemes and utilisation of
funds and strived to achieve the targets fixed in 10th plan.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the steel
PSUs should take all steps to complete the schemes projects sanctioned
in 9th and 10th Plans and those spilling over to 11th Plan in 2007-08
itself. The Committee also recommended the Ministry to facilitate PSUs
in identifying the constraints and formulate the strategy for
implementation of schemes/projects and better utilisation of funds.

15
Action Taken
The shortfall in utilization of I&EBR by the PSUs is not due to
shortfall in IEBR generation during the 10th Plan. All the PSUs except
HSCL, BRL and MECON generated adequate I&EBR to fund their
approved I&EBR expenses during the 10th Plan. A tabular statement
on target for generation of IEBR during the 10th Plan, 10th Plan
approved component of outlay to be financed through IEBR of the
PSUs, actual utilization during the 10th Plan and reasons for shortfall
in utilization is given in Annexure-I.
The Committee’s recommendation regarding taking of all steps by
the steel PSUs to complete the schemes/projects spilling over to the
11th Plan from the 9th and 10th Plans in 2007-08 itself has been
communicated to all the concerned PSUs for their information and
compliance. In this context it is mentioned that of the 41 schemes/
projects spilling over to the 11th Plan from 9th & 10th Plans, 24 schemes
will be/are likely to be completed during 2007-08 itself. Another 10
schemes are likely to be completed by 2008-09. Many of these spill
over schemes were taken up in the latter part of the 10th Plan period
and their expected completion during the first two years (2007-09) of
the 11th Plan is as per the original schedule. The details of the
remaining 7 spill over schemes that cannot be completed even by
2008-09 are given in Annexure-II.
As regards the Committee’s recommendation for the Ministry to
facilitate the PSUs in identifying the constraints and formulate strategy
for implementation of schemes/projects and better utilization of funds,
the matter has been discussed with the PSUs in the quarterly review
meeting held in the Ministry to review inter alia their utilization of
Plan outlays during the 10th Plan. Based on the discussions, an internal
committee comprising of representatives of PSUs like SAIL, NMDC,
RINL, etc. has been set up to identify common major constraints faced
by PSUs in the implementation of schemes and to suggest mechanism/
strategy for better implementation of schemes and utilization of funds.
First meeting of the internal committee was held at SAIL, New Delhi,
on 3rd August, 2007.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

16
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 4.3)
The Committee noted that 11th Plan Period is vital for further
growth of steel sector and therefore, the Ministry had identified major
thrust areas viz. creation of infrastructure, availability of raw material,
flow of adequate funds, promotion of steel usage, technology
development and price stability, etc. to develop Indian steel industry
at par with global steel sector. The Committee desired that detailed
working plans be drawn up for each of the sector and implemented
in a time-bound manner. The Committee should be informed of the
action taken in the matter.
The Committee observed that the boom in the global steel industry
had led to the buoyancy in the Indian steel sector. The Committee
were, however, of strong view that Indian steel industry could grow
further on its own by stimulating the demand in the country with a
special focus on rural areas. For this, both the steel PSUs and private
steel companies should improve their productivity through technological
development, produce more consumer oriented products at competitive
price in order to compete other cheaper products like aluminium, etc.
The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to facilitate the
domestic steel companies in general and steel PSUs in particular in
achieving the major thrust areas identified for 11th Plan in close
coordination with the State Governments and monitor the
implementation at the Ministry level. The Committee might be apprised
of the progress in this regard regularly.
Action Taken
1. Creation of Infrastructure:  Prime Minister has approved the
formation of Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) to monitor and coordinate
issues concerning major steel investments in the country. The Committee
will function under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Steel) and to be
convened by Joint Secretary, Ministry of Steel. The members are the
secretaries of Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion,
Department of Shipping, Department of Road Transport and Highways,
Ministry of Mines, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Member
(Traffic) of the railway Board and Chief Secretaries of the concerned
States.
The terms of reference of the IMG have been specified as:
To review and co-ordinate measures for early completion of the
major steel capacities and address various problems concerning:
• Infrastructure constraints related to ports, rail, road network.
•A vailability of iron ore and coal.

17
• Speedy environmental clearance for project site as well as
for iron and coal mining activities.
•A vailability of land, water resources and issues concerning
rehabilitation.
• Any other item concerned with the major steel investments
in the country.
On the 14th August 2007, a meeting of the leading investors with
credible investment plans was convened by the Secretary(Steel) to assess
the requirements of the infrastructure facilities, raw material linkages
and of land and water resources. This is a precursor to the meeting
of the IMG.
The first meeting of the IMG is scheduled to be held on
18th October, 2007.
2. Promotion of steel usage:  the MOS in association with some of
the major producers has established the Institute of Steel development
and growth with a view to promoting steel use in the construction
sector the single largest user of steel accounting for 61% of total steel
consumption in India. INSDAG has already undertaken a number of
projects to promote steel use vis-a-vis other competing materials in the
areas of civil construction—especially in the infrastructure sector.
INSDAG is also actively involved in popularising the use of steel
amongst architects, civil engineers fabricators and other practitioners
of steel intensive technology especially in the area of civil construction.
To that end it has also actively participated in formulation of modified
curriculum in academic institutes to familiarize students with the use
of steel in construction. It has also a programme of promoting lifecycle
costing as a tool for project evaluation for all government and private
project and changing the established norms for the purpose and thereby
give a fillip to steel use.
Apart from this several efforts have been made and are under
progress for promoting use of steel in the rural areas. Some of these
are:
• Popularising the use of metal bins for grain storage (under
the National Campaign for Steel Consumption and in
association with Joint Plant Committee and selected
producers),
• Designing of household equipments and agricultural tools
for use in the rural areas,

18
•D esigning of steel-intensive housing and transport (hand-
carts etc.) for rural use, and
• Most importantly, the opening up of rural stock-points at
each district of India by the steel PSUs so as to improve
the access of steel to rural population and the policy of
providing steel to rural market at a cost equal to that of
the district headquarters.
3. Price Stability:  The National Steel Policy recommended
promotion of hedging instruments like ‘Futures and Derivatives’ in
the steel market to minimize the risks of price volatility for both
consumers and producers of steel. The world over, these instruments
and the futures market in steel are still at nascent stage. In a sense,
India is a pioneer in this respect as it already has two exchanges,
namely—the MCEX (the Multi Commodity Exchange) and the NCDEX
(National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange)—dealing in Futures
trading in steel. The quantities traded and the items covered under
the arrangement are still limited. But is hoped that because of this
early start, the Indian derivatives markets in steel will be able to take
advantage of this new system of risk management as trading in such
instruments grows world wide. The MOS is studying the unfolding
conditions so as to help this system nature in an equitable and
regulated manner.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 5.1.18)
The Committee noted that annual outlay of the SAIL had been
increased to Rs. 2641 Crore in BE 2007-08 from Rs. 1275 Crore in RE
2006-07 based on the projected progress of schemes/projects. The
anticipated expenditure for the year 2006-07 would be Rs. 1150 Crore
only due to delay in supply of equipments by suppliers. The Committee
also noted that the progress of implementation of some of the schemes
viz. Revamping of B-strand in wire rod mill, Rebuilding of coke oven
Battery No. 5, Technological Upgradation of BF-7, Installation of BF–
7 and Hot Metal Sulphurisation in SMS being taken by the SAIL for
Bhilai Steel Plant were scheduled to be completed by 2007. As against
the total sanctioned cost of Rs. 1071.10 Crore for the above-mentioned
schemes respectively, SAIL could barely spend Rs. 319.64 crore as on
December 2006, which was comparatively lesser than the sanctioned
cost.

19
The Committee were unhappy to note that a number of ongoing
projects of Bhilai Steel Plant like Technological upgradation of BF-7
not progressing as per schedule. In Bokaro Steel Plant also the pace of
expenditure was much less as compared to the work schedule. The
Committee desired that all out efforts should be made to complete the
projects as per schedule. The Committee noted that execution of various
schemes and projects takes longer time due to elaborate procedures
involving considerable time as compared to flexibility available to
private sector, steel PSUs need to go through due procedures like
tendering formalities, etc.
The Committee desired that since the SAIL has already compressed
its corporate plan from the year 2012 to 2010, it should expedite the
completion of the ongoing schemes by simplifying the procedural
formalities.
Action Taken
Of the various schemes of Bhilai Steel Plant, Revamping of B-strand
in wire rod mill has been completed in Dec’ 06 and Technological
Upgradation of BF-7 has been completed in Feb’ 07. Rebuilding of
Coke Oven Battery No. 5 and Installation of Hot Metal Desulphurisation
in SMS-II are planned to be completed during 2007-08.
Out of the total sanctioned cost of Rs. 1071.1 crore for Bhilai Steel
Plant, Rs. 434.08 crore has been incurred upto May’07 on various
ongoing schemes.
SAIL has well established procedures & systems for Project
Management in the form of Manuals. Projects costing more than
Rs. 20 crore are monitored and reviewed on quarterly basis at Plant
& Corporate level as well as at Ministry level.
Progress of the Corporate/Expansion Plan of SAIL is being
monitored by Secretary (Steel) on monthly basis.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 5.1.28)
The Committee noted that the production of special steel/value
added steel by the SAIL during 10th Five Year Plan was 11.3 million
tonnes (MT) against the target of 14.8 MT. The Committee also noted
that the SAIL under its major expansion/modernisation programme
had planned to set up special unit at Salem Steel Plant and modernise

20
Cold Rolled Mill at Bokaro Steel Plant to cater the demands of oil and
gas sector and automobile sector. SAIL, as a long-term vision, had
also planned to set up more such units in its other steel plants to
meet the growing demands in different segments including automobiles.
The Committee were unhappy to note that the SAIL had failed to
achieve the target in the production of special steel/ value added steel
envisaged in the 10th Plan Period. The Committee felt that in the
growing steel sector, the production of special steel/ value added steel
would determine the competitiveness of steel companies. The
Committee also felt that setting up of dedicated units in the existing
plants with the latest technologies specifically producing special steel
and value added steel would accelerate the growth and competitiveness
of the SAIL.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the SAIL should
prepare an action plan for increasing the production of special steel/
value added steel by suitably modifying the ongoing expansion/
modernisation programmes. SAIL should also quickly explore the
possibilities of technical tie-ups with overseas companies by special
purpose vehicle route for viable projects. It should also explore the
possibilities of reduction of costs by improving techno-economic
parameters. The Committee were also concerned to note the 9 per
cent reduction in Net Sales Realisation and desired that corrective steps
be taken.
Action Taken
SAIL has prepared an action plan for increasing the production of
special steel/value added steel by planning suitable changes as part of
ongoing expansion/modernization programmes.
In addition, it has also explored areas of reduction of costs by
improving techno-economic parameters.
Increase in quality has also been planned to increase Net Sales
Realization per tonnes of output.
Plan of volume increase for value added/special steel products :
SAIL has made Expansion Plan of its Plants/Units to achieve hot
metal production target of 26 Mtpa from its present capacity by 2010.
In this regard, ‘in-principle’ approval has been accorded by SAIL Board
for the Expansion of its five Plants Units, viz. IISCO Steel Plant (ISP),
Salem Steel Plant (SSP), Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL), Bhilai Steel Plant

21
(BSP) and Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP). ‘In-principle’ approval for the
Expansion of Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP) has been given in Jul’ 07.
In case of BSP , hot metal capacity will be increased to 7.5 Mtpa.
Among other facilities, a New Blast Furnace of higher volume
(4060 m3) with a New Universal Rolling Mill of 1.2 Mtpa capacity of
long rails, Bar & Rod Mill of 0.9 Mtpa capacity and a New Universal
Beam Mill of 1.2 Mtpa capacity will be installed.
In case of RSP , hot metal capacity will be increased to 4.5 Mtpa.
Among other facilities, a New Blast Furnace of higher volume
(4060 m3) with a New 4.3 meter wide Plate Mill and a New CRNO
complex of 100,000 tpa capacity will be installed.
RSP is exploring the possibility of producing CRGO. In this regard,
Expression of Interest for the technology of CRGO has already been
floated.
In case of BSL, hot metal capacity will be increased to 7.44 Mtpa.
Among other facilities, a Thin Slab Casting of 2.4 Mtpa capacity with
a compact Slab Mill of 2.4 Mtpa and a New Cold Rolling Mill complex
of 1.2 Mtpa capacity to produce auto body sheets, among other
products, will be installed.
In case of ISP , a new plant of 2.9 Mtpa of hot metal capacity will
be installed. Among other facilities, a Blast Furnace of higher volume
(4060 m3), Heavy Section Mill of 0.6 Mtpa capacity and Wire Rod Mill
of 1.2 Mtpa capacity will be installed.
In case of SSP , a Steel Melting Shop with a capacity to produce
180,000 tpa of CC slabs will be installed alongwith expansion of Cold
Rolling Mill complex from its present capacity of 65,000 tpa to 146,000
tpa.
Cost reduction & improvement of Techno-economic parameters:
The technological up-gradation to be undertaken during the growth
period will also help in achieving Cost Competitiveness through some
of following measures:
• Optimizing coal blend at coke ovens, raw-materials quality
• 100% production of steel through BOF route
• 100% processing of steel through continuous casting
• Palletisation facilities in Iron ore mines

22
• Auxilliary fuel consumption in Blast furnaces
• Desulphurisation of hot metal
• Coke Dry quenching
In addition, quality improvements have been planned to increase
thrust on value added products. Some of important steps planned for
value addition are as follows:
• New mills for superior tolerances and quality
• Reduction of semi finished steel to about 5% from exiting
20%
• State-of-art online testing and quality control
• Quality assurance system, standardization,
•P re-treatment and post treatment of metal
• New products e.g. HCR-EQR TMT, Rock Bolt TMT, Micro
Alloyed Rails, S-Profile Loco wheels and MC-12 HR Coil
etc. are being envisaged for production.
During 2006-07, the NSR of mild steel products has shown a growth
of approx. 14% over the corresponding period of last year. In order to
improve the NSR following steps have been initiated:
• Close coordination with plants for adjustment of product
mix as per market requirement.
• Focus on production of value added and special steel
products.
• Close monitoring of inventories and timely disposal of
stocks.
• Improving supplies to actual consumers.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 5.1.36)
The Committee noted that availability of critical raw material viz.
iron ore, coking coal and non-coking coal was indispensable for the
sustainable development of the steel industry. The SAIL was at present
meeting its requirement of iron ore through captive mines. However,
it had been purchasing indigenous non-coking coal from the Coal India
Ltd (CIL) and importing coking coal. It had already entered into

23
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Bharat Coking Coal
Ltd. (BCCL), a subsidiary of CIL, to augment availability of non-coking
coal. It had also been in the process of acquiring coking coal mines on
its own and agreed to participate in the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)
to be floated for acquisition of overseas coal mines along with the
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd (RINL), the CIL and the National Thermal
Power Corporation (NTPC).
The Committee observed though the SAIL had captive iron ore
mines and getting uninterrupted supply of iron ore, it had not made
required efforts to acquire captive coal blocks unlike major private
steel companies. The Committee were anguished to note that the SAIL
had been carrying its operations for more than four decades and it
not been able to acquire any captive coal blocks so far. The Committee
felt that allotment of captive coal mines to the SAIL was significant to
meet its long-term requirement of non-coking coal and to improve its
competitiveness.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the SAIL should make
concerted endeavour to get captive coal blocks to ensure adequate
availability of indigenous non-coking coal.
Action Taken
Around 30% of total coking coal requirement for SAIL is met from
indigenous sources which include supplies from Coal India Ltd. (CIL)
and production from captive mines. Over the years, there has been
decline in supplies from CIL. Coking Coal availability from CIL has
come down from around 9 MT during 1993-94 to 3.6 MT during
2006-07. In order to ensure security of coking coal supplies, SAIL is
taking steps to enhance indigenous availability to the level of 8-10 MT
by 2015-16. This include entering into strategic alliance with Bharat
Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL) a subsidiary of CIL and developing new
coking coal blocks as detailed below :
Alliance with BCCL
(a) MOU has been signed with BCCL to fund phase-I
upgradation of Moonidih Mine at 16 Top seam. Entire coal
production has been assured for SAIL plants. SAIL has also
agreed to fund phase-II upgradation of Moonidih mine at
XV seam on similar lines.
(b) SAIL has taken up the matter with CIL & BCCL for
developing Kapuria & Kharkharee-Dharmaband Extension
blocks in joint venture with BCCL.

24
Development of new coking coal blocks
(a) SAIL has been allocated Tasra and Sitanala coking coal
blocks for captive mining. Actions are being taken to develop
the blocks.
In addition, SAIL had submitted applications to the Ministry of
Coal for allocation of 11 nos. thermal coal blocks. But note of the
stocks have been allocated to SAIL.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 5.1.37)
The Committee were of the strong view that floating of SPV to
acquire overseas coal mines would held PSUs in avoiding the
uncertainty that prevails in getting adequate supply of coking coal.
The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to expedite the action
so as to enable the SAIL, RINL, CIL and NTPC to reap the benefits
of SPV at the earliest.
Action Taken
Ministry of Steel has constituted a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Director (Finance), Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL)
to submit a Status Paper on “Securing Coking Coal Supplies for the
Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.
(RINL)”. Based on the recommendation of the Committee, an
Empowered Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) comprising Steel Authority
of India Limited (SAIL), Coal India Limited (CIL), Rashtriya Ispat
Nigam Ltd. (RINL), National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) and
National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC) has been proposed
for incorporation for the purpose of acquisition of coal mining
companies/properties in overseas territories. The proposed SPV would
specifically cater to meet the requirements of coking and thermal coal
of the participant companies. This proposal has been approved by the
Cabinet in its meeting held on 8.11.2007.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 5.2.7)
The Committee noted that as against the installed capacity of
Sponge Iron of 60000 Tonnes Per Annum (TPA), the Sponge Iron India
Limited (SIIL) had produced 57600 and 48600 TPA during the years

25
2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively. The SIIL was anticipated to produce
55000 TPA in 2006-07. The target fixed for the year 2007-08 was 57000
TPA as against the installed capacity of 60000 TPA representing capacity
utilization of 95 per cent. The Committee also noted that net profit of
the SIIL was 12.98 crore in 2003-04, Rs. 3.93 crore in 2004-05 and
Rs. 3.18 crore in 2005-06 with estimated marginal increase to Rs. 6.37 crore
in 2006-07. The net profit would again decline to Rs. 4.20 in 2007-08.
The Committee had been informed that the main reasons for poor
performance in production is non-availability of iron ore. Expansion
project of SIIL had been kept on hold due to non-supply of coal and
iron ore by Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) and National
Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC) respectively.
The Committee observed that Sponge Iron Industry using non-
coking coal, a substitute for coke, and iron ore are adequately available
in the country. The Committee could not but deprecate that the
Ministry/SIIL had failed to take prompt action in ensuring
uninterrupted supply of iron ore from the NMDC. The Committee,
therefore, recommended the Ministry to take necessary measures to
make available the required quantity of raw material viz. coal and
iron ore to the SIIL.
The Committee also noted that a proposal for merger of the SIIL
with the NMDC was pending with the Ministry. The Committee hoped
that the proposed merger of the SIIL with the NMDC would improve
the performance of the SIIL and desired expeditious action on the part
of the Ministry in this regard.
Action Taken
Ministry of Steel has decided to merge M/s. Sponge Iron India
Limited (SIIL) with M/s. National Mineral Development Corporation
(NMDC) in principle. The Ministry directed SIIL/NMDC to appoint a
Merchant Banker for valuation of assets and determination of value of
shares of M/s. SIIL. Accordingly, M/s. Axix Bank (formerly known as
UTI Bank) was appointed as Merchant Banker, who have submitted
the Valuation Report in August, 2007. The Boards of NMDC and SIIL
have approved the valuation report in their meetings held on
18th and 21st September, 2007 respectively.
Ministry has noted the concern of Hon’ble Standing Committee on
the raw material supply, particularly iron ore supplies to SIIL from
NMDC. Once the process of merger of SIIL with NMDC is completed,
the problem of iron ore supplies will be automatically resolved by

26
inhouse supply from NMDC mines located in Karnataka which is also
better suited for sponge iron making. As far as coal is concerned, SIIL
is getting adequate quantity of coal from M/s. Singareni Collieries
Limited. Expansion of sponge iron plant will also be taken up after
merger of SIIL with NMDC.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 5.3.5)
The Committee noted that the Hindustan Steelworks Construction
(HSCL) was primarily engaged in undertaking construction of steel
plants and projects in the infrastructure sector. The Committee also
noted that in the year 2005-06 the HSCL had secured high orders of
Rs. 344 crore in infrastructure sector and Rs. 86 crore in steel sector.
The Committee were constrained to note that due to high negative net
worth of the HSCL of Rs. (-)1164.69 crore, it had been unable to pre-
qualify for the upcoming expansion projects of the SAIL. The
Committee further noted that the restructuring proposal of HSCL has
been pending with the Ministry for want of clearance. The Planning
Commission had also approved Rs. 1 crore only in view of the
proposed restructuring of the company .
The Committee in their earlier recommendations had reiterated
that the restructuring proposal of HSCL should be approved early.
Further, till a final decision is taken on merger of HSCL with SAIL,
the Ministry should facilitate HSCL in awarding works on
modernisation/ upgradation of steel PSUs. The Committee were
anguished to note that the Ministry had neither approved the financial
restructuring proposal of the company as yet nor facilitated it getting
work orders from steel PSUs. The Ministry had also not come out
with any proposal for the merger of HSCL with SAIL. The Committee
strongly felt that these had had a cumulative effect on the performance
of the Company.
The Committee would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation
on restructuring proposal of HSCL and its merger with SAIL. The
Committee desired the Ministry/Steel PSUs to take immediate steps
in giving preference to HSCL in work orders in their ongoing expansion
projects.
Action Taken
Steel Authority of India (SAIL) are of the view that Hindustan
Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL), basically being a civil

27
construction company having its core strength in piling, soil
investigation, foundation works, high rise fabrication etc., has no
synergy of operation with SAIL (production and marketing of carbon
steel). Hence, it is felt that merger of HSCL with SAIL may not be
feasible at this stage.
As regards awards of work by SAIL to HSCL, it is submitted that
in case of capital project, SAIL awards work on competitive bidding
and whenever HSCL participates in SAIL tenders, HSCL is being
awarded work on the basis of their competitive bidding (L1). However,
while awarding the work, the purchase preference is given by SAIL to
all the PSUs including HSCL for the works less than Rs.100 crore as
per Guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises. SAIL gives works
to HSCL within the guidelines of government/CVC governing such
matters.
In so far as RINL is concerned, the company has been extending
preference/support to HSCL by obtaining special approvals wherever
necessary in tenders where HSCL is participating.
A revised proposal for Restructuring and Revival of HSCL has
been prepared and present under discussion in the Ministry of Steel.
This will be shortly sent to Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector
Enterprises (BRPSE).
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 5.3.7)
The Committee further noted that when the HSCL has been
starving of funds, it had failed to realize the pending amount of
Rs. 60.21 crore (as on 31.3.2006) particularly from its main debtors viz.
SAIL, Neelanchal Ispat Nigam Ltd. (NINL), National Thermal Power
Corporation (NTPC) and Central Coalfields Ltd. (CCL). The Committee
in their 3rd Report had already recommended that the Ministry should
prepare a time-bound schedule for early settlement of pending dues
of the HSCL but no noticeable progress has been made so far in this
regard.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should
take up the matter seriously and to facilitate the HSCL in realizing
the dues from Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs).
Action Taken
The accounts for 2006-07 have been finalized in respect of HSCL
and the Debtors outstanding for more than six months has reduced

28
from Rs. 60.21 crore as on 31.3.2006 to Rs. 54.47 crore as on 31.3.2007.
Bills have been submitted by HSCL to respective steel Plants on the
basis of modalities decided by Disputes Settlement Committee in the
matters relating to the long outstanding payments receivable from SAIL
and RINL.
Efforts have been made by the Ministry also to help HSCL in
realizing its long pending dues with SAIL and RINL.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 5.4.8)
The Committee noted that the Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd.
(KIOCL) had been allotted of Rs. 75 crore for the year 2007-08 for
various schemes including mines development and setting up of Ductile
Iron Spun Pipe Plant (DISP) to produce value added product. The
Ministry had stated that additional funds would be provided, if
required, in the RE 2007-08 depending upon the progress of the ongoing
schemes. The Committee also noted that the funds earmarked during
2006-07 to the KIOCL has been reduced to Rs. 38 crore in RE 2006-07
from Rs. 200 crore in BE but the expenditure had been so far Rs.16
crore only.
The Ministry had stated that non-allotment of mining lease at
Ramanadurg and dispute over a portion of land allocated by Karnataka
Industrial Areas Development Board (KIADB) were the major reasons
for shortfall in utilization of funds viz. The Committee further noted
that the proposal of merger of the Kudremukh Iron and Steel Company
(KISCO) with the KIOCL is pending with Board for Reconstruction of
Public Enterprises (BRPSE).
The Committee felt that diversification of schemes and development
of new mines needs to be accorded highest priority for the sustainable
development of the KIOCL. The Committee were, however, constrained
to note that the KIOCL is continuously facing hurdles in implementing
the schemes which resulted in lesser utilization of funds ultimately
telling heavily on its performance. The Committee in their earlier
recommendations had expressed their concern that KIOCL should
utilize the allotted funds to retain its financial strength.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry Should
assist the KIOCL in overcoming the hurdles being experienced in the
completion of schemes envisaged for the year 2007-08 and provide
additional funds, if required. The Committee also recommended the

29
Ministry to facilitate early merger of KISCO with KIOCL in order to
consolidate its position.
Action Taken
In the Annual Plan 2007-08, there is a provision of Rs. 75 crores
for implementation of various plan schemes which includes Ductile
Iron Spun Pipe Project (DISP), development of permanent railway
siding at Mangalore, construction of bulk material handling facilities
for receipt of iron ore by Rail and other mines development under
Joint Venture with M/s. Steel Authority India Limited (SAIL) through
internal resources of KIOCL. The company has taken steps in the
direction of implementation of these schemes.
The Ministry, based on the powers delegated to Mini Ratna PSEs,
authorized KIOCL for merger of KISCO (a JV company) in May, 2006.
The Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) vide its
order dated 18.6.2007 and 18.7.2007 has also approved the merger of
KISCO with KIOCL with effect from 1.4.2007. KIOCL has also filed
the copies of BIFR order with Registrar of Companies and other
concerned agencies and published the Notice of Merger in the
newspapers. Concurrent Auditors as per BIFR directives have also been
appointed.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 5.5.9)
The Committee also noted that the NMDC had been exploring for
diamonds in India to continue its presence in diamond market. The
Committee felt that keeping in view the demand for diamond and
competition from the private companies, it is crucial for NMDC to
retain its market share for substantial growth. The Committee, therefore,
recommended the NMDC to expedite the process of exploration for
diamonds not only in India and also abroad. The Committee also
desired the NMDC to work in close coordination with Geological
Survey of India (GSI) and Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd (MECL)
in this regard.
Action Taken
1. Based on the results of R.P works in Kalyandurg of
Anantapur Distt. of Andhra Pradesh, NMDC had applied
for 8 Prospective licenses covering an area of 123.293 sq.m
which are at various stages of processing. Meanwhile ground

30
magnetic data interpretation is under progress. Besides
application for 2nd renewal of the Prospective License at
Chigicherla in Anantpur district of Andhra Pradesh has been
filed which is in advance stages of process.
2. Mining Lease applications are filed for areas in Anumpalle
and Chigicherla areas in Anantpur distt. of Andhra Pradesh
and the applications are pending with DMG, Hyderabad
and the matter is being pursued.
3. The observation of the committee for expediting the process
of exploration for diamonds not only in India and also
abroad and also to work in close coordination with GSI
and MECL have been noted by NMDC for compliance.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 21, Para No. 6.9)
The Committee also noted that the Ministry had no mechanism to
monitor the participation of steel companies especially steel PSUs in
various programmes like Bharat Nirman Programme and National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme, etc. The Committee felt that
effective participation of steel companies in general and steel PSUs in
particular in the national programmes would not only stimulate
consumption of steel but also help the PSUs to increase their production
as envisaged in the National Steel Policy.
The Committee, therefore, desired that the steel producers
particularly steel PSUs should effectively participate in the national
programmes and give priority in supplying the steel products to the
rural areas. The Committee further desired the Ministry to monitor
the participation of steels PSUs in the national programmes.
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and
conveyed for compliance to all the major domestic steel producers.
Further, SAIL and RINL have been directed to furnish a report on
quarterly basis regarding their participation in the national programmes
like Bharat Nirman Programme and National Rural Employment
Guarantee Programme etc.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]

31
Recommendation (Sl.No. 23, Para No. 6.14)
The Committee noted that the creation and development of the
infrastructure viz. Power, Railways, Highways and Ports were of
paramount importance in sustaining the growth of steel sector.
However, considering the huge size of investment involved, it was not
feasible to develop all the required infrastructure either by Government
or by steel producers except through Public Private Partnerships(PPPs)
which benefits all stake-holders. The Committee further noted that
steel PSUs viz. Steel Authority of India Ltd (SAIL) and Rashtriya Ispat
Nigam Ltd (RINL) were developing infrastructure through PPPs. The
SAIL had entered into agreement with the Railways for availability of
wagons and also planned to take part in the dedicated Eastern Freight
Corridor Project. While RINL had participated in developing a minor
port at Gangavaram, Andhra Pradesh, the SAIL was also exploring
the possibilities of developing the same port.
The Committee observed that infrastructure bottlenecks particularly
in transportation was a key concern for movement of raw material.
Hence, it was imperative to improve rail and road linkages between
mines and steel plants as well as strengthening port infrastructure.
The Committee while welcomed the initiatives of steel PSUs viz. SAIL
and RINL, they were of the strong view that since more private
companies were effectively developing the infrastructure through PPPs,
the steel PSUs had to do a lot more in this regard.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the steel
PSUs should strive to reap the benefits of PPPs in developing the
infrastructure in order to minimize their overall cost of transportation
and improve their competitive edge in steel sector.
Action Taken
Development of infrastructure viz. power, railways, highways and
ports is a crucial element for achieving the targets as set in the
expansion plan of SAIL. The PPP route is already being explored by
SAIL. SAIL has already participated in the SPV formed for development
of Paradip-Haridaspur railway line. Any other opportunity may also
be utilized by SAIL if found suitable.
Ministry of Steel has commissioned its Economic Research Unit
(ERU) to undertake a study of the status of infrastructure as well as
augmentation requirements in terms of road and rail networks, ports
and the water sector in various steel-producing States. The objective
of the study is to evaluate the state of infrastructure preparedness and

32
the additional investments required in the context of the announced
investment plans of private and public sector steel producers. Since a
number of fresh investments are proposed in the State of Orissa, it is
proposed to commence the study with the State of Orissa. This Ministry
had stipulated that the study may encompass the States of Orissa,
Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh.
An initiative has been taken by Ministry of Steel for setting up of
a Coordination-Committee comprising representatives from
M/o Railways, Steel and PSUs under M/o Steel for discussing issues
such as augmentation of railway infrastructure, tariff issues and other
specific problems.
Ministry of steel has with the approval of the Competent Authority
transferred 1400 acres of land to the State Government of Andhra
Pradesh (AP) for development of Minor Port at Gangavaram in AP .
The port is presently under construction. RINL being a shore based
integrated steel plant is expected to reap the benefits of the Gangavaram
port by saving on cost of the transportation. The development of
Gangavaram port apart from developing infrastructure in the area may
also help in RINL in cutting down delays in its exports and imports.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25, Para No. 6.19)
The Committee noted that the availability of critical raw materials
like iron ore, coking and non-coking coal, etc. was vital for the growing
needs of steel sector. To ensure this, the Ministry of Steel had identified
inter-alia the major thrust areas for 11th Plan viz. changes in policy
and institutional set up, adopting new technologies to improve material
efficiencies and use indigenous raw materials. The Committee further
noted that in the Budget 2007-08 Rs.300 per mt had been imposed as
export duty on iron ore to conserve iron ore for domestic industry in
future.
The Committee felt that imposing duty on export of iron ore was
a significant step for fulfilling the long-term requirements of domestic
steel industry. The Committee had along been emphasizing that the
Ministry should encourage setting up of capacity and adoption of
technologies for utilizing the iron ore fines which were mostly exported.
The Committee, therefore, reiterated their earlier recommendation
that the export of iron ore should be gradually stopped altogether in
the longer interest of domestic steel industry.

33
The Committee also desired the Ministry to encourage steel
companies to absorb new and emerging technologies for use of iron
ore fines and also improving the material efficiency.
Action Taken
The policy regarding export of iron ore is under consideration of
the Government.
Economic Research Unit, Ministry of Steel had prepared a
discussion paper for encouraging utilization of iron ore fines in the
country, incorporating inputs from the steel and mining industry . The
paper identifies measures for encouraging utilization of iron ore fines
in the country. This discussion paper has been sent to Prime Minister’s
Office and a copy of this has also been sent to Ministry of Mines,
Deptt. of Revenue, Deptt. of Commerce and Planning Commission for
necessary action.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26, Para No. 6.21)
The Committee found that following de-regulation of prices for
integrated steel plants in 1991-92, the domestic prices of steel had
become market determined. The Committee noted that the Ministry of
Steel had set up a “Steel Pricing Monitoring Committee (SPMC)” with
the participation of all major steel producers and steel consumers to
monitor steel price. The Committee also noted that the SPMC would
function as a watchdog and oversee that a free and fair environment
prevails in the market.
The Committee observed that the constitution of SPMC was a step
in the right direction in monitoring steel price and to make the steel
products available in domestic market at an affordable price. The
Committee, however, felt that rise in cost of critical inputs such as
indigenous coal and dolomite, increase in demurrage rates, freight rates
on iron ore and fluxes had a major say in fixation of steel price.
The Committee were, therefore, of the strong view that there should
be a mechanism for negotiation between the major producers, raw
material suppliers and the Ministry of Railways to facilitate the steel
producers in containing the steel price at the reasonable level.
The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to broaden
the structure of SPMC by induction of representatives of raw material

34
suppliers like National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC) and
Coal India Ltd.(CIL), etc and the Ministry of Railways for effective
coordination between them in order to curb the irrational escalation in
steel price.
Action Taken
In pursuance of the recommendation of the Standing Committee
Ministry of Steel invited Ministry of Railways, Coal India Ltd. and
NMDC to participate in the 3rd meeting of the Steel Price Monitoring
Committee (SPMC) held on 08.06.2007. Ministry of Railways and
NMDC participated in the meeting alongwith other existing members
and were co-opted as members of the SPMC.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27, Para No. 6.24)
The Committee had been informed that some steel producers show
lower output figures to evade duties and some other taxes. In this
regard the Ministry had informed the Committee that receipts were
almost 100 per cent for all segments except sponge iron, induction
furnace and re-rolling segment. In order to minimize any lesser
reporting of production figures, Joint Plant Committee (JPC), functioning
under the Ministry of Steel undertook periodical surveys for complete
enumeration. The Ministry had also constituted an Expert Group to
estimate the production of steel producers and put in place a system
of data collection.
The Committee were anguished to note that the JPC, the only
institution in the country, which was officially empowered to collect
data on the Indian iron and steel industry had no effective mechanism,
since its inception in 1964, to ensure correct reporting of production
data by steel producers. Further, the JPC had failed to mould itself in
keeping pace with changing scenario in steel industry, resulted in not
only loss of exchequer to the Government but also questioned its
efficiency in discharging of key function  i.e. creation and maintenance
of a comprehensive databank of the steel industry.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should
strengthen the JPC to monitor and inspect the reporting of production
data of steel producers. The committee also desired the Ministry to
expedite the task of Expert Group and the Committee may be appraised
of progress in this regard.

35
Action Taken
The Joint Plant Committee (JPC) was set up in 1964 for taking
over the functions of the Iron & Steel Controller in regard to planning
and distribution of indents and rolling programmes. The role of JPC
was revised through a notification issued in 1971. Post liberalization
role of JPC was confined to collection and analysis of data related to
the steel sector. The JPC collected production returns from the main
producers and its data bank was supplemented by the data from the
secondary sector collected by the office of the Development
Commissioner for Iron & Steel (DCI&S), the erstwhile office of the
Iron & Steel Controller.
With the closure of the office of DCI&S in May, 2003, in pursuance
of the recommendations of the Expenditure Reforms Commission (ERC),
the entire responsibility of collection and analysis of data from steel
sector rests with the JPC. Since then, JPC has been collecting and
maintaining a data base on the entire iron and steel industry. The data
from main producers is received by JPC timely and without any hassle.
However, due to heterogeneous nature of secondary steel sector, JPC
faces problems in collection of data from secondary sector. The absence
of a regulatory framework prompted a modest percentage of units in
the secondary sector to display considerable reluctance to submit data
to JPC and thereby default on submission, some on a regular basis.
Though statutory powers to collect data are put in place, yet it suffered
from weak penal clauses (Provisions of section 24 of the Industries
Development and Regulations Act, 1951 apply on failure to submit
production returns) and which were difficult to implement, given the
industrial/economic order of the day. At the same time, no suitable
measures could be adopted by JPC for undertaking technical inspection
of steel units and the facilities therein, to ensure the accuracy of the
collected data. The deregulated industrial framework made such a step
difficult to implement either voluntary or officially. The net result was
that, in case of secondary sector JPC has to rely on voluntary
submission of data by the units to a considerable extent. JPC through
painstaking efforts has now built up a database on the secondary steel
structure in the country, which is the only official database of its kind.
As regards strengthening of the JPC, it is stated that with the
deletion of iron and steel from the list of essential commodities under
the Essential Commodities Act, 1956, the Iron and Steel (Control) Order,
1955 has been repealed, recently. The JPC which itself was set up
under Iron & Steel (Control) Order is undergoing restructuring. Ministry
will consider the strengthening of JPC.

36
An Expert Committee with members from main producers, steel
associations and experts etc. was constituted in the Ministry to identify
and estimates the under reporting of the Induction Furnace segment
and also to put in place a system of data collection to minimize under
reporting on a regular basis.
The Expert Committee had estimated a capacity of 18.7 MT and a
production of 13.5 MT for the Induction Furnace segments against JPC
estimated capacity of 13.2 MT and production of 8.6 MT respectively
during 2005-06 by the voluntary submission of return approach. The
difference accounted for the year 2005-06 between JPC and Expert
Committee Estimates was, however, completely adjusted after
elimination of the double counting from the JPC database on apparent
consumption of finished steel.
On the basis of the findings, the Ministry has directed JPC to
update the data series from 1992-93. Accordingly, data worked out by
JPC in terms of production of crude steel, finished steel and apparent
consumption from 1992-93 onwards, placed before the representatives
of the Industry, was accepted in a meeting convened in the Ministry.
Thereafter, final report submitted by the JPC has been approved by
the Ministry. JPC has now in the process of publication and release of
new data services.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]

37
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 5.4.9)
The Committee noted that installed capacity of Pelletisation Plant
and Concentrate Plant of the KIOCL had been reduced from 4 MT to
3.5 MT and from 5.5 MT to 3.1 MT respectively in the 2005-06 in
pursuance of the directives of Hon’ble Supreme Court to stop mining
at Kudremukh. The KIOCL had, therefore, switched over from
magnetite ore to hematite ore to continue the operation of Pellet Plant.
However, the Pellet Plant was facing operational problems as the plant
is designed for use of magnetite ore. Though the KIOCL had taken
several steps to modify the technology so as to use hematite ore in
pellet making but no progress had been achieved so far.
The Committee was unhappy to note that the KIOCL had not
been able to procure alternate technology to use hematite ore resulting
in under utilisation of Pellet Plant. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that the KIOCL should make sincere efforts to explore
the suitable technology to use hematite ore in pellet making and
improve the capacity utilisation of the plant during 2007-08 itself.
Action Taken
As per the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court given in October
2002, the mining operations at Kudremukh have been stopped with
effect from 31st December 2005. The Company initially procured some
quantity of Hematite ore in sizes suitable as pellet feed and the same
was blended with Magnetite concentrate from Kudremukh. Large-scale
procurement was not feasible, as the size of the ore was larger than
the pellet feed whereas the grinding facilities are located at Kudremukh,
and the filtration facilities are located at Mangalore.
The Company has taken timely action to shift Ball Mills from
Kudremukh to Mangalore to take care of the requirement of grinding
of ore to be procured from outside. Further, based on the
recommendations of M/s. Met-Chem, Canada (Consultant) and
considering the ecological impact in a high sensitive area of Mangalore

38
and also with a view to achieve cost reduction, KIOCL shifted the
existing ball mills available in Kudremukh to Mangalore for wet process
of grinding. However, due to clayey nature of the ore available from
NMDC, Donimalai, initially the company faced tremendous difficulties
in wet grinding as well as filtration due to generation of higher quantity
of slimes. Several in-house modifications were carried out such as
modification of grinding circuit, introduction of screens, installation of
Cyclones etc., from time to time. The Company also took the help of
M/s. Met-Chem, Canada for testing ore at M/s. COREM Laboratory,
Canada, M/s. RRL (a CISR unit, now known as Institute of Minerals
and Materials Technology, Bhubneshwar), M/s. KHD, West Germany
and certain other academic experts like IIT, etc. After receipt of test
reports/recommendations of the Consultant, further corrective steps
will be taken to improve capacity utilization in Pellet Plant. Since this
is a new process altogether, the stabilization of process has taken some
time and it is considered a normal practice in similar industries.
In the meantime, with the corrective steps taken so far, KIOCL
has achieved production of 195000 tonnes of pellets in October, 2007
against the MoU target of 240000 tonnes for the month (81%).
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 5.5.6)
The Committee noted that the annual plan outlay of the National
Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC) for the year 2007-08 had
been increased to Rs.250 crore from Rs.150 crore in BE/RE 2006-07 for
implementing ongoing AMR/R&D schemes, etc. and new schemes like
Kumaraswamy iron ore project, Bailadila deposit-11B and Wind Mill
in Karnataka. The Committee were constrained to note that the NMDC
had spent Rs.89.60 crores in 2006-07. The Committee further noted
that the forest clearance for Kumaraswamy iron ore project had been
received in January 2007 but work could not be commenced due to
stay order from Karnataka High Court against lease renewal. However
a sum of Rs. 2 crore had been earmarked for carrying out preliminary
work. For the ongoing schemes i.e. Bailadila Deposit-11B and Wind
Mill in Karnataka, a sum of Rs. 55 crore and Rs. 50 crore respectively
had been allotted for the year 2007-08.
The Committee felt that implementation of these schemes were
essential to improve performance of the NMDC and were unhappy to
note that an amount of barely Rs. 89.60 crore could be spent thereby
hampering the progress of the schemes. The Committee, therefore,

39
desired the NMDC to make all out efforts for getting stay vacated in
the Kumaraswamy Iron ore Project and expedite the progress of other
ongoing schemes for better utilization of funds.
Action Taken
1. Utilization of funds during 2006-07 :  The amount of utilization
of Rs 89.60 crores as stated above was upto February 2007 only. The
total utilization of funds during the year 2006-07 is Rs 112.75 crores as
against the RE 2006-07 of Rs. 150 crores. Thus the actual ultilization
of funds during the year 2006-07 is 75% of the RE.
2. Kumaraswamy iron ore project :  The work of Kumaraswamy
iron ore project could not be speeded up as M/s. Deccan Mining
Syndicate has brought a stay order from the Karnataka High Court
against the renewal of lease in favour of NMDC. Govt. of Karnataka
and NMDC have approached the High Court for vacation of stay.
Decision of the High Court of Karnataka is awaited.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 5.5.8)
The Committee noted that the National Mineral Development
Corporation (NMDC) was the single largest producer of diamond in
the country. However, the Mining activities at Diamond Mining Project
(DMP), Panna were stopped w.e.f. 22.8.2005 following the directives of
Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board. The issue was pending before
the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to take up the issue
at the highest level with the State Government of Madhya Pradesh in
consultation with the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) to
arrive at an amicable solution including out of court settlement, if
possible.
Action Taken
It is stated that the matter is presently sub judice before the Hon’ble
Supreme Court and administrative intervention at the level of Ministry
of Steel is not possible. The mining operations at the project were
stopped w.e.f. 22.8.2005 and subsequently the plant operations were
also stopped from 19.04.06 as desired by the Central Empowered
Committee constituted by Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon’ble
Supreme Court had heard the case on different dates and the last

40
hearing was on 2.11.2007. On 2.11.2007 the case has been adjourned to
22.01.2008. Matter pending in Hon’ble Supreme Court.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 5.5.12)
The Committee noted that the State Government of Chhattisgarh
had recommended certain areas earlier held by the National Mineral
Development Corporation (NMDC) in Bailadila Deposit No.1 and 3
for the grant of prospective licence for iron ore in favour of
M/s. Essar Steel (Chhattisgarh) and M/s. Tata Iron and Steel Ltd.,
where the NMDC was also one of the applicants, for the reasons that
the NMDC did not carry out any mining activities in the area. M/s.
Essar Steel and M/s. Tata Iron and Steel Ltd. had signed an MoU
with the State Government for setting up of a Steel Plant and to
generate employment opportunity in the State. The Ministry of Mines
had also conveyed its approval to the above proposals of the State
Government subject to outcome of revision applications filed by the
NMDC against the approval given by the Ministry in favour of
M/s. Essar Steel.
The Committee observed that the application of the NMDC had
not been considered by the State Government for the reason that it
had no schemes for value addition in Chhattisgarh. The Committee
were distressed to note that both the State Government and the
Ministry of Mines had completely ignored the fact that the NMDC
had plans for setting up of Pelletisation unit, Sponge iron unit and
integrated steel plant in Chhattisgarh. The request of the Ministry of
Steel in this regard had also remained unheeded in the Ministry of
Mines. The Committee felt that lack of coordination between the
Ministries of Mines and Steel and ore rich State Governments had not
only resulted into deprivation of mining lease held by the NMDC but
also delayed in approval of mining leases applied by PSUs in various
States.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Steel
in coordination with Ministry of Mines and the NMDC took up the
matter at highest level with the State Government of Chhattisgarh for
review of mining leases recently granted, particularly those earlier held
by the NMDC, in view of its massive value addition proposals in the
State.
Action Taken
It may be stated that the matter pertaining to Bailadila deposit
1 and 3 has already been taken up by Ministry of Steel with Ministry

41
of Mines at various levels including that at the level of Minister for
Chemicals and Fertilizers and Steel with Minister for Mines and
Secretary (Steel) with Chief Secretary (Chhattisgarh). In-spite of all these
correspondences at the highest level, Ministry of Mines granted prior
approval for grant of Deposit 1 and 3 to M/s. Tata Steel and
M/s. Essar respectively subject to decision of the mining tribunal on
the revision applications filed by NMDC. In both the cases, NMDC
filed Revision Applications against the decision of the State Government
before the Mining Tribunal in the Ministry of Mines. NMDC has also
filed cases in the Delhi High Court on 30.10.2007 against the decision
of Ministry of Mines to grant prior approval to Chhattisgarh
Government for grant of Bailadila Deposit-1 and 3, after taking due
approval of Committee on Disputes(CoD) in this regard. Meanwhile
on 2.11.2007 Mining tribunal in the Ministry of Mines has passed its
order on the three Revision applications filed by NMDC with regard
to Bailadila Deposit-3. The Mining Tribunal in its order has upheld
the orders of the State Government of Chhattisgarh regarding Bailadila
Deposit-3 and has dismissed the Revision Applications filed by NMDC.
The case filed by NMDC with regard to Bailadila Deposit-3 has been
admitted by the Delhi High Court in its hearing held on 14.11.2007.
The case filed by NMDC with regard to Bailadila Deposit-1 came up
for hearing in the Delhi High Court on 15.11.2007. Next date of hearing
has been fixed on 22.11.2007 with direction to file rejoinder within one
week to the replies of Govt. of Chhattisgarh and M/s. Tata Steel filed
on 14.11.2007. Therefore, both the matters of Bailadila deposit 1 and 3
are now in the realm of judicial review before the Delhi High Court.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]

42
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.5)
The Committee noted that the Ministry had set the targets for
Finished Steel, Alloy Steel and Stainless Steel, etc. for 11th Plan based
on certain assumptions like 9 per cent GDP growth during 11th plan,
progress of expansion projects, etc. The Committee further noted that
demand and availability of Flat product of Finished steel for the year
2007-08 would be 27.56-28.40 million tonnes (mt.) and 25.60 mt.
respectively, leaving a marginal short-fall in availability of around 3
mt. It was also projected that export of Finished Steel by 2011-12 would
be between 10-14 mt., higher than the growth rate of 13 per cent per
annum envisaged in the National Steel Policy (NSP). But the Ministry
had no plan of action to achieve the export target during 11th Plan.
The Committee were in agreement with the contention of the
Ministry that since the steel sector is cyclical and being driven by
market forces, it was difficult to set the targets. But they were of the
view that steel sector could capitalize the growing potential of domestic
economy, if there was a suitable mechanism to execute the goals
envisaged in NSP in true spirit.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should
prepare a comprehensive strategy for each year of 11th Plan to achieve
the ambitious goals of NSP . The Committee also desired that the
Ministry should take corrective measures at the appropriate time and
ensure that there was no shortfall in achievement of target fixed for
11th Plan.
Action Taken
Export Projection :  The export projections given in the Eleventh
Plan document are not ‘targets’ but are export possibilities given a
domestic demand ranging between 72 and 78 million tonnes. In India,
exports always take place after meeting the domestic demand. The
10-14 million tonnes of exports are shown merely as possible exportable
surplus and not ‘targets’. As a matter of fact, in the last three years

43
as domestic demand grew by 10%, 14% and 11%, net exports
(Exports-Imports) fell from a high of 3.5 Million Tonnes (2003-04) to a
mere 0.5 Million Tonnes (2006-07). This happened because exports
stagnated while imports increased almost four-fold. The primary goal
of the Indian steel industry is to meet the requirements of a fast
paced growth in the domestic steel-consuming sectors.
Moreover, export are taking place because of the inherent cost
competitiveness of Indian steel and not because of any specific export
promotion programmes. This is in keeping with the provisions of the
multilateral trading regime such as the WTO.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para Nos. 1.19 and 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 6.12)
The Committee noted that the National Steel Policy (NSP) sets out
a road map for the domestic steel sector towards reform, restructure
and globalisation. The domestic steel sector had two sub-sector namely,
the large scale integrated units and small size secondary steel units
includes Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). SMEs produced
finished steel products from semis were meeting the local demand as
they were widely dispersed. The Committee also noted that some of
the SMEs which were closed down in later 90’s had been refurbished
and proliferated following upswing in the steel sector.
The Committee further noted that the Ministry of Steel had
proposed a token amount of Rs.10 crore for a new scheme viz.
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for SMEs in the 11th
Plan. But the Planning Commission had not approved due to pending
finalisation of scheme by the Ministry.
The Committee observed that the SMEs were occupying a central
place in fulfilling the local demand considering their wide geographical
dispersion. The Committee also observed that the growing
competitiveness in steel sector with the latest technology, massive
capacity addition and expanding network would force a formidable
threat to SMEs. The Committee felt that keeping in view the role
being played by SMEs in the country by meeting the local demands,
they desired the Ministry to strengthen them by providing necessary
infrastructure and fulfilling their various requirement like raw material
through Small Scale Industries Corporation to derive the benefits of
proposed technology upgradation.

44
Action Taken
In pursuance of the recommendations made by the Working Group
on Iron & Steel for the 11th Five Year Plan. Ministry of Steel has
proposed formation of a Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS)
for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) with the proposed token
outlay of Rs.10 crore over the 11th Five-Year Plan Period i.e.
2007—2012. Planning Commission is of the view that replication of
the scheme on the pattern of TUFS would not be encouraged in other
sectors of the industry.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 1.25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24, Para No. 6.15)
The Committee noted that steel was one of the six sectors that
figure in the index of industrial production for “infrastructure” but
the fiscal incentives available to the infrastructure projects were not
available to the steel industry. The Committee felt that providing
suitable fiscal incentives to the steel industry was absolutely necessary
to mobilize vast resources to achieve the strategic goal of 110 mt. of
steel production by 2019-20. The Committee were surprised to note
that the Ministry had not proposed any schemes for providing fiscal
incentives to the steel sector during 11th Plan.
The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to approach
the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission with the details of
schemes to provide suitable fiscal incentives for steel industry during
11th Plan itself.
Action Taken
Fiscal Incentives to Steel as an ‘Infrastructure’ Industry:  The
Ministry of Steel has made several attempts to get steel industry
classified as an ‘Infrastructure’ industry so that this industry also get
accelerated benefits accorded to the infrastructure industries. But its
proposals have not found favour with the Finance Ministry .
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 1.29 of Chapter-I of the Report)

45
 CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.8)
The Committee noted that the National Steel Policy (NSP) had
envisaged to achieve indigenous production of 110 million tonnes (mt.)
per annum by 2019-20 from 38 mt. in 2004-05. To achieve this objective,
it was necessary to create required infrastructure for steel industry as
well as increase per capita consumption of steel. In this regard, the
Ministry of Steel had constituted several task force and study
committees to take care of the facilities required for development of
domestic steel sector and launched National Steel Promotion Campaign
on 20.03.2007 to create consumer awareness with a focus on rural
area. The Committee further noted that the major steel producers
proposes to make steel available in rural areas by selling steel at the
same price as applicable in Metros, developing “Model Steel Villages”
and producing new steel grades.
The Committee felt that promotion of steel usage was quite
important to attain the goals envisaged in NSP . The Committee
observed that the biggest challenge in achieving the desired level of
consumption was removing the wide disparity between urban and
rural areas. Though the major steel producers and the Ministry had
resolved to address this disparity, the Committee were, however,
constrained to note that the Ministry had not facilitated steel producers
in assessing the demand of steel in rural areas in order to produce the
same.
The Committee believed that identifying the products required in
rural areas would immensely help the steel producers. The Committee,
therefore, desired the Ministry to conduct a survey immediately through
the Institute of Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG) to assess
the demand of steel in rural areas.
Action Taken
Institute of Steel Development & Growth (INSDAG) have intimated
that neither they have ever undertaken such a survey nor do they
have the requisite expertise for such work and have therefore suggested

46
that an agency with the desired competence may be hired for the
survey. The response from INSDAG is under examination/
consideration.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014(5)/2007 Parl., dated 22.11.2007]
 N EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December, 2007 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

47
ANNEXURE I
TARGET AND ACHIEVEMENT OF INTERNAL AND EXTRA
BUDGETARY RESOURCES (IEBR) OF STEEL PSUs
DURING 10TH PLAN
(Rs. in crore)
No. Name Target of 10th Actual Percentage Percentage Reasons for shortfall
of PSU PSU for Plan IEBR of of in the utilisation of
generation approved utilization utilization shortfall 10th Plan outlay
of IEBR component during in in
during of outlay the relation utilization
10th to be 10th to
Plan financed Plan approved
by IEBR outlay
(Revised)
12 345 67 8
1. SAIL 5,000.00 3700.00 3172.98 85.76% 14.24% The m inor shortfall is
due to delay in design &
engineering, equipment
supply by contractors,
firming up the cost of
schemes/projects and in
civil & structural work.
2. NMDC 3,615.74 2660.00 458.96 17.25% 82.75% Delay in getting forest
clearance/ environmental
clearance for the
company’s schemes/
projects from the
Central/ State authorities
and weeding out of
certain schemes like
NMDC Iron & Steel Plant
due to lack of viable
technology.
3. KIOCL 594.27 200.00 81.61 40.81% 59.19% As per Hon’ble Supreme
Court’s directive, mining

48
12 345 6 7 8
had to be stopped at
Kudremukh by the end
of Dec., 2005, which
adversely affected the
Plan schemes of KIOCL
resulting in reduced
expenditure on Plan
schemes. Utilisation of
Plan funds has also
suffered due to dispute
over land allotted to the
company, lack of mining
lease with the company
for Other Mine
Development scheme and
delay in formation of
joint venture.
4. RINL 5,639.31 1219.65 705.51 57.84% 42.16% Delay by Original
Equipment Manufacturers
(OEM) and suppliers
affecting implementation
of AMR schemes; delay
in approval from the
Govt. for COB-4 and
capacity expansion
schemes resulting in
envisaged plan expendi-
ture not taking place and
non-allotment of Iron Ore
and Coking coal mines
due to state policies of
allotment of mines only
on the basis of value
addition within the states.
5. MOIL 158.00 100.23 128.62 128.32% Nil Not Applicable.
6. MSTC 72.82 30.00 19.15 63.83% 36.17% Scheme for setting up of
stockyard did not
materialize due to non-
allocation of land at
Haldia for the scheme.

49
12 345 6 7 8
7. FSNL 64.00 56.00 69.33 123.80% Nil Not Applicable.
8. SIIL 25.00 25.00 7.28 29.12% 70.88% No expenditure could be
incurred on the capacity
expansion of Sponge Iron
plant because SIIL was
listed for disinvestment
till 2004-05, and thereafter
due to proposed merger
of SIIL with NMDC.
9. Bird Group 107.80 107.80 33.66 31.22% 68.78% Poor financial
(Govt. performance of 3 out of
managed 4 companies under Bird
company) Group, uncertainty in the
renewal of leases and
changes in the
administrative set up at
the top level hampered
initiation of new
projects/ schemes.
10. MECON 53.49 0.00 20.14 — Nil Against I&EBR
generation target of Rs.
53.49 crore, the company
generated Rs. 48.52 cr.
This minor shortfall of
Rs. 4.97 crore is due to
recession in the steel
sector during the initial
period of 10th Plan.
11. HSCL 0.00 3.00 0.00 0% 100% Due to continuous losses
the company could not
generate any IEBR during
10th Plan for expenditure
on Plan schemes.
12. BRL 10.00 10.00 0.00 0% 100% Due to losses the
company could not
generate any IEBR during
10th Plan for expenditure
on Plan schemes.

50
ANNEXURE II
SCHEMES/PROJECTS OF PSUS SPILLING OVER TO 11TH PLAN
FROM 9TH/10TH PLAN AND LIKELY TO BE COMPLETED
AFTER 2008-09
Sl. Name of PSU Estimated/ Remarks/Reasons for
No. and Scheme/ Sanctioned cost completion of scheme
Project of the Scheme extending beyond 2008-09
(Rs. in crore)
12 3 4
1. KIOCL
(i) Other Mine 145.00 As per the directive of
Development Hon’ble Supreme Court,
KIOCL had to stop mining
activities at Kudremeukh w.e.f.
31.12.2005. For sustained
growth of the company and
keeping in view the good
market potential and demand
for iron ore concentrate and
pellets, it became necessary
for the company to explore
alternate deposits for long
term operations. In this
direction, the company had
also applied to Govt. of
Karnataka for grant of mining
lease in Tumkur and Bellary
district of Karnataka.
An MoU has been entered
into with SAIL for formation
of Jt. Venture company for
mining and related activities
to develop and work on
Taldih along with Barsua and
Kalta. However, the mining
lease has not been renewed
in favour of SAIL by the
State Government. Govt. of

51
Karnataka in principle has
agreed to allot 50% of
Ramanadurg mine in Bellary
district to KIOCL. Matter is
being followed up with the
State Government.
It would take about 4/5 years
to start production once
mining lease and all other
clearances are available. The
anticipated date of completion
of the scheme can be
indicated once the mining
lease is available.
(ii) Ductile Iron Spun 225.00 The initial proposal was to set
Pipe Plant (DISP Plant) up the plant as a JV with
KISCO. During 2001, global
tender inviting offers for
setting up of DISP plant on
turnkey basis was floated by
KISCO. However, due to
funds constraint and concern
for giving priority to KIOCL’s
survival (following banning of
mining at Kudremenkh from
31.12.2005), the setting up of
DISP Plant was deferred.
KISCO on stand alone basis
is not in a position to raise
finance for implementation of
DISP project and hence
merger of KISCO with KIOCL
was proposed. Orders from
BIFR in respect of the
proposed merger is awaited.
KIOCL is executing DISP
project and Engineering
Consultancy contract has
already been awarded to
M/s MECON.
It would not be possible for
the completion of DISP within
12 3 4

52
12 3 4
2007-08 since it would take
about 24 months from date of
ordering etc.
2. NMDC
(i) Bailadila Deposit 11B 295.89 As the various clearances for
the projects could be obtained
only by October, 2006, starting
of the project got delayed. The
Zero date of the Project was
announced as 1st January,
2007.
MECON has been appointed
as the consultants. Civil works
have already started. The
other packages will be
awarded in the year 2007-08.
Hence the project cannot be
completed in the FY 2007-08.
The expected completion date
of the Project is October, 2009.
(ii) Kumaraswamy Iron 296.03 Project delayed due to delay
Ore Project in receipt of environment and
forest clearance. Final
clearance was received in
January, 2007 only.
MECON has been appointed
as the consultant and
finalization of tender
documents for various
packages is in progress.
However, Karnataka High
Court has imposed stay on
the renewal of the mining
lease which is yet to be
disposed. Tree falling clearance
is awaited. Subject to clearance
and vacation of stay by the
Hon’ble High Court of
Karnataka by 2007-08, the
project will be completed
during 11th Plan period.

53
12 3 4
(iii) Investment in 300.00 A provision of Rs. 300.00 crore
other JVs Deposit-13 was made in 10th Plan for
development of Deposit-13.
However the same could not
be materialized.
The project is now planned as
a JV Project with Chhattisgarh
Mineral Development
Corporation Ltd. The process
of finalization of JV Company
is in progress.
(iv) Development of 25.00 A provision of Rs. 25.00 crore
Rawghat—Jagdalpur was made for NMDC’s share
Railway Line towards the development of
the Railway Line in the 10th
Plan but no utilization has
been made.
Rawghat-Jagdalpur Railway
Line is supposed to be taken
up in Phase-II by Indian
Railways, which may start the
work after completion of
Phase-I of linking Rawghat
with Bhilai. Now a provision
of Rs. 200.00 crore towards
NMDC’s share in the project
has been made in the 11th
Plan (starting from the year
2009-10 onwards). No
allocation has been made for
2007-08.
3. SAIL
IISCO Steel Plant— 416.50 The scheme was sanctioned in
Rebuilding of COB-10 Mar ch, 2007 i.e. in the last
month of the 10th Plan
period. The scheduled date of
completion of the scheme is
September, 2009.

54
ANNEXURE-III
MINUTES OF THE  THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2007-08) HELD ON
5.12.2007 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya —Chairman
Members
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Hiten Barman
4. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
5. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
6. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
7. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
9. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla
11. Shri Ali Anwar
12. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
13. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri B.J.Panda
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson, welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the

55
following draft Action Taken Reports:—
(i) ** ** ** **
(ii) ** ** ** **
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twenty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel(2006-07) on
“Demands for Grants (2007-08)” of the Ministry of Steel.
4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor
additions/deletions/amendments.
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports
after making consequential change arising out of factual verification
by the concerned Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses
of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Does not pertain to this Report.

56
ANNEXURE IV
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE  RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY
FIFTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2006-07)
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 27
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been 19
accepted by the Government:
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 21, 23, 25, 26, and 27)
Percentage of total 70.37%
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 4
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 15, 16, 17 and 19)
Percentage of total 14.81%
IV . Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 3
replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 6, 22 and 24)
Percentage of total 11.11%
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 1
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 20)
Percentage of total 3.70%