 
12 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL  
(2005-2006) 
 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2005-2006)  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
TWELFTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2005 / Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 

TWELFTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL 
(2005-2006) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2005-2006)  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.12.2005 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on   22.12.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2005 / Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 
 

CC&S No. 13  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.18.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure a nd Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110005. 

CONTENTS 
  
              
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………………. 
 
 
(iii)
 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………... …………………………………………. (v) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report   ………………………………………………….. 1 
   
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………………. 
 
 15
  
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies…………………………………. 
 
27 
  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee………………………….. 
 
29 
  
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited…… 
 
33 
  
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
I.  Minutes of Fourth  sitting of  the Standing Commi ttee on Coal and 
Steel (2005-06) held on 21st December, 2005…………………………..
 
 
34 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of  the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel…………. ………………………………... 
 
  
36 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2005-06)          
 
Shri Ananth Kumar    - Chairman  
 Members 
            
           Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey 
6. Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
7. Shri Sunil Khan 
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
9. Shri Nitish Kumar 
10. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam 
11. Shri  Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta 
12. Shri Hemlal Murmu 
13. Shri Anirudh Pras ad Alias Sadhu Yadav 
14. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
16. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
18. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
19. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
20. Shri Ramsevak Singh (Babuji) 
21. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Devdas Apte 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
24. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 

25. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad 
26. Shri B.J.Panda 
27. Shri G.K.Vasan  
28. Dr. Swami Sakshi Ji Maharaj 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Secretary 
2. Shri A.K.Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri R.K.Sharma  - Committee Officer  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and St eel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twelfth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Nin th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Coal and Steel  on “Demands for Grants (2005- 2006) of the Ministry of 
Mines”.  
 
2.  The Ninth Report on the Standi ng Committee on Coal and Steel was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 26 th April, 2005. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in t he Report were received on 20 th September,  
2005.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 21st  December, 2005.   
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Ninth R eport  of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    ANANTH KUMAR, 
21  December, 2005                                      Chairman, 
30  Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 

CHAPTER -I  
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with  Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Coal a nd Steel on “Demands for Grants (2005-
2006) of the Ministry of Mines” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 26.4.2005.    
 
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been rece ived from the Government in respect 
of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorised as follows:  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
   
Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 11, 13, 14,15, 17 and 18.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Sl.Nos.8 and 10.  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee :  
 
SI. Nos. 4, 7 and 16. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government were still awaited :     
 
   Sl. No.12.   
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations  accepted by the Government. In 
case, where it is not possible for the Government to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit fo r any reasons, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation.  
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations made in the Ninth Report. 
 

Plan Outlay  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4 Para No.2.17) 
 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) 
 
1.5 The Committee were constrained to  note that the modernization 
programme of Geological Survey of India (GSI) conceived during the early phase 
of the X th Plan, had not made steady progre ss due to non-availability of 
specialized equipment and s hortage of staff. The Commi ttee further noted that 
the proposals for acquisition of high cost  equipment for offshore Marine Surveys 
Airborne Geophysical Surveys was yet to be cleared by the Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance. The Comm ittee recommended that the Ministry 
should take all possible measures to procure above equipment  in a time bound 
manner lest the modernizati on process of GSI should get further delayed. The 
Committee also desired that shortage of staff in GSI should be met immediately 
to obviate any adverse affect on its functioning.  
 
1.6 The Government have in their reply stated that the Modernisation 
programme of GSI is also constantly m onitored by the Projec t Proposal Review 
Committee [PPRC].  The Committee has  taken so far 7 meetings. The 
Committee, in order to syst ematize the procurement pr ocess and to hasten the 
utilisation of plan fund (under Modernisation Programme) has suggested 
appropriate corrective measures like  constituting an agency responsible for 
GSI’s Heli-borne Survey System and its onboard equipments and inviting 
representatives from HA L and DGCA for detailed discussions on its safety 
aspects, nomination of Sh.G opal Mandal, Stores Officer  as Nodal Enforcement 
Officer (Procurement) to enforce prompt del ivery of equipments, constitution of a 
Modernization Review Committee of DDG level officers to work out the 
modernization plan over and above the requirement of laboratories of GSI, etc. 
 
1.7 As regards the procurement of Ocean going research vessel for GSI, 
Planning Commission had advised this Ministry to submit the proposal in 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) format. The DPR has been  received from GSI 
and is under consideration in the Ministry. 
 
1.8 As regards the procurement of Helib orne Survey System for GSI, Planning 
Commission considered the proposal and advised that the clarifications asked for 
by Planning Commission may be incorpor ated in EFC memo of GSI and a copy 
of which be sent to project Appraisal and Monitoring Division (PAMD) of Planning 
Commission.  GSI vide Ministry’s lette r dated 18.5.2005 has  been requested to 
take urgent necessary action in the matter as per advise of Planning Commission 
and furnish the revised DPR (EFC) to this Ministry for onward submission to 
Planning Commission.  
 

1.9 As regards the procurement of G eotechnical vessel for GSI, on the advice 
of Planning Commission DPR in respec t of Geotechnical vessel, is under 
preparation in GSI.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10 The Committee, while recommending to the Ministry of Mines to take 
all possible measures to procure various equipments for the modernization 
of Geological Survey of India (GSI), had also desired  that shortage of staff 
in GSI should be met immediately. The Ministry in its reply has stated that 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the procurement of ocean going research 
vessel has been received in the Minist ry and was under consideration. 
Regarding procurement of Heliborne Survey System the Ministry has asked 
GSI to furnish revised DPR for onward submission to Planning 
Commission.  So far as the procur ement of Geotechnical Vessel was 
concerned, DPR was under preparation by GSI.  The Committee are 
dismayed  to find the utter lack of ur gency on the part of  the Ministry for 
procurement of critical equipments. The Committee are concerned that the 
process of modernization of GSI a nd its performance  would suffer  
irreparably if the procurement process of  equipments which have already 
been badly delayed are not procured in time. The Committee are of the view 
that if no time schedule is adhered to in this regard, the modernization 
programme may spill over to 11
th Plan since  in about a year or so 10 th Plan 
would come to an end.  The Committee,  therefore, desire the Ministry to 
submit the Detailed Project Report (DPR ) in respect about equipments to 
Planning Commission without any further loss of time and try to compress 
the time required in the entire process.  
 
 The Committee are surprised that  the Ministry has ignored the 
recommendation regarding meeting the shor tages of the staff in GSI.  The 
Committee deprecate this approach of the Ministry and feel that in the 
absence of optimum strength the perf ormance of GSI is destined to 
deteriorate.  The Committee would like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation  and desire that the shor tage of staff in GSI  is urgently 
met to enable  to effectively discharge  its statutory obligations.    
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para No.3.11) 
 
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) 
 
1.11 The Committee noted that the I ndian Bureau of Mines (IBM) performs 
regulatory functions, under the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957, Environmental Protection Act, 1986 and Rules made 
thereunder. IBM also undertakes scientific, techno-economic, research-oriented 
studies in various aspects of Mining geological studies, Ore beneficiation and 
environmental studies besides providing  technical consultancy services to the 
mining industry. For undertaking the abov e activities, an outla y of Rs.103 crore 

was approved for the X th Plan. However, the actual expenditure incurred during 
the first three years of the plan had been Rs. 50.18 crore. The Committee were 
extremely surprised to note that though an amount of Rs .44.89 crore was 
earmarked for new schemes during the plan , not even a single rupee  had been 
spent thereon so far. The Committee, therefore, could not but conclude that 
IBM/Ministry of Mines had made mockery of budgetary proposals by including in 
the Xth Plan ill conceived and infructuous schemes/projects which remained on 
paper only entailing no expenditure at all ev en after lapse of first three years of 
the Plan. The Committee, ther efore, desired the Ministry to look into the matter 
and fix responsibility as to how such sch emes/projects were included in the first 
instance or why no funds could be spent thereon. In case these schemes were 
not likely to fruitify in the coming two y ears, the Ministry shou ld consider utilizing 
these funds on other schemes.  
 
1.12 The Ministry vide its letter No . 2(3)/2001-IF dated 3.6.2002 had conveyed 
the allocation of Rs.103 crore for 10th Plan of IBM as follows: 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 1.  Gross Budgetary Suppor t (GBS)  Rs.103.00 crore  
     i.e. (i) Net Budgetary support (NBS) Rs.53.00 crore  
 (ii) Aid Through Budget   Rs.50.00 crore 
         Total=  Rs.103.00  crore 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
2. Construction activities   Rs. 3.00 crore  
 (Under M/o Urban Development) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
The distribution of the above funds for various schemes and programmes 
is detailed below:  
1.  For four existing  schemes   52.50 crore 
2. Works outlay     00.50 crore 
    Total =  53.00 (NBS) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
IBM –BRGM (Aid through Budget) 
 
i) IBM-BRGM TMIS project   0.6683 
(Balance payment form 9th plan ) 
 
ii) IBM- BRGM Supply of  
Laboratory equipment to IBM.  4.4375 
 
iii) Token Provision for New  
Schemes under BRGM   44.8942 
   Total =  50.00 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Grand Total of 10th Plan outlay:  103.00 crore  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 

 
A Provision of Rs.44.8942 crore have been kept for new scheme under 
BRGM. In the 10 th Plan document of IBM, following new schemes were 
proposed under BRGM (Grant -in-Aid) and submitted to Ministry for 
approval.  
 
IBM- BRGM (Grant-in-Aid Programme) 
 
The following 4 new schemes under IBM- BRGM were proposed.  
 
1) Management of Solid Waste from Mining in India . 
2) Supply of Laborator y Equipment to IBM. 
3) Capacity Building at State Lev el for Mineral Development and 
Environmental Management (renamed as – setting of 
Computerized. On Line Register of Mining Tenements System). 
4) Development of UNFC for Mi neral Resources Management in 
India. 
 
Out of the above 4 schemes, the following 2 schemes were sanctioned 
during the 10 th Plan periods and have been co mpleted and implemented 
successfully. 
 
1) Supply of Laborator y Equipment to IBM. 
Total amount spent  5.72 crore. 
2) Development of UNFC for Mi neral Resources Management in 
India. 
 
No expenditure was incurred under this  project. With the guidance of 
BRGM experts only a software for conv ersion of UNFC system  from Mineral 
Resources Mineral System have been de veloped. BRGM has not charged any 
cost.  
 
 The actual expenditure incurr ed during first 3 years of the 10 th plan in 
respect of general schemes and BRGM projects were given below: 
  
 General 
Schemes  
BRGM (Projects) Total(Rs. Crore) 
2002-03 14.10 1.68 15.78 
2003-04 14.67 1.50 16.17 
2004-05 14.72 3.21 17.93 
Total 43.49 6.39 49.88 
 
1.13 From the above it may kindly be  noted that Rs.49. 88 crore have been 
spent during the first 3 years of 10 th plan which includes  an expenditure of 
Rs.6.39 crore towards BRGM Projects.  

 
1.14 In the 10 th Plan a provision of Rs.50 cror e was kept for BRGM schemes 
under grant in aid. From the above amount, Rs.6.39 (Rs.0.67 crore towards 
balance payment of TIMS Pr ojects and Rs.5.72 crore for supply of laboratory 
equipment to IBM) crore have been spent leaving a balance of Rs.43.61 crore as 
against the provision of Rs.44.89 crore for new schemes as stated earlier.  
 
The other two BRGM projects proposal s which were under consideration 
of the Ministry were: 
 
1. Project on computeris ed on Line Register on Tenements Systems. 
The total cost of the projects is Rs.17.50 crore.  
 
2.  Projects on Managem ent of Solid Waste from Mining in India.  
 
Total  cost of the project is Rs. 30.00 crore.  
 
 The total cost of both the projects – 47.50 crore 
 
The requirement of funds for these projects for the rest of the two years of 
10th plan i.e. 2005-06 and 2006-07 is as follows: 
 2005-06 2006-07 
Project :1 1.00 12.84 
Project:2 15.00 15.00 
Total  16.00 27.84 
 Total  43.84 
 
Balance of Rs. 3.66 crore will spill over to 11th Plan.  
 
1.15 The above mentioned proj ects were discussed in 18 th meeting of Indo-
French Working Group on Mineral Explor ation and Development of the Indo-
French Joint Committee and Technical Cooperation held on 8-9 November, 
2004. BRGM has asked for revised concept document on the project before 
finalising the project proposal. The revised concept has been submitted by IBM 
but BRGM has still not finalized the pr ojects. Since both the projects were 
planned to be served by Aid through Bud get, no funds have been allotted during 
the year 2005-06. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.16 Since the Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) had not incurred any 
expenditure on new projects envisaged in Xth Plan against the allocated 
budget of Rs.44.89 crore, the Committee had desired the Ministry to look 
into the matter and fix responsibility as to why  such schemes/projects 
were included in the first instance and why no fund could be spent thereon. 
The Committee had also desired the Mi nistry to utilize the fund  on other 

schemes in case new projects were not likely to fructi fy in the coming two 
years. The Ministry in its reply has stated that out of four new schemes 
proposed under Bureau  De-Research Geologique Minera l (BRGM) in the 
Xth Plan, the  two schemes viz. supply of laboratory equipments to IBM  
and development of United Nation Fr amework on Classification (UNFC) for 
mineral resources in India  have been  completed and an expenditure of 
Rs.5.72 crore has been incurred thereon. The two other schemes viz. 
Project on Computerized on line Register on Tenements Systems and 
Project on Management of Solid Waste fr om Mining in India at a total cost 
of Rs.47.50 crore are awaiting the Mi nistry’s approval as revised concept 
document submitted by IBM is yet to be finalized by BRGM. The Ministry 
expects to spent nearly Rs.47.50 crore during remaining period of 10th Plan. 
The Committee express their displeasur e at the state of planning in 
Ministry and IBM whereby in total disregard of financial principles, the 
Ministry would spend about 95% of th eir funds earmarked for new projects 
in the last one and half year of 10
th Plan. The Committee, therefore, desire 
the Ministry to expedite these projects for their early completion.  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.7, Para No.3.13) 
 
Illegal Mining 
 
1.17 The Committee were  dismayed to not e that the alarming increase in the 
cases of illegal mining in different St ates resulting in immense loss to the 
National Exchequer. The Committee felt that  IBM could not  absolve itself of the 
responsibility entrusted to it under MMDR Act and therefore strongly recommend 
the IBM/Ministry to pull up the concerned agencies for their failure to stop illegal 
mining. The Committee also desired that the Ministry should take pro-active 
steps by exercising full vigi l and responsibility in terms  of location, detection and 
prosecution to control and prevent such illegal mining.  
 
1.18 The Government in their reply stat ed that the nature of  magnitude of the 
problem of illegal mining activity varies  from State to St ate and States being 
owners of minerals in the lands under their jurisdiction and responsible for 
collection and retention of royalty fr om minerals, the full powers have been 
delegated to the State Gove rnment to form their own rules for curbing illegal 
mining as it makes possible for each St ate Government to address the problem 
of illegal mining in their State by suitably listing out the target  were as depending 
upon the strength of its law and order machinery and revenue implications for the 
State.   
 
1.19 The issue of further delegation of powers to IB M to effectively control 
illegal mining was discussed in the m eeting of the State Governments on 
17.1.2005 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Mines). The State Governments 
were unanimous that further delegati on of powers to IBM would lead to 

duplication of authority and would lead to lack of co-ordination with the State 
Governments. 
 
1.20 However, IBM is being asked to be more vigilant in their inspection to 
check illegal mining activities being ca rried out and bring such  cases to the 
notice of State Government  while carrying out the re sponsibility entrusted to 
them under the Act and Rules there under . As and when the cases of illegal 
mining were brought/come to the notice of  the Ministry/IBM,   the matter is 
immediately taken up with the concerned St ate Government to check and curb 
the illegal mining. At the same time St ate Governments were being asked to 
complete framing of the rules as per the powers given to them under MMDR Act, 
1957 and to intensify their monitoring activity to strictly control any illegal mining. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.21 Keeping in view the rampan t illegal mining taking place with 
impunity in various States, the Committee had recommended to the 
Ministry to take pro-active steps by ex ercising full vigil and responsibility 
in terms of location, detection a nd prosecution to control and prevent 
illegal mining and pull up the concerned agencies for their failure to stop 
illegal mining. The Ministry has stated that the nature and  magnitude of the 
problem of illegal mining activities vary from State to State. Being owner of 
minerals in the land under their jurisdiction and responsible  for collection 
and retention of royalty from minera ls, the State Governments have been 
delegated  the full powers to frame th eir rules for curbing illegal mining. 
The Committee are not convinced  with  the reply of the Ministry and 
strongly feel that Ministry of Mines and IBM cannot absolve themselves  of 
their responsibilities by taking refuge to  the plea of  delegating full powers 
to State Governments. The Committee need not emphasise that under the 
Mines and Minerals Development  and Regulation Act, 1957, the Union 
Government and State Governments have been assigned distinct 
responsibilities, and therefore, the a ttempt of Ministry/IBM to put entire 
blame for illegal mining on State Go vernments is unacceptable.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Mini stry/IBM to gear up and activate their 
machinery and in coordination with th e State Government to take concrete 
measures to detect and prevent illegal mining instead of depending on 
State Governments in this regard.  The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry may set up Monitoring Machin ery at appropriate levels involving 
representatives of Ministry of Mines, IBM, Ministry of Environment and 
Forests and State Governments, etc. to effectively prevent the menace of 
illegal mining.   
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para No.4.21) 
NALCO 
 
1.22 The Committee were informed that X th Plan outlay of Rs.7,056.00 crore for 
NALCO had been revised to Rs.2865.25 cror e in the Mid Term Appraisal due to 
reduced allocation in respect of 2 nd phase expansion,  Qata r project, Coal Mines 
and AMR, etc . The Committee expect that t he  Qatar  project,  a prestigious one 
for NALCO would materialize since the Qatar authorities were showing some 
positive interest and desired th at the Ministry of Mines should further pursue the 
matter with Qatar Authorities.  
 
1.23 The Ministry in their r eply have stated that the  X th Plan outlay of 
Rs.7,056.00 crore for NALCO has been  revised to  Rs.2864.25 crore. 
 
1.24 So far as the year 2004-05 is co ncerned, the BE outlay of Rs.310 crore 
was reduced to Rs.172 crore. The majo r drop in the capital outlay was in 
respect of 2 nd  phase expansion and captive c oal mines allotted wherein the 
outlay has been reduced from Rs.100 crore in BE level to Rs.11 crore in RE 
level. The drop in outlay in respect of  these schemes was because of the delay 
in Government approval to the projec ts. While Government approval to 2 nd  
phase expansion was received in October , 2004, the provisional allotment of 
Utkal E Coal Mines to the Company was received in August, 2004. 
 
1.25 However, hardly any expenditure has been in curred on the proposed 2 nd 
phase expansion and coal mine. The pre-project activities for 2 nd phase 
expansion of int egrated Aluminium Complex has commenced. The consultancy 
contract for integrated Mines, Alumina and Aluminium project has been awarded 
to M/s.EIL on 29.3.2005.  Simi larly the contracts for CPP 9 th and 10 th unit and 
SGP of Alumina Refinery have been awarded in favour of MECON in the last 
week of March, 2005.  The pre-qualification bids in respect of Bauxite Mines, 
Alumina and Smelter Segments of 2 nd  phase expansion have already been 
received and vendor list partly finalised. Some of the proj ect activities like site 
grading and other enabling works have st arted. Few of MRs and technical 
specifications have been finalized. 
 
1.26 As far as Qatar Project is concer ned, originally an outlay of Rs.1573.00 
crore was planned for Xth Plan, which was revised to Rs.10.00 crore in Mid Term 
Appraisal, as local party in Qatar could not finalise the financing arrangements. 
However, Company is exploring possibilities of joint venture in Middle East. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.27 The Committee had noted that  th e Utkal coal block was allocated to 
NALCO to cater to its captive power plant and, therefore, recommended 
that the same should be activated  at the earliest and all necessary 
clearances from different authoriti es should be obtained. The Committee 
had also recommended that the Monitoring mechanism be set up to ensure 
that all the schemes under the 2 nd phase expansion plan are completed 
within the time schedule without any time and cost overrun.  
 

 The Committee are surprised to  find  that Ministry has not replied to 
the above recommendations and, theref ore, extremely unhappy at this 
approach of the Ministry  whereby its has chosen to ignore very significant 
recommendations for setting up monitoring mechanism in NALCO. The 
Committee reiterate their earlier reco mmendations and would like to be 
apprised   of the action taken in this regard within three months.  
 
Recommendation (Sl.Nos.15, 16 &17, Para Nos.6.30, 6.31 & 6.32) 
 
Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) 
 
1.28 The Committee noted an Expert Committee was constituted by the 
Government in June, 1995 to arrest the declining trend in the physico-financial 
performance of the Mineral  Exploration Corporatio n Limited (MECL). The 
recommendations made by the Expert Commi ttee were considered by a Review 
Committee chaired by the Secretary, Ministry of Mines. Most of the 
recommendations of the Review Committee except financial rest ructuring of the 
Company had since been implem ented. As a result of various measures, the 
productivity of the Company had improved. However, the financial performance 
of the Company has not shown the improvement. T he Committee note that a 
revised proposal for financial restructur ing of MECL was under  consideration in 
the Ministry of Mines.  
 
1.29 The Committee were extremely concer ned that in spite of various policy 
measures taken by the Government, the physico- financial performance of MECL 
had not shown any improvement. The Committ ee felt that financial restructuring 
package is an essential component for the progress of a company and were 
unhappy to find that the proposal is still hanging fire even after the lapse of nearly 
eight years thereby causing not only re curring losses worth crore of rupees but 
had also derailed a promising Company. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the revised financial re structuring proposal  in this regard. MECL presently 
under consideration in the Ministry of  Mines should be approved without further 
loss of time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken  
 
1.30 The Committee had observed that t he physical performance of MECL was 
affected due to several constraints like the stoppage of explorat ion of coal and 
lignite on behalf of Ministry of Coal fo r want of environment forest clearance the 
delay in commencement of promotional projects for want of financial sanction 
and non-materialization of Coal Bed Methane work on behalf of ONGC. The 
Committee recommended that a Steering Committee might be constituted in the 
Ministry for holding wide ranging discuss ions with the concerned Ministry/State 
Government for getting expeditious cl earance from different agencies. The 
Committee also desired that MECL should  strive to obtain more and more job 
orders from PSUs and private organizations to achieve higher turnover.  
 
1.31 The Ministry in their reply have st ated that the fresh proposal for financial 

restructuring (waiver of interest, penal interest outstanding, against the 
accumulated losses, transfer of outstanding loan to Grants-in-A id, conversion of 
Non-Plan loans in to grant etc., and for a provision of Rs.70 crore as grant for 
implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme in Mineral Exploration 
Corporation Ltd (MECL) for separation of 1081 surplus employees to bring the 
manpower strength of the company to the level of 1200, in the prescribed format 
as per guidelines instructions of DPE, was sent to DPE on 18.7.2005 for 
consideration by BRPSE. DPE has asked some information/ material which has 
already been sent to them  on 9.8.2005. The proposal at present is under 
consideration of DPE/ BRPSE. 
 
1.32 The Ministry further stated that  MECL is continuing its exploration 
programmes with the availabl e plant and  machineries  which were by and large 
more than 15 years old and requires continuous maintenance and frequent 
repairs resulting in loss of production and productivity. Inspite of  this,  as a result 
of  cost control measures, optimum ut ilisation of available resources, the 
performance of MECL has gr adually improved in the recent past and has been 
remarkable during 2004-05. The salient features of the achievements were given 
below: 
 
• The MoU targets for physico-financial parameters have exceeded. 
 
• The drilling achievement  has  been 1,73,144m against target of 
1,65,000m and for mining 7,525m against the target of 6,000m. 
 
• The gross revenue of the Com pany has been Rs.7364 lakhs as 
against  target of Rs.6600 lakhs. It  is highest  since inception. 
 
• The gross margin has been in positive  throughout year and it stood 
at Rs.1794 lakhs as against the tar get of Rs.1304 lakhs, which is 
also the highest  since inception of the Company. 
 
• The Company achieved a  net prof it of Rs.244 la khs during 2004-
05 after a gap of 14 years. 
 
 
1.33 For gainful utilisation of  the available resources  and increase in turn over, 
efforts were being continued to obtain  more and more jobs from PSUs  as well as  
private organisations.  During the y ear 2003-04 and 2004-05 MECL has received  
orders for contractual work for over Rs.40 crore  during each years.  It has added 
a number of new clients  namely  M/s.  Hindustan Zinc Ltd- Sterlite,  BALCO 
Sterlite,  Sindhudurg Mining  Corporation (P) Ltd., South West Mining Ltd., 
Sulakshini Mines & Minerals Ltd., HGML, IRCON,  etc.  Amongst these the geo-
technical investigation on behalf of IRCON is being carried out  at Banihal – 
Quazigund section of Kashmir Rail Project  at J&K.  
 

1.34 The physical-financial performance of MECL is expected to improve 
further  once the financia l restructuring which is  under consideration at 
Government level is approved and implemented.  As it shall be able to meet its 
requirement of replacement of  the old  equipment and  in duction of  state-of-art 
technology  commensurate with the requirement of the Industries from its internal 
resources.   
 
1.35 As regards Committee’s recommendat ions for constituting the Steering 
Committee for getting expeditious clearance from different agencies , it may be 
stated that as soon as SCPP approves t he promotional projects, on receipt of 
projects proposals from MECL immediately action is taken and the administrative 
approval/financial sanctions were issued within a period of one & half month. The 
meetings with the MoC were generally held from time to time for providing work 
of exploration of Coal & Lignite to MECL. Further, on perusal of the above salient 
features of the achievements of the company during the year 2004-05 it would be 
observed that the Company’s physico-fin ancial parameters have exceeded the 
MoU targets. The gross margin has been in positive throughout year and it stood 
at Rs.1794 lakhs as against Rs.1253 lakhs during 2003-04,  a record 
achievement in net profit of Rs.244 la khs during 2004-05 was after a gap of 14 
years. Further, during the first three years of Xth  Plan period i.e. 2002-03 to 
2004-05, a sum of Rs.24.77 crore repr esenting around 92% have been utilised 
by the Company leaving the balance of only 8% of the estimates which is  
ignorable. Moreover, MECL is the member of Sub-Commi ttee of I, II, III &VIII of 
CGPB [Sub-Committee Group-I Metallic  Minerals, Sub-Committee Group-II 
Industrial Minerals, Sub- Committee Group-III Energy Minerals, Sub-Committee 
Group-VIII Geological Resources of North Eastern Region]. These Sub-
Committees consists of representatives  from State Governments, Central 
Departments/Ministries, GSI/IBM PSUs of Government offices and State 
Government offices. The functions of these Sub-Committee were to review the 
work done so far relating to the exploration of Mines in the country, to go into 
programme of Central agencies as well as State Departments and GSI etc. 
Keeping this position in view, it is felt  that there is no need of constituting the 
Steering Committee as recommended by the Committee. 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.36 The Committee  had recommende d that the revised financial 
restructuring proposal of Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd.(MECL) 
which had been awaiting Government approval for a long time should be 
approved without any further loss of time.  
 
 The Ministry in their reply has in formed that the revised proposal has 
not been cleared so far. They have also  stated that  the physical-financial 
proposal of MECL is expected to improve further once the financial 
restructuring which is under consideration at Government level is 
approved and implemented. The Committee are deeply anguished to note 
that the revised financial structuring proposal of MECL pending with the 
Ministry of Mines/Government of India  for more than  a year has  still not 
been cleared so far.  The Committee strongly feel that the above proposal if 
not approved and implemented well in time besides having cost and time 
overrun implications is likely to have a cascading effect on the economic 
health of MECL.   The Committee canno t but deprecate the attitude of the 
Ministry towards PSUs under its ad ministrative control in not fully 
exercising its responsibilities for bringing ailing PSUs like MECL to the 
path of recovery.  The Committee, theref ore, desire the Ministry to approve 
the financial restructuring proposal of MECL immediately.  
 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para No.2.14) 
 
The Committee note that the annual plan outlay for the year 2004-05 for 
mining sector was Rs.549.00 crore which was reduced to Rs.497.77 crore at RE 
stage. However, the actual utilization has been Rs.440.58 crore. The Committee 
were constrained to observe the declining trend in the annual plan outlays of the 
Ministry of Mines both under plan and non-pl an for the last five years as well as 
failure of the Ministry of Mines to ut ilize even the outlay approved at the RE 
stages. The Committee find that despite their earlier recommendation for the 
corrective steps for preparing realistic budgetary proposals, no  improvement is 
discernible in the functioning of the Ministry. The budgetary proposals continue to 
reflect a casual approach and were either  inflated or unrealistic. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that  budgetary division of the Ministry be further 
strengthened and sensitized  to ensure realistic budgetary estimates and a 
monitoring mechanism put in place to closely oversee utilization of funds.  
 
Action Taken  
Plan Outlay  
 
 The Budget proposals were finaliz ed after detailed discussion and 
deliberations in Pl anning Commission and the Minist ry of Finance at various 
levels. The Ministry takes note of the Valuable advice of the Hon’ble Committee 
and would sensetize the budget  division to put up a realistic budget proposal 
and would keep a watch on utilizations of funds.  
  
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para No.2.15) 
 
The Committee further note that utilizat ion of funds by most of the PSUs 
under the Ministry of Mines has been far fr om satisfactory during 2004-05 except 
in the case of Hindustan Copper Limited,  which was allocated a small budget of 
Rs.40.00 crore for replac ement and renewals. The reasons adduced by the 
Ministry for less utilization of funds hav e been of routine nature and not at all 
convincing. One of the major reasons being attributed for less utilization of funds 
has been the delayed Government ap proval for various schemes. The 
Committee fails to comprehend as to wh y the funds were continuously being 
earmarked during successive annual plan when the Government approval was 
not forthcoming in time. The Committee str ongly feel that major thrust areas of 
X
th Plan, viz. expansion of NALCO and modernization of GSI will suffer 
irreparable setback due to imprudent under-utilization of funds.  
 

Action Taken  
 
 The Ministry has earmarked funds with an optimistic anticipation of 
materlization of   oncomi ng  implementation of projec ts/schemes. The Ministry 
would endeavor to the best to utilise the funds to the maximum possible extent in 
the major thrust areas  of X
th Plan  with the remaining period of the Five Year 
Plan 2002-2007.  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.3, Para No.2.16) 
 
As regards the X th Plan, the Committee find ev en a more dismal scenario 
as the utilization of funds dur ing first three years of the plan dips to merely 20.03 
per cent of the approved outlay of Rs. 8,344. 50 crore. This is a sad reflection on 
the functioning of Ministry of Mines and PSUs under its administrative control. 
The Committee further note that with the enforcement of the Fiscal Responsibility 
and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, the ex penditure is required to be 
monitored by the Ministry on quarterly basis ensuring that every organization 
spends 67% or more of the Budget in the First three quarters and of 33% of the 
budget during the last quarter of the year. The under- utiliz ation of funds by the 
Ministry and PSUs during the first three years of the X th Plan negates the spirit of 
the FRBM Act. The Committee feel deeply concerned at the failure of the Ministry 
to effectively play its role of facilitat or and coordinator and feel that a mid-term 
appraisal stage of the X th Plan, the funds which rema ined unutilized should have 
been earmarked for other approved schemes/projects.  
 
Action Taken  
 
 The Ministry has  taken note of the reasoning of t he Hon’ble Committee 
and would make all possible efforts to play the role of facilitator and coordinator 
in overall utilizations of funds of the Tenth Five Year Plan outlay.  As regards, the 
enforcement of the Fiscal Responsibilit y and Budget Management (FRBM Act) 
the expenditure is regularly being moni tored by the Ministry through monthly 
return and quarterly meeting held with the PSUs, & Subordinate offices. All out 
efforts were being made to utilise the a llocated fund within the Frame  work of 
FRBM Act.  
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para No.3.11) 
 
The Committee note that the Indi an Bureau of Mines (IBM) performs 
regulatory functions, under the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957, Environmental Protection Act, 1986 and Rules made 
thereunder. IBM also undertakes scientific, techno-economic, research-oriented 
studies in various aspects of Mining geological studies, Ore beneficiation and 
environmental studies besides providing  technical consultancy services to the 
mining industry. For undertaking the abov e activities, an outla y of Rs.103 crore 
was approved for the X th Plan. However, the actual expenditure incurred during 
the first three years of the plan has been Rs.50.18 crore. The Committee were 

extremely surprised to note that though an amount of Rs .44.89 crore was 
earmarked for new schemes during the pl an, not even a singly rupee  has been 
spent thereon so far. The Committee, therefore, cannot but  conclude that 
IBM/Ministry of Mines have made mockery of budgetary proposals by including in 
the Xth Plan ill conceived and infructuous schemes/ projects which remained on 
paper only entailing no expenditure at all ev en after lapse of first three years of 
the Plan. The Committee, ther efore, desired the Ministry to look into the matter 
and fix responsibility as to how such schem es/ projects were included in the first 
instance or why no funds could be spent thereon. In case these schemes were 
not likely to fruitify in the coming two y ears, the Ministry shou ld consider utilizing 
these funds on other schemes.  
 
Action Taken  
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) 
 
The Ministry vide its letter No.2(3)/2001-IF dated 3.6.2002 had conveyed 
the allocation of Rs.103 crore for 10th Plan of IBM as follows: 
 
 1.  Gross Budgetary Suppor t (GBS)  Rs.103.00 crore  
    i.e.  (i) Net Budgetary support (NBS) Rs.  53.00 crore  
 (ii) Aid Through Budge t   Rs.  50.00 crore 
    Total=  Rs.103.00  crore 
2. Construction activities   Rs. 3.00 crore  
 (Under M/o Urban Development) 
 
 The distribution of the above funds for various schemes and programmes 
is detailed below:  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
1.  For four existing  schemes   52.50 crore 
2. Works outlay     00.50 crore 
    Total =  53.00 (NBS) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
IBM –BRGM (Aid through Budget) 
 
i) IBM-BRGM TMIS project  0.6683 
(Balance payment form 9th plan ) 
 
ii) IBM- BRGM Supply of  
Laboratory equipment to IBM. 4.4375 
 
iii) Token Provision for New  
Schemes under BRGM  44.8942 
Total = 50.00 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Grand Total of 10th Plan outlay:           103.00 crore  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 

A Provision of Rs. 44.8942   crore have been kept for new scheme under 
BRGM. In the 10th Plan document of IBM, following new schemes were proposed 
under BRGM  (Grant -in -Aid) and submitted to Ministry for approval.  
 
IBM- BRGM (Grant-in-Aid Programme) 
 
The following 4 new schemes under IBM- BRGM were proposed.  
 
1) Management of Solid Waste from Mining in India. 
 
2) Supply of Laborator y Equipment to IBM. 
 
3) Capacity Building at State Lev el for Mineral Development and 
Environmental Management (renamed as – setting of 
Computerized on Line Register of Mining Tenements System). 
 
4) Development of UNFC for Mi neral Resources management in 
India. 
 
Out of the above 4 schemes, the following 2 schemes were sanctioned 
during the 10 th Plan periods and have been co mpleted and implemented 
successfully. 
 
1) Supply of Laborator y Equipment to IBM. 
 
Total amount spent  5.72 crore. 
 
2) Development of UNFC for Mi neral Resources Management in 
India. 
 
No expenditure was incurred under this  project. With the guidance of 
BRGM experts only a software for conv ersion of UNFC system  from Mineral 
Resources Mineral System have been de veloped. BRGM has not charged any 
cost.  
 
The actual expenditure incurred during first 3 years of the 10 th plan in 
respect of general schemes and BRGM projects were given below.  
 
 General 
Schemes  
BRGM (Projects) Total (Rs. Crore)
2002-03 14.10 1.68 15.78 
2003-04 14.67 1.50 16.17 
2004-05 14.72 3.21 17.93 
Total 43.49 6.39 49.88 
 
 

From the above it may kindly be noted that Rs.49.88 crore have been 
spent during the first 3 years of 10 th plan which includes  an expenditure of 
Rs.6.39 crore towards BRGM Projects.  
 
In the 10 th Plan a provision of Rs.50 cror e was kept for BRGM schemes 
under grant in aid. From the above amount, Rs.6.39 (Rs.0.67 crore towards 
balance payment of TIMS Pr ojects and Rs.5.72 crore for supply of laboratory 
equipment to IBM) have been spent leavi ng a balance of Rs.43.61 crore as 
against the provision of Rs.44.89 crore for new schemes as stated earlier.  
 
The other two BRGM projects proposal s which were under consideration 
of the Ministry were: 
 
1. Project on computeris ed on Line Register on Tenements Systems. 
The total cost of the projects is Rs.17.50 crore.  
 
2.  Projects on Managem ent of Solid Waste from Mining in India.  
 
Total  cost of the project is Rs.30.00 crore.  
 
The total cost of both the projects – Rs.47.50 crore 
 
The requirement of funds for these projects for the rest of the two years of 
10th plan i.e. 2005-06 and 2006-07 is as follows: 
 
 2005-06 2006-07 
Project :1 1.00 12.84 
Project:2 15.00 15.00 
Total  16.00 27.84 
 Total  43.84 
 
Balance of Rs. 3.66 crore will spill over to 11th Plan.  
 
 The above mentioned projec ts were discussed in 18 th meeting of Indo-
French Working Group on Mineral Explor ation and Development of the Indo-
French Joint Committee and Technical Cooperation held on 8-9 November, 
2004. BRGM has asked for revised concept document on the project before 
finalising the project proposal. The revised concept has been submitted by IBM 
but BRGM has still not finalized the pr ojects. Since both the projects were 
planned to be served by Aid through Bud get, no funds have been allotted during 
the year 2005-06. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para No.3.12) 
 
The Committee note that the IB M has been providing technical 
consultancy services to the mining i ndustry at prescribed charges and on 
promotional basis. The Committee further note that the target for consultancy 
services assignments for the year 2005-06 has been kept at quite low, i.e., 7 to 8 
whereas the number of assignments during 2003-04 and 2004-05 were much 
more. The Committee desired that IBM should make all out efforts to provide 
more and more technical consultancy services in order to generate more funds.  
 
Action Taken  
 
The decision of the Committee have been noted and all efforts will be 
made to provide more and more technica l consultancy service in order to 
generate more funds.  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para No.4.21) 
 
National Aluminium Company limited (NALCO) 
 
The Committee have been informed that X th Plan outlay of Rs.7,056.00 
crore for NALCO has been revised to Rs.2865.25 crore in  the Mid Term 
Appraisal due to reduced a llocation in respect of 2 nd phase expansion, Qatar 
project, Coal Mines and AMR, etc. The Committee expect that the Qatar project, 
a prestigious one for NALCO would materi alize since the Qatar Authorities were 
showing some positive interest and desir ed that the Ministry of Mines should 
further pursue the matter with Qatar Authorities.  
 
Action Taken  
 
The 10th Plan outlay of Rs.7,056.00 crore fo r NALCO has been  revised to  
Rs.2864.25 crore (Committee has inadvertently indicated as Rs.2865.25 crore). 
 
So far as the year 2004-05 is conc erned, the BE outlay of Rs.310 crore 
was reduced to Rs.172 crore. The majo r drop in the capital outlay was in 
respect of 2 nd phase expansion and c aptive coal mines allotted wherein the 
outlay has been reduced from Rs.100 crore in BE level to Rs.11 crore in RE 
level. The drop in outlay in respect of  these schemes was because of the delay 
in Government approval to the projec ts. While Government approval to 2 nd 
phase expansion was received in October , 2004, the provisional allotment of 
Utkal E Coal Mines to the Company was received in August, 2004. 
 
However, hardly any ex penditure has been incu rred on the proposed 2 nd 
phase expansion and coal mine. The pre project activities for 2 nd phase 
expansion of int egrated Aluminium Complex has commenced. The consultancy 
contract for integrated Mines, Alumina and Aluminium project has been awarded 
to M/s.EIL on 29.3.2005.  Simi larly the contracts for CPP 9 th and 10 th unit and 

SGP of Alumina Refinery have been awarded in favour of MECON in the last 
week of March, 2005. The pre-qualificat ion bids in respect Bauxite Mines, 
Alumina and Smelter Segments of 2 nd phase expansion have already been 
received and vendor list partly finalised. Some of the proj ect activities like site 
grading and other enabling works have st arted. Few of MRs and technical 
specifications have been finalized. 
 
As far as Qatar Project is concerned,  originally an outlay of Rs.1573.00 
crore was planned for Xth Plan, which was revised to Rs.10.00 crore in Mid Term 
Appraisal, as local party in Qatar could not finalise the financing arrangements. 
However, Company is exploring possibilities of joint venture in Middle East. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Paras 1.27 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No.4.23) 
 
The Committee further desired that monitoring mechanism be set up to 
ensure that all the schemes under the 2 nd phase expansion were completed 
within the time schedule without any time and cost overrun.  
 
Action Taken  
 
The detailed Project Schedule for implementation of 2 nd phase expansion 
has been finalised. NALCO Board has constituted a Project Monitoring 
Committee comprising of Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Director (Finance), 
Director (Projects & Technical) and Director (Production) to regularly monitor 
project implementation. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para No.5.17) 
 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) 
 
The Committee note that a Budget pr ovision of only Rs.40 crore was 
made for the Hindustan Copper Limited in RE 2004-05. The same outlay has 
been proposed in BE 2005-06 for replacement/ renewals of critical equipments to 
ensure optimum utilization of the available resources to facilitate implementation 
of production plan for the year 2005-06. 
 
Action Taken  
 
An amount  of Rs.40.00 crore  wa s  allocated under Replacement & 
Renewal in Financial Year 2004-05 and the Company has been able to utilize the 
same during the financial year. In BE 2005-06, a provision of Rs.40.00 crore has 
been made for Replacement & Renewals of critical equipment to ensure optimum 
utilization of the available resources and to facilitate implementation of production 
plan for the year 2005-06.  The Comp any has already identified the various 

equipment, which were to be covered und er this R&R Scheme and advised all 
the units to initiate necessary action for implementation of the plan. All necessary 
efforts will be made to ens ure that the amount so a llocated is utilized during 
2005-06. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.14, Para No.5.18) 
 
The Committee feel that higher allo cation for HCL has become imperative 
in view of the operation of the Company having started from the Khetri Mines and 
also import of 40 % of copper concentrates for full capacity utilization. The 
Committee, therefore, recomm end that the Ministry of Mi nes should take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance/ Pl anning Commission for higher allocation of 
HCL at RE stage.  
 
Action Taken  
 
During 2005-06 allocation has been made under the Head Replacement & 
Renewal (R&R) of the plant and machinery to the extent of Rs.40.00 crore. The 
said amount has been arrived at after due scrutiny and taking into account the 
unavoidable expenditure to be made towards R&R during the financial year. To 
sustain the mining output fr om the existing Mines incl uding Khetri Mine of the 
HCL, Company has planned to inve st around Rs.80.00 crore on Mine 
Development and allied activities in Financial Year 2005-06 which remained 
neglected in earlier years due to fund co nstraint. HCL also have planned to 
achieve production target of 40,000 T of copper during 2005-06 by operating 
both the Smelter at Indi an Copper Complex (ICC) and Khetri Copper Complex 
(KCC). Company can produce about 31000 MT of metal in concentrate from the 
operating Mines. The balance quantity is, t herefore, to be impor ted to bridge the 
gap. Ministry have noted down the suggestions made by the Standing Committee 
and the same would  be taken care of at RE stage.  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No.6.30) 
 
The Committee note that an expert Committee was constituted by the 
Government in June 1995 to arrest the declining trend in the physico-financial 
performance of the Mineral  Exploration Corporatio n Limited (MECL). The 
recommendations made by the Expert Commi ttee were considered by a Review 
Committee chaired by the Secretary, Ministry of Mines. Most of the 
recommendations of the Review Committee except financial rest ructuring of the 
Company have since been impl emented. As a result of  various measures, the 
productivity of the Company has improv ed. However, the financial performance 
of the Company has not shown the improvement. T he Committee note that a 
revised proposal for financial restructuri ng of MECL is under c onsideration in the 
Ministry of Mines.  
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.17, Para No.6.32) 
 
The Committee observe that the physical performance of MECL was 
affected due to several constraints like the stoppage of explorat ion of coal and 
lignite on behalf of Ministry of Coal fo r want of environment forest clearance the 
delay in commencement of promotional projects for want of financial sanction 
and non-materialization of Coal Bed Methane work on behalf of ONGC. The 
Committee recommend that a Steering Co mmittee may be constituted in the 
Ministry of holding wide ranging discussi ons with the concerned Ministry/State 
Government for getting expeditious cl earance from different agencies. The 
Committee also desired that MECL should  strive to obtain more and more job 
orders from PSUs and private organizations to achieve higher turnover.  
 
Action Taken  
 
MECL is continuing its exploration programmes with the available plant 
and   machineries  which were by and large more than 15 years old and requires 
continuous maintenance and frequent repairs  resulting in loss of production and 
productivity. Inspite of  this,  as a resu lt of  cost control measures, optimum 
utilisation of available re sources, the performance of MECL has gradually 
improved in the recent past and has been remarkable during 2004-05. The 
salient features of the achievements were given below: 
 
• The MoU targets for physico -financial parameters have 
exceeded. 
 
• The drilling achievement  has  been 1,73,144m against 
target of 1,65,000m. 
 
• The gross revenue of the Company has been Rs.7364 lakhs 
as against  target of Rs. 6600 la khs. It  is highest  since 
inception. 
 
• The gross margin has been in po sitive  throughout year and 
it stood at    Rs.1794 lakhs as  against the target of Rs.1304 
lakhs, which is also  the hi ghest  since inception of the 
Company. 
 
• The Company achieved a  net pr ofit of Rs.244 lakhs during 
2004-05 after a gap of 14 years. 
 
 
For gainful utilisation of the available resources  and increase in turn over, 
efforts were being continued to obtain  more and more jobs from PSUs  as well as  
private organisations. During the year 2003-04 and 2004-05 ME CL has received  
orders for contractual work for over Rs. 40 crore  during each year.   It has added 
a number of new clients  namely  M/s.  Hindustan Zinc Ltd-  Sterlite, BALCO 

Sterlite,  Sindhudurg Mining  Corporation (P) Ltd , South West Mining Ltd, 
Sulakshini Mines & Minerals Ltd, HGML, IRCON, etc.  Am ongst these the geo-
technical investigation on behalf of IRCON is being carried out  at Banihal –
Quazigund section of Kashmir Rail Project  at J&K.  
 
The physico-financial performance of MECL is expected to improve further  
once the financial restructuring which is un der consideration at Government level 
is approved and implemented. As it shal l be able to meet its requirement of 
replacement of the old  equi pment and  induction of  st ate-of-art technology  
commensurate with the requirement of the Industries from its internal resources.   
 
  As regards Committee’s recommendat ions for constituting the Steering 
Committee for getting expeditious clearance from different agencies , it may be 
stated that as soon as SCPP approves t he promotional projects, on receipt of 
projects proposals from MECL immediately action is taken and the administrative 
approval/financial sanctions were issued within a period of one & half month. The 
meetings with the Ministry of Coal were generally held from time to time for 
providing work of exploration of Coal & Lignite to MECL. Further, on perusal of 
the above salient features of the achievements of t he company during the year 
2004-05 it would be observ ed that the Company’s phy sico-financial parameters 
have exceeded the MoU targets. The gr oss margin has been in positive 
throughout year and it stood at Rs.1794 lakhs as again st Rs.1253 lakhs during 
2003-04, a record achievement in net prof it of Rs.244 lakhs during 2004-05 was 
after a gap of 14 years. Further, during t he first three years of Xth  Plan period 
i.e. 2002-03 to 2004-05, a sum of Rs.24.77 crore repres enting around 92% have 
been utilised by the Company leaving the balance of only 8% of the estimates 
which is  ignorable. Moreover, MECL is the member of Sub-Committee of I, II, III 
& VIII of CGPB [Sub-Committee Group- I Metallic Minerals, Sub-Committee 
Group-II Industrial Minerals,  Sub-Committee Group-III Energy Minerals, Sub-
Committee Group-VIII Geological Resour ces of North Eastern Region]. These 
Sub-Committees consists of representativ es from State Governments, Central 
Departments/Ministries, GSI/IBM PSUs of Government offices and State 
Government offices. The functions of these Sub-Committee were to review the 
work done so far relating to the exploration of Mines in the country, to go into 
programme of central agencies as we ll as State Departments and GSI etc. 
Keeping this position in view, it is felt  that there is no need of constituting the 
Steering Committee as recommended by the Committee. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.36 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.18, Para No.7.12) 
 
Science & Technology (S&T) 
 
The Committee note that Science & Technology (S&T) programme of the 
Ministry of Mines covers the disciplin e of Geology, Exploration, Mining and 
Exploration, Mining and Environment Blea ching, Beneficiation, Rock Mechanics 
and Ground Control and Non-Ferrous metallurgy.   Since the init iation of the S&T 
programme in 1978, 120 projects have been completed and 36 were in progress. 
On a perusal of statement of the stat us of ongoing S&T projects, the Committee 
note that out of 36 ongoing S&T projects, though four projects have since been 
completed but their completion reports we re far from completion. The Committee 
were unhappy at the snail’s pace progre ss of S&T project and recommend that 
the Standing Scientific Advisory Commi ttee which approves these projects 
should also ensure that these projects were co mpleted on schedule. The 
Committee would like to emphasize that S&T programmes were the basis of 
modernization and progressiveness of any industry and, theref ore, desired that 
the Ministry should accord utmost import ance to the allocation of funds adequate 
and timely completion of such projects as  to gainfully reap t he benefits accruing 
from their findings.  
 
Action Taken  
 
  S&T projects of Ministry of Mines were approved  by the  Standing 
Scientific Advisory Group (SSAG) after considering the cost and time required for 
implementation & completion of the projects . These aspects were discussed and 
approved by experts in the field.  
 
 To monitor the progress of each major project, a Pr oject Monitoring 
Committee is constituted under the Chairm anship of an eminent expert and with 
representation of funding Ministries /Departments implementing organization, 
industry & experts in the field as members.  
 
 It is now proposed that SSAG meet ing will be held every six months. 
Monitoring reports of each projects wil l be  reviewed in SSAG to overcome 
difficulties faced in implementation of projects and ensure their timely completion.  
 
 As the projects were mainly for the development of indigenous technology 
or introduction of newer technology, these ge t delayed by difficulties in import of 
equipment, unforeseen design problems, resistance from  the local public and 
environment clearance.  

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl.No.8, Para No.4.20) 
 
National Aluminium Company limited (NALCO) 
 
The Committee were happy to note that National Aluminium Company 
Limited (NALCO) has become a ‘Zero Debt company  after repaying all loan 
including entire foreign currency loan. The Committee further note that NALCO is 
Asia’s largest integrat ed aluminium complex and has emerged as a star 
performer in production and export of  alumina and aluminium and more 
significantly is propelling self-sustained growth. The Committee also note that the 
1st phase of expansion of production capacity at an investment of Rs. 4,200 crore 
has been completed in February 2004 with saving of  Rs.610 crore. The 2 nd 
phase expansion of capacity encompassi ng all the production segments has 
been approved by the Government in Oc tober 2004 at a project outlay of  
Rs.4,091.50 crore to be completed in 50 months. 
  
Action Taken  
 
As the Committee observed on the given facts, t here were no comments 
to offer. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para No.4.22) 
 
The Committee were happy to note t hat the coal block Utkal has been 
allotted to NALCO in August 2004 to cater to the need of its Captive Power Plant. 
The Committee desired that it should be activated at the earliest and all the 
necessary clearances from different authorities should be obtained.  
 
Action Taken  
 
NALCO has been allotted UTKAL-E Coal Block for its Captive Power Plant 
on 27.8.2004.  Application for Mining Lease has been submitted to the  Collector, 
Angul on 12.10.2004. Report from Tahsildar on reven ue angle, DDM on mining 
angle and DFO on forest angle have been received by Co llector, Angul by May 
2005.  The exploration work of its Coal Block has been completed by M/s 
CMPDI, Ranchi and Geological Report was received by NALCO in April, 2005. 
Order has been placed on by M/s CMPDI, Ranc hi for preparation of Mining Plan, 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) and EI A/EMP. Specialized agencies have been 
appointed for study of socio-economic aspec ts, floral/fauna, land use/land cover, 
biological monitoring and green belt design.  These studies were essential for 

getting NOC from State Pollution Control Board and Environment Clearance from 
MoEF.  The works were in progress. Orders has been placed on M/s RITES 
(under Ministry of Railways) for a deta iled study regarding various alternative 
methods of transportation of coal from t he Mines to the CPP. The work is in 
progress. Discussions were on with IPICOL/IDCO (Govt. of Orissa undertakings) 
for assignment of land acquisition work.  Application has been f iled at Tahsildar 
office, Chandipada to get cert ified copies of Record of  Rights (ROR) as required 
by IDCO for land acquisition.  The TE FR required by IPCOL/IDCO is under 
preparation. 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No.2.17) 
 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) 
  
The Committee were constrained to  note that the modernization 
programme of Geological Survey of India (GSI) conceived during the early phase 
of the X th Plan, has not made steady progre ss due to non-availability of 
specialized equipment and shortage of staff. The Commi ttee further note that the 
proposals for acquisition of high cost equipment for offshore Marine Surveys 
Airborne Geophysical Surveys were yet to be cleared by the Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance. The Co mmittee recommend that the Ministry 
should take all possible measure to pr ocure above equipment in a time bound 
manner lest the modernizati on process of GSI should get further delayed. The 
Committee also desired that shortage of staff in GSI should be met immediately 
to obviate any adverse affect on its functioning.  
 
Action Taken  
 
            The modernisation programme of GSI is also constantly monitored by the 
Project Proposal Review Committee [PPRC].  The Committee has taken so far 7 
meetings. The Committee, in order to sys tematize the procurement process and 
to hasten the utilisation of plan fund (under Modernisation Programme) has 
suggested appropriate corrective measur es like   constituting an agency 
responsible for GSI’s Heli-borne Survey System and its onboard equipments and 
inviting representatives from HAL and DGCA for detailed discussions on its 
safety aspects, nomination of Sh.Gopal Mandal, Stores Officer as Nodal 
Enforcement Officer (Procu rement) to enforce prompt  delivery of equipments, 
constitution of a Modernization Review Co mmittee of DDG level officers to work 
out the modernization plan over and above the requirement of laboratories of 
GSI, etc. 
 
As regards the procurement of Ocean going research vessel for GSI, 
Planning Commission had advised this Ministry to submit the proposal in 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) format. The DPR has been received from GSI and 
is under consideration in the Ministry. 
 
As regards the procurement of Heliborne Survey System for GSI, Planning 
Commission considered the proposal and advised that the clarifications asked for 
by Planning Commission may be incorpor ated in EFC memo of GSI and a copy 
of which be sent to project Appraisal and Monitoring Division (PAMD) of Planning 
Commission.  GSI vide Ministry’s lette r dated 18.5.2005 has been requested to 

take urgent necessary action in the matter as per advise of Planning Commission 
and furnish the revised DPR (EFC) to this Ministry for onward submission to 
Planning Commission.  
 
As regards the procurement of Geot echnical vessel for GSI, on the advice 
of Planning Commission DPR in respec t of Geotechnical vessel, is under 
preparation in GSI.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.10  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.7, Para No.3.13) 
 
The Committee were dismayed to note that the alarming increase in the 
cases of illegal mining in different St ates resulting in immense loss to the 
National Exchequer. The Committee feels that IBM could not absolve itself of the 
responsibility entrusted to it under MMDR Act and therefore strongly recommend 
the IBM/Ministry to pull up the concerned agencies for their failure to stop illegal 
mining. The Committee also desired that the Ministry should take pro-active 
steps by exercising full vigi l and responsibility in terms  of location, detection and 
prosecution to control and prevent such illegal mining.  
 
Action Taken  
Illegal Mining  
 
The nature of magnitude of the problem  of illegal mining activity varies 
from State to State and States being owne rs of minerals in t he lands under their 
jurisdiction and responsible for collection an d retention of royalty from minerals, 
the full powers have been delegated to th e State Government to form their own 
rules for curbing illegal mining as it makes possible for each State Government. 
to address the problem of illegal mining in  their State by suitably listing out the 
target were as depending upon the strength of  its law and order machinery and 
revenue implications for the state.   
 
 The issue of further delegation of powers to IBM to e ffectively control 
illegal mining was discussed in the meeting of the State Governments on 
17.1.2005 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Mines). The State Governments 
were unanimous that further delegati on of powers to IBM would lead to 
duplication of authority and would lead to lack of co-ordination with the State 
Governments. 
 
 However, IBM is being asked to be mo re vigilant in their inspection to 
check illegal mining activities being ca rried out and bring such  cases to the 
notice of State Government  while carrying out the re sponsibility entrusted to 
them under the Act and Rule s there Under. As and when  the cases of illegal 

mining were brought/ come to  the notice of the Mini stry/IBM, the matter is 
immediately taken up with the concerned St ate Government to check and curb 
the illegal mining. At the same time St ate Governments were being asked to 
complete framing of the rules as per the powers given to them under MMDR Act, 
1957 and to intensify their monitoring activity to strictly control any illegal mining.  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see Para 1.21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para No.6.31) 
 
Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) 
 
The Committee were extremely concerned that in spite of various policy 
measures taken by the Government, the physico- financial performance of MECL 
has not shown any improvement. The Committ ee feel that financial restructuring 
package is an essential component for the progress of a company and were 
unhappy to find that the proposal is still hanging fire even after the lapse of nearly 
eight years thereby causing not only re curring losses worth crore of rupees but 
has also derailed a promising Company. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the revised financia l restructuring proposal of MECL presently under 
consideration in the Ministry  of Mines should be approved without further loss of 
time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
 Action Taken  
 
  The fresh proposal for financial restructuring (waiver of interest, penal 
interest outstanding, against the accumulated losses, transfer of outstanding loan 
to Grants-in-aid, conversion of Non-plan in  to grant etc., and for a provision of 
Rs.70 crore as grant for implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme in 
mineral Exploration Corpor ation Ltd. (MECL) for separation of 1081 surplus 
employees to bring the m anpower strength of the com pany to the level of 1200, 
in the prescribed format as per guidelines instructions of DPE, was sent to DPE 
on 18.7.2005 for consideration by  BRPSE. DPE has asked some 
information/material which has already been sent to them on 9.8.2005. The 
proposal at present is under consideration of DPE/ BRPSE. 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT WERE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Para No.5.16) 
 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) 
 
The Committee note that the Govern ment had decided to disinvest its 
entire share  holdings in HCL (98.95%) to an interested buyer. Financial bids had 
been initiated by the then Ministry of Disinvestments but the same was kept in 
abeyance in view of the litigation pending in the court against the disinvestments 
of HCL. The Committee also note that HCL has returned on a path of recovery 
and has earned a net profit of Rs.38. 08 crore (Up to December 2004.) The 
Committee strongly feel that disinvestm ents proposal of HCL should be put on 
hold since the company has taken a tu rn around from 2004 onwards and there 
has been marked improvement in the MoU rating of the Company during the last 
three years. The Committee also reiter ate their recommendation contained in 
Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) and would like that the financial 
restructuring package pending with the Governm ent should be approved 
immediately The Committee hope that with the implem entation of financial 
restructuring proposal and required allo cation for replacement of critical 
equipments, the Company would start earning much higher profits.  
 
Action Taken  
 
  The proposal for  Financial Restruct uring of HCL duly recast by HCL as 
per the format circulated by DPE and fu rther instructions issued by DPE vide 
their O.M. dated 13.6.2005, is under process. Additio nal information has been 
asked from HCL to process the proposal further. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;        ANANTH KUMAR, 
21   December, 2005           C h a i r m a n ,  
30 Agrahayana, 1927(Saka)            Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 

ANNEXURE I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2005-06) HELD ON 21 ST  DECEMBER, 2005  IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1700 hrs. to 1730 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar-In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya  
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan  
5. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey   
6. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
7. Shri  Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta  
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste  
9. Shri E. Ponnuswamy  
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla  
11. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
12. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad  
13. Shri B.J. Panda  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K.Singh   - Director 
3. Shri Shiv Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committ ee considered and adopted the following 
Draft Reports: 
 
i) **   **  **  ** 
 
ii) Action Taken Report on the reco mmendations contained in the Ninth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2004-05) on 
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Mines;  
 
iii) **   **  **  ** 
 
 
** Does not pertain to this Report. 

3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor 
additions/deletions/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairm an to finalise these Reports after 
making consequential change arising out of factual verification by the concerned 
Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE II  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH  REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made      18 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  
G o v e r n m e n t :            1 2  
 (vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 1, 2, 3,  5, 6,   9, 11,  13, 14, 15, 17 
 and  18) 
 
Percentage of total         66.66% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire  
to pursue in view of the Government's replies:     2 
(vide Recommendation at S1. Nos. 8 and 10) 
 
Percentage of total         11.11% 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of  
the Government  have not been accepted by the Committee:   3 
(vide Recommendation at S1.Nos.4,  7 and 16) 
 
Percentage of total                 16.67% 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in res pect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited:       1 
(vide Recommendation at S1.No.12)                          
 
Percentage of total                5.56% 
 
---- 
 