STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEELCOAL AND STEEL
(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)(2008-09)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COAL
REHABILITATION AND
RESETTLEMENT BY COAL INDIA
LTD.
3535353535
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORTTHIRTY-FIFTH REPORTTHIRTY-FIFTH REPORTTHIRTY-FIFTH REPORTTHIRTY-FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2008-09)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COAL
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
BY COAL INDIA LTD.
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.10.2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.10.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.C.&S. No. 35C.C.&S. No. 35C.C.&S. No. 35C.C.&S. No. 35C.C.&S. No. 35
Price : Rs. 67.00
© 2008 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by The Indian
Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
2
10
14
22
25
30
35
44
50-60
C
OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................
A. Introductory.............................................................................
B. Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy of Coal India
Ltd.(CIL)...................................................................................
C. Acquisition of Land..............................................................
D. Provision of Compensation.................................................
E. Project Affected Persons (PAPs)..........................................
F. Implementation & Monitoring of R&R Schemes.........
G. Community Development Activities.................................
Statement of Recommendations/Observations of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel contained in the Report...............
ANNEXURES
I. Comparative Statement showing CIL’s R&R Policy
2000, NRRP-2007 and CIL’s R&R Policy, 2008.............
II to V. Minutes of the Sittings........................................................
P
AGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2008-2009)
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
 3. Shri D.K.Audikesavulu
 4. Shri Hiten Barman
 5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
 6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
 7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
 8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
 9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
12. Shri Tarachand Sahu
13. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
14. Smt. Karuna Shukla
15. Shri Prabhunath Singh
16. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
17. Shri Sugrib Singh
18. Shri Bhishm Shanker alias Kushal Tiwari
19. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav
20. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
21. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
23. Dr. T.Subbarami Reddy
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri Jesudas Seelam
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
27. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
28 Shri T.K. Rangarajan
29. Shri B.J. Panda
30. Shri R.C. Singh alias Ram Chandra Singh
31. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
4. Shri Raj Kumar — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Gurpreet Singh — Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Rehabilitation and Resettlement by Coal India Ltd.”
2. The Committee discussed the subject matter with the
representatives of the Ministries of Coal and Rural Development on
20.9.2006 and 14.6.2007 respectively and took oral evidence of the
Ministry of Coal on 19.5.2008.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
sitting held on 15.09.2008.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Ministries of Coal and Rural Development and
Coal India Ltd. for placing their views before them and in furnishing
material/information from time to time as desired by the Committee.
5. The Committee place on record their profound appreciation
for the work done by the previous Committees on Coal & Steel for
their in-depth study and analysis of the subject and invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
16 October , 2008 Chairman,
24 Asvina , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

REPORT
A.A.A.A.A. INTRODUCTORYINTRODUCTORYINTRODUCTORYINTRODUCTORYINTRODUCTORY
In India, the lives and livelihoods of a large number of people
are affected by forced displacement due to development projects such
as mining, dams, industries, power plants, etc. Not only such
displacements put the affected people at grave impoverishment but also
sets back the entire poverty reduction efforts of the State.  These
displacements are likely to increase manifold in a developing country
like ours in the subsequent years due to the large scale upcoming
projects.
2. Considering the importance of coal, the Government of India
nationalized the coal industry in  1971 and 1973 and thereafter Coal
India Ltd., as  a holding company,  was set up on 1st November, 1975
to stream-line the working of the coal industry in a manner conducive
to more efficient administration and rapid stepping up of coal
production.
3. Coal Mining is a site specific Industry. Selection of mine site
depends upon the quality of reserves and its distance from major
consumers. For reserves that are close to the surface, opencast mining
has proven to be the most efficient mining method. Relatively
inexpensive, opencast mines require large areas of land. Population
growth makes it increasingly difficult for the subsidiary coal companies
of Coal India Limited (CIL) to acquire the land they need for expanding
their operations.
4. In the past, subsidiaries found it relatively easy to acquire land,
if they were able to offer employment. Partly because of this practice,
subsidiaries have built up their labour force beyond their needs. This
has contributed to heavy losses many mines incur and has eroded the

2
competitiveness of the coal industry. The subsidiaries may still need
to hire people in selected locations and continue to give preference
to those whose livelihood will be affected by coal mining operations.
However, subsidiaries will need to develop other ways and means to
compensate landowners and others adversely affected by their projects.
5. Coal India’s basic philosophy of compensating land-losers and
other project-affected people remains substantially unchanged and
emphasizes the need to cultivate and maintain good relationships with
the people affected by Coal India’s projects starting as early as possible.
It also underscores that the subsidiaries have a responsibility towards
the landless Project Affected Persons (PAPs), whose livelihood is often
taken away. Proper Resettlement & Rehabilitation (R&R) policy can
streamline the different R&R  practices that are being followed in the
subsidiaries.
6. To address the issues relating to Rehabilitation and Resettlement
of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs), Coal India Ltd.  framed its R&R
Policy to set out the basic principles in this regard.  The land is acquired
by CIL and compensation is paid under Section 4(1) of Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 or Section 7(1) of Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition
& Development) Act, 1957.
B.B.B.B.B. REHABILITATION & RESETTLEMENT POLICY OF COALREHABILITATION & RESETTLEMENT POLICY OF COALREHABILITATION & RESETTLEMENT POLICY OF COALREHABILITATION & RESETTLEMENT POLICY OF COALREHABILITATION & RESETTLEMENT POLICY OF COAL
INDIA LIMITEDINDIA LIMITEDINDIA LIMITEDINDIA LIMITEDINDIA LIMITED
7. Coal India’s R&R Policy was first formulated in 1994 and has been
in operation, with modifications from time to time. Based on the lessons
learned during operation, CIL through its Board resolutions had made
amendment/modifications in the policy.  The R&R Policy, in vogue
since 2000, has been further modified in 2008, in consonance with the
National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007 notified by the
Ministry of Rural Development, Govt. of India.
Objective of Coal India’s R&R PolicyObjective of Coal India’s R&R PolicyObjective of Coal India’s R&R PolicyObjective of Coal India’s R&R PolicyObjective of Coal India’s R&R Policy
8. Through the preparation of resettlement and rehabilitation action
plans as per the R&R policy, subsidiaries will safeguard that

3
project-affected people improve, or at least regain, their former
standard of living and earning capacity after a reasonable transition
period. The modified R&R Policy of CIL also provides for undertaking
and intensifying corporate social responsibility activities in and around
villages where land is being acquired. Over riding priority and
involvement of projected affected people particularly land losers shall
be ensured in the process.
Eligibility Criteria for Economic Rehabilitation BenefitsEligibility Criteria for Economic Rehabilitation BenefitsEligibility Criteria for Economic Rehabilitation BenefitsEligibility Criteria for Economic Rehabilitation BenefitsEligibility Criteria for Economic Rehabilitation Benefits
9. These benefits shall accrue only to Entitled Project Affected
Persons. Entitled Project Affected Person shall be one from the
following categories:
(i) Persons from whom land is acquired including tribals,
cultivating land under traditional rights.
(ii) Persons whose homestead is acquired
(iii) Sharecroppers, land lessees, tenants & day labourers
(iv) Tribals dependent on forest produce
Eligibility Criteria for Resettlement Benefits
10. Only a ‘Displaced’ family/person shall be eligible for resettlement
benefits.  A family/person shall be termed ‘displaced’ and hence
eligible for resettlement benefits if such family/person has been
a permanent resident and ordinarily residing in the project area on
the date of publication of notification U/S 4(1) of LA Act, 1894 or
notification U/S 7(1) of C.B.A. (Acquisition and Development) Act,
1957, and
(a) on account of acquisition of his/her homestead land/
structure is displaced from such areas, or
(b) He/she is a homesteadless or landless family/person, who
has been/is required to be displaced.

4
Eligibility and compensation
11. The Project Affected Persons have been classified into 4 categories.
The details of provisions regarding compensation and rehabilitation
entitlement options are given below:-
Category of Persons Compensation and Rehabilitation
affected by the entitlement option
Project
12
Provisions
All landowners with titles and tribals cultivat-
ing land under traditional rights will receive
monetary compensation for the land acquired.
Subject to suitability and availability of
vacancies and further subject to approval of
the Board of Directors of the subsidiary
company concerned, coal companies shall offer
employment at the rate of one employment for
every two acres of land acquired. Such persons
shall be taken in at a consolidated stipend of
Rs. 5,550/- per month for a period of two years.
Actual land losers or their dependants as
prescribed in the National R.R. Policy notified
by Ministry of Rural Development shall either
take employment or a cash compensation as
prescribed below:-
1. The subsidiary companies shall offer
monetary compensation/one time cash
grant/financial package as announced by
the concerned State Government.
2. In case there is no policy of the State
Government for monetary compensation/
(i) Persons (includ-
ing tribals culti-
vating land under
traditional rights)
from whom land
is acquired.

5
financial package in lieu of employment
against land, the monetary compensation
shall be paid on the following basis:
(a) Rupees two lakhs only for first acre
of land on pro-rata basis subject   to
a minimum of Rupees fifty thou-
sand only.
(b) Rupees One and half lakhs only on
pro-rata basis for 2nd and 3rd acre
of land.
(c) Rupees one lakh only on pro-rata
basis for land beyond 3 acres.
3. The project affected persons not offered
employment shall get a preference in
direct recruitment.
Alternate house site measuring 150 Sq. mtr. per
family, assistance in designing the new house
if so desired by the Displaced family, and
Compensation for shifting etc. shall be as per
the rate prescribed in the National R&R Policy
notified by Ministry of Rural Development as
indicated below :-
(i) Rupees fifteen thousand for construction
of cattle shed;
(ii) Rupees ten thousand for shifting family
and belongings;
(iii) Rupees twenty five thousand for con-
struction of working shed or shop for
12
(ii) Person whose
homestead is
acquired

6
rural artisan, small trader or self em-
ployed persons;
(iv) Subsistence allowance @ 25 days Mini-
mum Agriculture Wages (MAW) per
month for one year;
OROROROROR
One time lump sum payment of Rupees
one lakh.
The subsidiary will assist PAP to establish
non-farm self employment through the provi-
sion of infrastructure, petty  contracts or
formation of cooperatives
OROROROROR
Jobs with contractors. Contractors will be
persuaded to give job to eligible PAPs on a
preferential basis, where feasible.
A. The subsidiary will assist PAP to estab-
lish non-farm self-employment through
the provision of infrastructure, petty
contracts or formation of cooperatives.
OROROROROR
Jobs with contractors. Contractors will be
persuaded to give jobs to eligible PAPs
on preferential basis, where feasible.
B. Shift the tribal community as a unit and
provide facilities to meet specific needs
to allow them to maintain their unique
cultural identity.
12
(iii) Sharecroppers,
land lessees, ten-
ants and day
labourers
(iv) Landless tribals,
Tribal dependent
on forest pro-
duce

7
C. One time financial assistance of 500 days
MAW for loss of customary right or
usages of forest produce. Tribal affected
family resettled out of the  district shall
be given 25% higher rehabilitation and
resettlement benefit.
12
Rehabilitation EffortsRehabilitation EffortsRehabilitation EffortsRehabilitation EffortsRehabilitation Efforts
12. Rehabilitation Efforts for operating the R&R Policy are as
under :-
(a) “During the last 13 years of operation of CIL’s earlier R&R
Policy enunciated in 1994, it has been CIL’s experience that
the dependence of PAFs on CIL for mine jobs continues un-
abated irrespective of area of the land being acquired by CIL.
This pressure on job is further aggravated, due to different
minimum requirement of land, being acquired for provision
of job.  This makes possession of acquired land very difficult
and projects get held up/delayed.
(b) To mitigate, if not fully eliminate, PAF’s dependence on CIL,
for provision of mine job, a provision of monetary
compensation, over and above the value of land, has been
conceived to be offered to those PAFs, who forego any claim–
perceived or otherwise – on mine job.  Besides, as a policy,
mine job would be offered only with the approval of
subsidiaries” Board and PAPs getting jobs under such
circumstances would not get such additional monetary
compensation in lieu of employment.
(c) A PAP choosing this option i.e. additional monetary
compensation in lieu of employment or getting employment
in exceptional circumstances will not be entitled to any other
rehabilitation benefit.

8
(d) Jobs with contractors/Non farm self-employment:-  This
provision is open to only those who are sharecroppers land-
lessees, tenants, day labourers or landless tribal or tribal
dependant on forest produce.
(e) Resettlement Benefits:- Compensation for homestead whether
in the category of land owner or landless category is same
and provides for one time lump sum payment in lieu of (i)
alternate house site measuring 150 sq. m. per family, (ii)
assistance in designing the new house if so desired by the
displaced family and (iii) shifting allowance to cover cost
of transporting PAPs belongings to relocation site, (iv)
assistance for construction of cattle shed, working shed; and
(v) subsistence allowance for one year.
(f) Women :- Special attempts will be made to ensure that
women will be given adequate access to income generating
opportunities offered under this policy.”
13. Asked about the major changes made in CIL’s revised R&R
Policy, 2008, the Ministry of Coal in a written reply have stated as
under:-
(a) “CIL’s R&R Policy, 2000 provided for one employment for
losing 2 acres of irrigated or 3 acres non-irrigated land
subject to availability of vacancy and suitability of the
candidate. In the revised R&R Policy, release of employment
is considered under package i.e. one employment for every
2 acres of land acquired subject to availability of vacancy
and suitability of the candidates.
(b) Cash compensation in lieu of employment has been
doubled.
(c) Area of resettlement site has been enhanced by 50% i.e. from
100 Sq.mt. to 150 Sq.mt.
(d) Provision has been made for payment of subsistence
allowance @ 25 days Minimum Agriculture Wages(MAW)

9
per month for one year to the displaced affected family while
no such provision existed in the earlier policy.
(e) Provision has been made in the R&R Policy for financial
assistance to the extent of Rs.15,000/- for construction of
cattle shed, Rs.25,000/- for construction of working shed or
shop (For displaced rural artisan, small trader or self
employment persons) whereas no such provisions existed in
the earlier R&R Policy.
(f) Cash compensation in lieu of all resettlement benefits
enhanced by 100% i.e. from Rs.0.5 lakhs to Rs.1.0 lakh.
(g) Provision of one time financial assistance of 500 days MAW
for loss of customary rights or usage of forest produce for
tribals which did not exist earlier.
(h) Provision made for payment of 25% higher rehabilitation
and resettlement benefits to the tribals settling outside the
district which did not exist in the earlier policy.
(i) As a measure of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR),
activities and budget provisions have been incorporated
towards inclusive development whereas no such provision
existed earlier.”
14. A comparative statement showing CIL’s R&R Policy 2000, NRRP-
2007 and CIL’s R&R Policy, 2008 is given in Annexure-I.
15.15.15.15.15. The Committee note that Coal India Ltd.(CIL), keeping in viewThe Committee note that Coal India Ltd.(CIL), keeping in viewThe Committee note that Coal India Ltd.(CIL), keeping in viewThe Committee note that Coal India Ltd.(CIL), keeping in viewThe Committee note that Coal India Ltd.(CIL), keeping in view
the fact that lives and livelihoods of a large number of people arethe fact that lives and livelihoods of a large number of people arethe fact that lives and livelihoods of a large number of people arethe fact that lives and livelihoods of a large number of people arethe fact that lives and livelihoods of a large number of people are
affected by forced displacement due to coal mining projects, framedaffected by forced displacement due to coal mining projects, framedaffected by forced displacement due to coal mining projects, framedaffected by forced displacement due to coal mining projects, framedaffected by forced displacement due to coal mining projects, framed
its Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy in 1994 toits Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy in 1994 toits Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy in 1994 toits Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy in 1994 toits Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy in 1994 to
safeguard the interests of the Project Affected People (PAPs) so thatsafeguard the interests of the Project Affected People (PAPs) so thatsafeguard the interests of the Project Affected People (PAPs) so thatsafeguard the interests of the Project Affected People (PAPs) so thatsafeguard the interests of the Project Affected People (PAPs) so that
they may regain their original standard of living and earningthey may regain their original standard of living and earningthey may regain their original standard of living and earningthey may regain their original standard of living and earningthey may regain their original standard of living and earning
capacity after a reasonable transition period.  This policy has beencapacity after a reasonable transition period.  This policy has beencapacity after a reasonable transition period.  This policy has beencapacity after a reasonable transition period.  This policy has beencapacity after a reasonable transition period.  This policy has been
in operation with modifications from time to time. Thisin operation with modifications from time to time. Thisin operation with modifications from time to time. Thisin operation with modifications from time to time. Thisin operation with modifications from time to time. This
Rehabilitation and Resettlement(R&R) Policy of Coal India Ltd.Rehabilitation and Resettlement(R&R) Policy of Coal India Ltd.Rehabilitation and Resettlement(R&R) Policy of Coal India Ltd.Rehabilitation and Resettlement(R&R) Policy of Coal India Ltd.Rehabilitation and Resettlement(R&R) Policy of Coal India Ltd.
(CIL) has now been revised in 2008  in consonance with the(CIL) has now been revised in 2008  in consonance with the(CIL) has now been revised in 2008  in consonance with the(CIL) has now been revised in 2008  in consonance with the(CIL) has now been revised in 2008  in consonance with the

10
National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy(NRRP) 2007.  TheNational Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy(NRRP) 2007.  TheNational Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy(NRRP) 2007.  TheNational Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy(NRRP) 2007.  TheNational Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy(NRRP) 2007.  The
Committee, however, observe that even after the revision of theCommittee, however, observe that even after the revision of theCommittee, however, observe that even after the revision of theCommittee, however, observe that even after the revision of theCommittee, however, observe that even after the revision of the
policy by CIL, much needs to be done.  In some cases, NRRP-2007policy by CIL, much needs to be done.  In some cases, NRRP-2007policy by CIL, much needs to be done.  In some cases, NRRP-2007policy by CIL, much needs to be done.  In some cases, NRRP-2007policy by CIL, much needs to be done.  In some cases, NRRP-2007
is more progressive and pragmatic is more progressive and pragmatic is more progressive and pragmatic is more progressive and pragmatic is more progressive and pragmatic vis-à-visvis-à-visvis-à-visvis-à-visvis-à-vis CIL’s R&R Policy 2008. CIL’s R&R Policy 2008. CIL’s R&R Policy 2008. CIL’s R&R Policy 2008. CIL’s R&R Policy 2008.
For example, while NRRP contains a provision of providing ‘land-For example, while NRRP contains a provision of providing ‘land-For example, while NRRP contains a provision of providing ‘land-For example, while NRRP contains a provision of providing ‘land-For example, while NRRP contains a provision of providing ‘land-
for-land’ subject to availability of the Government land, there isfor-land’ subject to availability of the Government land, there isfor-land’ subject to availability of the Government land, there isfor-land’ subject to availability of the Government land, there isfor-land’ subject to availability of the Government land, there is
no such provision in R&R Policy of CIL.  Similarly, NRRP-2007no such provision in R&R Policy of CIL.  Similarly, NRRP-2007no such provision in R&R Policy of CIL.  Similarly, NRRP-2007no such provision in R&R Policy of CIL.  Similarly, NRRP-2007no such provision in R&R Policy of CIL.  Similarly, NRRP-2007
provides for house-site to Project Affected Persons (PAPs) inprovides for house-site to Project Affected Persons (PAPs) inprovides for house-site to Project Affected Persons (PAPs) inprovides for house-site to Project Affected Persons (PAPs) inprovides for house-site to Project Affected Persons (PAPs) in
proportion to the actual loss of land but not more than 250 sq.mproportion to the actual loss of land but not more than 250 sq.mproportion to the actual loss of land but not more than 250 sq.mproportion to the actual loss of land but not more than 250 sq.mproportion to the actual loss of land but not more than 250 sq.m
in rural area and 50 sq.m. in urban area, whereas CIL’s policy offersin rural area and 50 sq.m. in urban area, whereas CIL’s policy offersin rural area and 50 sq.m. in urban area, whereas CIL’s policy offersin rural area and 50 sq.m. in urban area, whereas CIL’s policy offersin rural area and 50 sq.m. in urban area, whereas CIL’s policy offers
150 sq.m. irrespective of the size of house whether it is less or150 sq.m. irrespective of the size of house whether it is less or150 sq.m. irrespective of the size of house whether it is less or150 sq.m. irrespective of the size of house whether it is less or150 sq.m. irrespective of the size of house whether it is less or
more acquired.  The Committee feel that CIL’s R&R packagesmore acquired.  The Committee feel that CIL’s R&R packagesmore acquired.  The Committee feel that CIL’s R&R packagesmore acquired.  The Committee feel that CIL’s R&R packagesmore acquired.  The Committee feel that CIL’s R&R packages
should not be less than that of NRRP. The Committee, therefore,should not be less than that of NRRP. The Committee, therefore,should not be less than that of NRRP. The Committee, therefore,should not be less than that of NRRP. The Committee, therefore,should not be less than that of NRRP. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that these provisions of NRRP relating to ‘land-for-recommend that these provisions of NRRP relating to ‘land-for-recommend that these provisions of NRRP relating to ‘land-for-recommend that these provisions of NRRP relating to ‘land-for-recommend that these provisions of NRRP relating to ‘land-for-
land’ and house-site should be suitably incorporated/modified inland’ and house-site should be suitably incorporated/modified inland’ and house-site should be suitably incorporated/modified inland’ and house-site should be suitably incorporated/modified inland’ and house-site should be suitably incorporated/modified in
R&R Policy of CIL.R&R Policy of CIL.R&R Policy of CIL.R&R Policy of CIL.R&R Policy of CIL.
C.   ACQUISITION OF LANDC.   ACQUISITION OF LANDC.   ACQUISITION OF LANDC.   ACQUISITION OF LANDC.   ACQUISITION OF LAND
16. Coal India Ltd.(CIL) and all its subsidiary companies are in coal
mining and allied activities.  For this purpose, private and public land
is acquired under the provisions of either the Coal Bearing Areas
(Acquisition & Development) Act, 1957 or the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 and in certain cases, by direct purchase also.  In all these cases,
the land owners are fully compensated for the cost of the land and
homestead acquired by the coal companies.  All land owners with titles
of land receive monetary compensation for the land acquired from
them.  The value of land is determined on the basis of prevailing legal
norms.
17. Whenever it appears to the appropriate Government that the land
in any locality/area is likely to be needed for public purpose, a
notification under Land Acquisition Act, 1894, to that effect is
published in the official gadget wherein the extent of land so required
is notified.  In case of any objection to the acquisition of land by any
interested person, he can file his objection in writing within 30 days
from the date of publication of notification, to the appropriate

11
authority.  The matters to determine compensation to the land losers
are considered under Section-23 of the said Act.
18. The land is also acquired under the provisions of Coal Bearing
Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 (CBA) by Central
Government through its coal producing companies.
19. The CBA(A&D) Act provides that where any land is acquired
under Section-9 of CB Act, there shall be paid compensation to the
persons interested the amount of which shall be determined after
taking into consideration—
(a) The market value of the land at the date of the publication
of the notification under Sub-Section-1 of Section-4;
Explanation:   The value of any minerals lying in the land
shall not be taken into consideration in determining the
market value of any land.
(b) The damage sustained by the person interested, by any
reason of the taking of any standing crops or trees which
may be on the land at the time of the taking possession
thereof;
(c) The damage, if any sustained by the person interested, at
the time of taking possession of the land, by reason of
severing such land from other land;
(d) The damage, if any, sustained by the person interested, at
the time of taking possession of the land, by reason of the
acquisition injuriously affecting his other immovable
property in any other manner, or his earnings;
(e) If, in consequence of the acquisition of the land, the person
interested is compelled to change his residence or place of
business, the reasonable expenses, if any, incidental to such
change; and
(f) The damage, if any, bona fide  resulting from diminution of
the profits of the land between the time of the publication

12
of the notification under Sub-Section-1 of the Section-4 and
the time of the publication of the declaration under Sub-
Section-2 of Section-9.
20. When asked whether any study has been carried out to suggest
any amendments in Land Acquisition Act or Coal Bearing Areas
Act(Acquisition and Development) the Ministry of Coal have stated
as under:—
“Amendment of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition &
Development) Act, 1957 (CBA Act) is under active consideration.
In order to make the amendments pro-PAPs the following
provisions are being considered for insertion/ amendment in the
CBA Act.
The payment of solatium, escalation cost and interest has been
added in the Land Acquisition Act 1894 by an Amendment in
1984. As there was no such provision in the CBA Act and to
remove disparity between the two Acts so far as payment of
compensation is concerned, the Central Government in 1989
issued diectives to pay the same in the case of land acquisition
through CBA Act. It is being proposed to incorporate these
ingredients in the CBA Act. These ingredients  are solatium
@ 30% of market value in consideration of compulsory nature of
acquisition, additional payment @ 12% per annum of the market
value to compensate for escalation subject to a maximum of three
years and interest @ 9% per annum for the first year after the
date of issue of notification u/s 9 and @ 15% per annum thereafter
till the payment is made.
The existing time frame of completion of acquisition proceedings
under the CBA Act has been proposed to be reduced from six
years to four years. There is no provision at present in the
CBA(A&D) Act for de-notification of any land acquired u/s 9.
However, action is being initiated to adopt a procedure to return
the mined out areas, which are no more required by the coal
companies.”

13
21. During oral evidence, the Committee was apprised of land for land
provision in National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy (NRRP),
2007.  According to this provision, land losers will be provided
agricultural land or cultivable waste land to the extent actual land loss
subject to maximum 1 Ha. irrigated or 2 Ha. un-irrigated land/
cultivable waste land,  if Government land is available.  Apart from
this there is a provision in NRRP to give financial assistance for land
development for waste land or degraded land but there is no such
provision in the  R&R Policy of CIL.  The Committee was informed
that action has been initiated by CIL to revisit CBA(A&D) Act and
pass necessary amendment to enable use of un-utilised land for such
purpose.
22.22.22.22.22. The Committee note that Coal India Limited acquires landThe Committee note that Coal India Limited acquires landThe Committee note that Coal India Limited acquires landThe Committee note that Coal India Limited acquires landThe Committee note that Coal India Limited acquires land
for coal mining under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and Coalfor coal mining under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and Coalfor coal mining under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and Coalfor coal mining under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and Coalfor coal mining under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and Coal
Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and inBearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and inBearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and inBearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and inBearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and in
certain cases, by direct purchase.  Whenever any land in anycertain cases, by direct purchase.  Whenever any land in anycertain cases, by direct purchase.  Whenever any land in anycertain cases, by direct purchase.  Whenever any land in anycertain cases, by direct purchase.  Whenever any land in any
locality/area is to be acquired, a notification under the above Acts,locality/area is to be acquired, a notification under the above Acts,locality/area is to be acquired, a notification under the above Acts,locality/area is to be acquired, a notification under the above Acts,locality/area is to be acquired, a notification under the above Acts,
to that effect, is published in the Official Gazette wherein the extentto that effect, is published in the Official Gazette wherein the extentto that effect, is published in the Official Gazette wherein the extentto that effect, is published in the Official Gazette wherein the extentto that effect, is published in the Official Gazette wherein the extent
of land, so required, is notified.  In case of any objection to theof land, so required, is notified.  In case of any objection to theof land, so required, is notified.  In case of any objection to theof land, so required, is notified.  In case of any objection to theof land, so required, is notified.  In case of any objection to the
acquisition of such land, the interested person(s) can file his/theiracquisition of such land, the interested person(s) can file his/theiracquisition of such land, the interested person(s) can file his/theiracquisition of such land, the interested person(s) can file his/theiracquisition of such land, the interested person(s) can file his/their
objections within 30 days from the date of publication ofobjections within 30 days from the date of publication ofobjections within 30 days from the date of publication ofobjections within 30 days from the date of publication ofobjections within 30 days from the date of publication of
notification.  It is pertinent to note that the coal reserves in thenotification.  It is pertinent to note that the coal reserves in thenotification.  It is pertinent to note that the coal reserves in thenotification.  It is pertinent to note that the coal reserves in thenotification.  It is pertinent to note that the coal reserves in the
country are mostly in the far-flung areas inhabited by the tribalcountry are mostly in the far-flung areas inhabited by the tribalcountry are mostly in the far-flung areas inhabited by the tribalcountry are mostly in the far-flung areas inhabited by the tribalcountry are mostly in the far-flung areas inhabited by the tribal
communities, most backward and weaker sections of the society.communities, most backward and weaker sections of the society.communities, most backward and weaker sections of the society.communities, most backward and weaker sections of the society.communities, most backward and weaker sections of the society.
They hardly have any access to the Official Gazette wherein theyThey hardly have any access to the Official Gazette wherein theyThey hardly have any access to the Official Gazette wherein theyThey hardly have any access to the Official Gazette wherein theyThey hardly have any access to the Official Gazette wherein they
could see that their lands are to be acquired for public purposes.could see that their lands are to be acquired for public purposes.could see that their lands are to be acquired for public purposes.could see that their lands are to be acquired for public purposes.could see that their lands are to be acquired for public purposes.
The Committee feel that a mechanism may be in place to ensureThe Committee feel that a mechanism may be in place to ensureThe Committee feel that a mechanism may be in place to ensureThe Committee feel that a mechanism may be in place to ensureThe Committee feel that a mechanism may be in place to ensure
that such people automatically become aware of the acquisition ofthat such people automatically become aware of the acquisition ofthat such people automatically become aware of the acquisition ofthat such people automatically become aware of the acquisition ofthat such people automatically become aware of the acquisition of
their land  and  if necessary, they could timely file any objectiontheir land  and  if necessary, they could timely file any objectiontheir land  and  if necessary, they could timely file any objectiontheir land  and  if necessary, they could timely file any objectiontheir land  and  if necessary, they could timely file any objection
therefor within 90 days instead of the present provision of 30 days.therefor within 90 days instead of the present provision of 30 days.therefor within 90 days instead of the present provision of 30 days.therefor within 90 days instead of the present provision of 30 days.therefor within 90 days instead of the present provision of 30 days.
For this purpose local NGOs may be involved and wide publicityFor this purpose local NGOs may be involved and wide publicityFor this purpose local NGOs may be involved and wide publicityFor this purpose local NGOs may be involved and wide publicityFor this purpose local NGOs may be involved and wide publicity
through print and electronic media can also be given. Necessarythrough print and electronic media can also be given. Necessarythrough print and electronic media can also be given. Necessarythrough print and electronic media can also be given. Necessarythrough print and electronic media can also be given. Necessary
action may be taken to amend the  said Acts, in this regard, ifaction may be taken to amend the  said Acts, in this regard, ifaction may be taken to amend the  said Acts, in this regard, ifaction may be taken to amend the  said Acts, in this regard, ifaction may be taken to amend the  said Acts, in this regard, if
required.required.required.required.required.
23.23.23.23.23. The Committee are given to understand that The Committee are given to understand that The Committee are given to understand that The Committee are given to understand that The Committee are given to understand that CIL is inCIL is inCIL is inCIL is inCIL is in
possession of unutilized land acquired for mining and alsopossession of unutilized land acquired for mining and alsopossession of unutilized land acquired for mining and alsopossession of unutilized land acquired for mining and alsopossession of unutilized land acquired for mining and also

14
reclaimed land.  At present, there is no provision under CBA(A&D)reclaimed land.  At present, there is no provision under CBA(A&D)reclaimed land.  At present, there is no provision under CBA(A&D)reclaimed land.  At present, there is no provision under CBA(A&D)reclaimed land.  At present, there is no provision under CBA(A&D)
Act, 1957, for returning acquired land to PAPs.  The CommitteeAct, 1957, for returning acquired land to PAPs.  The CommitteeAct, 1957, for returning acquired land to PAPs.  The CommitteeAct, 1957, for returning acquired land to PAPs.  The CommitteeAct, 1957, for returning acquired land to PAPs.  The Committee
have been informed that measures are being contemplated by CILhave been informed that measures are being contemplated by CILhave been informed that measures are being contemplated by CILhave been informed that measures are being contemplated by CILhave been informed that measures are being contemplated by CIL
for returning mined out areas and unutilized land, which are nofor returning mined out areas and unutilized land, which are nofor returning mined out areas and unutilized land, which are nofor returning mined out areas and unutilized land, which are nofor returning mined out areas and unutilized land, which are no
more required by the coal companies. The Committee hope thatmore required by the coal companies. The Committee hope thatmore required by the coal companies. The Committee hope thatmore required by the coal companies. The Committee hope thatmore required by the coal companies. The Committee hope that
necessary changes in this Act  should be effected to ensure returnnecessary changes in this Act  should be effected to ensure returnnecessary changes in this Act  should be effected to ensure returnnecessary changes in this Act  should be effected to ensure returnnecessary changes in this Act  should be effected to ensure return
of unutilized land to the PAPs after proper development. Theof unutilized land to the PAPs after proper development. Theof unutilized land to the PAPs after proper development. Theof unutilized land to the PAPs after proper development. Theof unutilized land to the PAPs after proper development. The
Committee also recommend that CIL should plan their landCommittee also recommend that CIL should plan their landCommittee also recommend that CIL should plan their landCommittee also recommend that CIL should plan their landCommittee also recommend that CIL should plan their land
requirements   so that the same is judiciously and optimallyrequirements   so that the same is judiciously and optimallyrequirements   so that the same is judiciously and optimallyrequirements   so that the same is judiciously and optimallyrequirements   so that the same is judiciously and optimally
utilized.utilized.utilized.utilized.utilized.
D.    PROVISION OF COMPENSATIOND.    PROVISION OF COMPENSATIOND.    PROVISION OF COMPENSATIOND.    PROVISION OF COMPENSATIOND.    PROVISION OF COMPENSATION
24. Acquisition of land and deciding cases of land losers is a
continuous process which passes through various stages viz. enquiry,
scrutiny, vetting and taking over physical possession of acquired land.
Eligible claims for employment are being disposed of as per the
provisions of CIL’s R&R Policy as well as the norms prevalent in the
company.
25. During the evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal brought to
the notice of the Committee that provision of employment is considered
under package.  For each two acres of land acquired (irrespective of
category of land) one employment will be released subject to
availability of vacancy and suitability of the candidate in the
descending order of land lost.
26. According to the Ministry of Coal, the number of employment
cases against land acquisition under consideration/process is as
follows:-
ECL — At present, there are 715 nos. of cases to whom
employment will be provided over next five years.
BCCL — 1182 employment cases are under dispute due to
non-fulfilment  of  laid down norms of BCCL.
CCL — Cases of 306 Nos. of employment are under
Scrutiny.

15
NCL — There are 14 balance eligible cases for employment
but the  concerned land losers do not have eligible
candidates at  present.
WCL — 66 number of cases are under examination at
different stages for  approval.
SECL — 53 cases have been processed for issue of appoint-
ment orders. Further 627 cases are likely to be
considered based on application/ nominations to be
received from PAPs.
MCL — Cases of 706 employment are under scrutiny.
27. To a query as to whether employment is not given to women
in some of the  coal subsidiaries, the Secretary during the oral evidence
stated that:—
“There are some coal subsidiaries where there is provision of not
giving employment to women.  It has come to my notice that
perhaps only  in Western Coalfields Ltd. (WCL)   there is an
internal Circular in this regard and not in any other company.
We will withdraw it.”
28. To a query whether there is any provision to provide employment
to all dependent children of a joint family irrespective of acquisition
of number of acres of land, the Ministry in its written reply have stated
as under:—
“The package concept of release of one employment for every 2
acres of land acquired and the concept of nuclear family takes
care of this.”
29. The number of employment provided to the land losers
subsidiary-wise since nationalization upto 31st March, 2008 is as
under:—
Name of Subsidiary No. of  Employment
12
ECL — 12047

16
12
BCCL — 4628
CCL — 4707
MCL — 7755
WCL — 5853
SECL — 13616
NCL — 3826
When the Committee asked whether employment is provided
according to the qualification of the land losers, the Ministry of coal
have stated in their reply as follows:—
“Persons who are in possession of professional or technical
qualification and appointed either under land losers scheme or
on compassionate ground have been representing for their
placement in appropriate grade in commensurate with their
qualification.  The matter is under active consideration of Coal
India Ltd.”
3030303030. The Committee note that as per the revised R&R Policy ofThe Committee note that as per the revised R&R Policy ofThe Committee note that as per the revised R&R Policy ofThe Committee note that as per the revised R&R Policy ofThe Committee note that as per the revised R&R Policy of
CIL, one employment is released for each two acres of land acquiredCIL, one employment is released for each two acres of land acquiredCIL, one employment is released for each two acres of land acquiredCIL, one employment is released for each two acres of land acquiredCIL, one employment is released for each two acres of land acquired
(irrespective of category of land) subject to availability of vacancy(irrespective of category of land) subject to availability of vacancy(irrespective of category of land) subject to availability of vacancy(irrespective of category of land) subject to availability of vacancy(irrespective of category of land) subject to availability of vacancy
and suitability of the candidate in the descending order of landand suitability of the candidate in the descending order of landand suitability of the candidate in the descending order of landand suitability of the candidate in the descending order of landand suitability of the candidate in the descending order of land
lost. The Committee observe that the assurance for providinglost. The Committee observe that the assurance for providinglost. The Committee observe that the assurance for providinglost. The Committee observe that the assurance for providinglost. The Committee observe that the assurance for providing
employment is subject to availability of vacancies and suitabilityemployment is subject to availability of vacancies and suitabilityemployment is subject to availability of vacancies and suitabilityemployment is subject to availability of vacancies and suitabilityemployment is subject to availability of vacancies and suitability
of the affected persons and not as a guarantee.  As such theof the affected persons and not as a guarantee.  As such theof the affected persons and not as a guarantee.  As such theof the affected persons and not as a guarantee.  As such theof the affected persons and not as a guarantee.  As such the
assurance of employment is often found as a lip-service rather thanassurance of employment is often found as a lip-service rather thanassurance of employment is often found as a lip-service rather thanassurance of employment is often found as a lip-service rather thanassurance of employment is often found as a lip-service rather than
any serious efforts to achieve it.  The Committee, therefore, feelany serious efforts to achieve it.  The Committee, therefore, feelany serious efforts to achieve it.  The Committee, therefore, feelany serious efforts to achieve it.  The Committee, therefore, feelany serious efforts to achieve it.  The Committee, therefore, feel
that the PAPs should have the right to get employment in thethat the PAPs should have the right to get employment in thethat the PAPs should have the right to get employment in thethat the PAPs should have the right to get employment in thethat the PAPs should have the right to get employment in the
projects as the employment remains the most preferred option ofprojects as the employment remains the most preferred option ofprojects as the employment remains the most preferred option ofprojects as the employment remains the most preferred option ofprojects as the employment remains the most preferred option of
the PAPs since it is a permanent source of income.  The Committee,the PAPs since it is a permanent source of income.  The Committee,the PAPs since it is a permanent source of income.  The Committee,the PAPs since it is a permanent source of income.  The Committee,the PAPs since it is a permanent source of income.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend that instead of conditional provision oftherefore, recommend that instead of conditional provision oftherefore, recommend that instead of conditional provision oftherefore, recommend that instead of conditional provision oftherefore, recommend that instead of conditional provision of
employment , CIL should provide employment on mandatory basisemployment , CIL should provide employment on mandatory basisemployment , CIL should provide employment on mandatory basisemployment , CIL should provide employment on mandatory basisemployment , CIL should provide employment on mandatory basis
within a reasonable time.  The Committee also recommend thatwithin a reasonable time.  The Committee also recommend thatwithin a reasonable time.  The Committee also recommend thatwithin a reasonable time.  The Committee also recommend thatwithin a reasonable time.  The Committee also recommend that
the employment in lieu of acquisition of land should be provithe employment in lieu of acquisition of land should be provithe employment in lieu of acquisition of land should be provithe employment in lieu of acquisition of land should be provithe employment in lieu of acquisition of land should be provi deddeddeddedded

17
tototototo the oustees in ascending order of land lost so that the interests the oustees in ascending order of land lost so that the interests the oustees in ascending order of land lost so that the interests the oustees in ascending order of land lost so that the interests the oustees in ascending order of land lost so that the interests
of the poorest of the poor are taken care of.  The Committee furtherof the poorest of the poor are taken care of.  The Committee furtherof the poorest of the poor are taken care of.  The Committee furtherof the poorest of the poor are taken care of.  The Committee furtherof the poorest of the poor are taken care of.  The Committee further
recommend that employment may be provided to the PAPsrecommend that employment may be provided to the PAPsrecommend that employment may be provided to the PAPsrecommend that employment may be provided to the PAPsrecommend that employment may be provided to the PAPs
according to their qualifications.  The Committee hope that theaccording to their qualifications.  The Committee hope that theaccording to their qualifications.  The Committee hope that theaccording to their qualifications.  The Committee hope that theaccording to their qualifications.  The Committee hope that the
Ministry would ensure that there is no discrimination againstMinistry would ensure that there is no discrimination againstMinistry would ensure that there is no discrimination againstMinistry would ensure that there is no discrimination againstMinistry would ensure that there is no discrimination against
women in employment under CIL and its subsidiaries.women in employment under CIL and its subsidiaries.women in employment under CIL and its subsidiaries.women in employment under CIL and its subsidiaries.women in employment under CIL and its subsidiaries.
31. It was pointed out that in the revised R&R Policy of Coal India
Ltd., as an alternative option provision of one time cash grant has been
made in lieu of employment.  When enquired whether there is any
mechanism to ensure that livelihood of a dependent person and his
getting cash payment will be protected, the Ministry replied:—
“The modified R&R Policy provides for formation of a separate
group headed by a sufficiently Senior Officer of Coal Company
and at least one member of Social Science experience for planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of RAP. It also
provides for consultation and association of State Authorities,
PAPs, Village Leaders including Village Pradhans and NGOs.”
32. It has come to the notice of the Committee that private players
in the coal sector are giving attractive market rates in lieu of acquisition
of land and are also absorbing a number of land oustees without
compromising their efficiency.  When enquired about the reasons for
coal PSUs if they are lagging behind in this sphere, the Ministry in
a written reply have stated:—
“The modified R&R Policy provides for enhanced (doubled) cash
compensation apart from payment of value of land at market rate
and also brought in the package concept for employment which
is not less than what is provided by the Private Players. The coal
companies are not lagging behind in this regard.”
33. Further clarifying the position, the representative of the Ministry
stated during evidence:—
“When we made this policy we knew that private sector purchases
land by giving much better rates of market value but they do

18
not give employment guarantee.  They simply say that we will
give preference but no assured guarantee is given.  The
employment which we are assuring is much more worth.  If we
take the salary structure of an employee and supposing that he
will serve for forty years then it comes to Rs.  One crore.”
34. In National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy(NRRP) 2007
there is provision of providing home-land in proportion to the actual
loss of area of the house but not more than 250 sq. mt. in rural area
and 50 sq. mt. in urban area. But CIL has made a provision under
its R&R Policy to provide an alternate house site measuring 150 sq.m.
per family to a person whose homestead is acquired. To a query
whether CIL have made any provision to compensate the person with
the alternate house-site that would commensurate with the area of
house-site  acquired, the Ministry have stated that there is a provision
of 150 sq.mt. for house site irrespective of the area of house site
acquired whether it is less or more.
35. To provide support to a person whose homestead is acquired as
an alternative option, provision for one time lump sum payment of
Rs. 1 lakh exists. When asked whether this amount is sufficient in
context of ever-rising construction prices, the Ministry stated that  the
provision for Rs.1 lakh lump sum payment as an alternative option
is higher than what is provided in the National R&R Policy.
36. When asked the rationale behind for providing Rs.  2.00 lakh for
acquisition of 1st acre of land, Rs. 1.50 lakh for acquisition of 2nd and
3rd acres of land and Rs. 1.00 lakh for land beyond 3 acre and why
flat rate is not given for acquisition of entire land, the Ministry stated
as under:—
“This provision ensures payment at a higher rate than the
standard rate to the persons having lesser land holding.”
37. Elucidating further on the issue, the representative of the Ministry
during the oral evidence stated:—
“Besides this there comes the question of additional compensa-
tion.  Besides compensation two lakh rupees are paid for the first

19
acre of land and for 2nd and 3rd acre of land payment at the
rate of 1.5 lakh rupees per acre is made while for the 4th acre
payment at the rate of 1 lakh rupees per acre is made.  It is also
true that that if we pay them sufficient compensation then there
is no need to give them employment or other amenities.   But
we are not able to give them full compensation.  The purpose
of giving graded compensation is to give more compensation to
those who have less land.  It has been suggested that
compensation should be uniform.  This suggestion will be
considered.
It is true that we acquire land under Land Acquisition Act or C.B.
Act.  In most cases we acquire land under CB Act.  Under both
acts there is a provision for compensation.  Hon’ble Member has
rightly pointed out that the compensation is not sufficient as
compared to market value or their demand, as the method of
calculation of compensation under the Land Acquisition Act
depends on the rate of land registered during the last three years.
C.B. Act also lays down the same procedure.  This lays down
a ceiling under which more compensation cannot be paid under
the Act.  This is a wider question and requires amendment in
the Act.”
38. The Committee find that CIL makes the payment ofThe Committee find that CIL makes the payment ofThe Committee find that CIL makes the payment ofThe Committee find that CIL makes the payment ofThe Committee find that CIL makes the payment of
compensation for the loss of means of livelihood of the Projectcompensation for the loss of means of livelihood of the Projectcompensation for the loss of means of livelihood of the Projectcompensation for the loss of means of livelihood of the Projectcompensation for the loss of means of livelihood of the Project
Affected Persons(PAPs) as per their R&R Policy in vogue.  In lieuAffected Persons(PAPs) as per their R&R Policy in vogue.  In lieuAffected Persons(PAPs) as per their R&R Policy in vogue.  In lieuAffected Persons(PAPs) as per their R&R Policy in vogue.  In lieuAffected Persons(PAPs) as per their R&R Policy in vogue.  In lieu
of employment, the Policy provides for cash compensation ofof employment, the Policy provides for cash compensation ofof employment, the Policy provides for cash compensation ofof employment, the Policy provides for cash compensation ofof employment, the Policy provides for cash compensation of
Rs.2 lakh for 1Rs.2 lakh for 1Rs.2 lakh for 1Rs.2 lakh for 1Rs.2 lakh for 1ststststst acre of land, Rs.1.50 lakh for the 2 acre of land, Rs.1.50 lakh for the 2 acre of land, Rs.1.50 lakh for the 2 acre of land, Rs.1.50 lakh for the 2 acre of land, Rs.1.50 lakh for the 2 ndndndndnd and 3 and 3 and 3 and 3 and 3rdrdrdrdrd acresacresacresacresacres
of land and Rs.1 lakh for beyond 3 acres in addition to theof land and Rs.1 lakh for beyond 3 acres in addition to theof land and Rs.1 lakh for beyond 3 acres in addition to theof land and Rs.1 lakh for beyond 3 acres in addition to theof land and Rs.1 lakh for beyond 3 acres in addition to the
compensation paid under CBA & LA Acts.   The Committee arecompensation paid under CBA & LA Acts.   The Committee arecompensation paid under CBA & LA Acts.   The Committee arecompensation paid under CBA & LA Acts.   The Committee arecompensation paid under CBA & LA Acts.   The Committee are
not satisfied with compensation as it is not proportionate to acrenot satisfied with compensation as it is not proportionate to acrenot satisfied with compensation as it is not proportionate to acrenot satisfied with compensation as it is not proportionate to acrenot satisfied with compensation as it is not proportionate to acre
of land acquired.  The Committee, therefore, desire thatof land acquired.  The Committee, therefore, desire thatof land acquired.  The Committee, therefore, desire thatof land acquired.  The Committee, therefore, desire thatof land acquired.  The Committee, therefore, desire that
compensation should be paid equally for each acre of landcompensation should be paid equally for each acre of landcompensation should be paid equally for each acre of landcompensation should be paid equally for each acre of landcompensation should be paid equally for each acre of land
which will create a sense of financial security in the minds ofwhich will create a sense of financial security in the minds ofwhich will create a sense of financial security in the minds of
which will create a sense of financial security in the minds ofwhich will create a sense of financial security in the minds of
PAPs.  The Committee would also like CIL to come with a packagePAPs.  The Committee would also like CIL to come with a packagePAPs.  The Committee would also like CIL to come with a packagePAPs.  The Committee would also like CIL to come with a packagePAPs.  The Committee would also like CIL to come with a package

20
ooooof f f f f compensation that yields a permanent source of income not onlycompensation that yields a permanent source of income not onlycompensation that yields a permanent source of income not onlycompensation that yields a permanent source of income not onlycompensation that yields a permanent source of income not only
to the head of the family but also to other dependants of the family.to the head of the family but also to other dependants of the family.to the head of the family but also to other dependants of the family.to the head of the family but also to other dependants of the family.to the head of the family but also to other dependants of the family.
The Committee note that the private players are able toThe Committee note that the private players are able toThe Committee note that the private players are able toThe Committee note that the private players are able toThe Committee note that the private players are able to
overcome the land acquisition by offering attractive compensationovercome the land acquisition by offering attractive compensationovercome the land acquisition by offering attractive compensationovercome the land acquisition by offering attractive compensationovercome the land acquisition by offering attractive compensation
package, whereas the CIL and its subsidiaries take intopackage, whereas the CIL and its subsidiaries take intopackage, whereas the CIL and its subsidiaries take intopackage, whereas the CIL and its subsidiaries take intopackage, whereas the CIL and its subsidiaries take into
consideration registration value of the land, which is far below theconsideration registration value of the land, which is far below theconsideration registration value of the land, which is far below theconsideration registration value of the land, which is far below theconsideration registration value of the land, which is far below the
prevailing market rate for fixing compensation.  The Committeeprevailing market rate for fixing compensation.  The Committeeprevailing market rate for fixing compensation.  The Committeeprevailing market rate for fixing compensation.  The Committeeprevailing market rate for fixing compensation.  The Committee
apprehend that CIL may not be in a position to offer attractiveapprehend that CIL may not be in a position to offer attractiveapprehend that CIL may not be in a position to offer attractiveapprehend that CIL may not be in a position to offer attractiveapprehend that CIL may not be in a position to offer attractive
rate to the land oustees.  The Committee, therefore, recommendrate to the land oustees.  The Committee, therefore, recommendrate to the land oustees.  The Committee, therefore, recommendrate to the land oustees.  The Committee, therefore, recommendrate to the land oustees.  The Committee, therefore, recommend
that coal subsidiaries should become competitive that coal subsidiaries should become competitive that coal subsidiaries should become competitive that coal subsidiaries should become competitive that coal subsidiaries should become competitive vis-à-visvis-à-visvis-à-visvis-à-visvis-à-vis private private private private private
players in their approach while dealing with land acquisition.  Theplayers in their approach while dealing with land acquisition.  Theplayers in their approach while dealing with land acquisition.  Theplayers in their approach while dealing with land acquisition.  Theplayers in their approach while dealing with land acquisition.  The
Committee also recommend that CIL and its subsidiaries shouldCommittee also recommend that CIL and its subsidiaries shouldCommittee also recommend that CIL and its subsidiaries shouldCommittee also recommend that CIL and its subsidiaries shouldCommittee also recommend that CIL and its subsidiaries should
become more flexible in finalizing the relief packages accordingbecome more flexible in finalizing the relief packages accordingbecome more flexible in finalizing the relief packages accordingbecome more flexible in finalizing the relief packages accordingbecome more flexible in finalizing the relief packages according
to the prevailing ground realities.  For this it may be desirable thatto the prevailing ground realities.  For this it may be desirable thatto the prevailing ground realities.  For this it may be desirable thatto the prevailing ground realities.  For this it may be desirable thatto the prevailing ground realities.  For this it may be desirable that
CIL may study and analyse packages being  offered by the privateCIL may study and analyse packages being  offered by the privateCIL may study and analyse packages being  offered by the privateCIL may study and analyse packages being  offered by the privateCIL may study and analyse packages being  offered by the private
parties to the PAPs.parties to the PAPs.parties to the PAPs.parties to the PAPs.parties to the PAPs.
39. When enquired about the procedure being followed for
disbursing compensation to the project affected people (PAPs), the
Ministry of Coal have informed as under:—
“CBA Act -“CBA Act -“CBA Act -“CBA Act -“CBA Act -   The “persons interested” are issued notice for taking
payment of land compensation intimating the date and venue of
disbursement. Generally the venue is fixed in the project area.
Sometimes payment camps are also organised as per the
convenience of the land losers. Under the CBA Act company
officials are authorised to carry out the work of disbursement of
compensation. Help of the State Govt. officials is taken at the time
of disbursement of compensation.
L.A. Act - L.A. Act - L.A. Act - L.A. Act - L.A. Act -      Acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act 1894 is
carried out by the State Govt. on the basis of requisition sent by
the subsidiary companies through Ministry of Coal. On receipt
of demand, the subsidiary company deposits the land compen-
sation with the concerned Collector of the District. Spl. Land
Acquisition Officer disburses the compensation to the land
losers.”

21
40. When enquired to what extent the grievances of the PAPs have
been addressed to in the revised policy, the Ministry stated as follows:—
“Significant enhancement in the rehabilitation and resettlement
benefits and incorporation of activities and budget provisions as
a part of Corporate Social Responsibility is expected to reduce
the grievances of PAPs.”
41. It was further clarified that as a mechanism   for dealing  with
disputes of PAPs   a Committee comprising nominee(s) of the State
Government, nominee(s) of the project general manager of the
subsidiaries, a representative of the PAPs and an independent party,
such as a respected community leader, a retired judge or principal of
a reputed local institution of higher education, will be constituted to
examine the grievances of the PAP and propose corrective actions as
required.  The subsidiaries will make arrangements for establishing
the Committee and bear the cost.
42. The Ministry of Coal have furnished the  pending cases of
compensation as on 31st March, 2008 as follows:—
ECL - 936
BCCL - Nil
CCL - 1282
NCL - 361
W C L -             7 4
SECL - 1798
MCL - 46
Total 4497
43. The Ministry of Coal have brought to the notice of the Committee
of the difficulties being faced in disbursing compensation as follows:—
(i) “Non-availability of updated Record of Rights.
(ii) Delay in authentication of ownership by the State Govt.

22
(iii) Non-production of relevant documents to establish owner-
ship.
(iv) Title disputes among the tenants.
(v) Non-appearance of the tenants to receive compensation at
the payment camps organised from time to time.”
44. The Committee note that around 4500 cases of compensationThe Committee note that around 4500 cases of compensationThe Committee note that around 4500 cases of compensationThe Committee note that around 4500 cases of compensationThe Committee note that around 4500 cases of compensation
are pending with CIL  and its subsidiaries.  The  Committee alsoare pending with CIL  and its subsidiaries.  The  Committee alsoare pending with CIL  and its subsidiaries.  The  Committee alsoare pending with CIL  and its subsidiaries.  The  Committee alsoare pending with CIL  and its subsidiaries.  The  Committee also
note that CIL and its subsidiaries propose to set up a mechanismnote that CIL and its subsidiaries propose to set up a mechanismnote that CIL and its subsidiaries propose to set up a mechanismnote that CIL and its subsidiaries propose to set up a mechanismnote that CIL and its subsidiaries propose to set up a mechanism
for dealing with the disputes of PAPs.  The Committee, therefore,for dealing with the disputes of PAPs.  The Committee, therefore,for dealing with the disputes of PAPs.  The Committee, therefore,for dealing with the disputes of PAPs.  The Committee, therefore,for dealing with the disputes of PAPs.  The Committee, therefore,
desire that the CIL and its subsidiaries should expedite thedesire that the CIL and its subsidiaries should expedite thedesire that the CIL and its subsidiaries should expedite thedesire that the CIL and its subsidiaries should expedite thedesire that the CIL and its subsidiaries should expedite the
establishment of mechanism and settle the pending cases in  a timeestablishment of mechanism and settle the pending cases in  a timeestablishment of mechanism and settle the pending cases in  a timeestablishment of mechanism and settle the pending cases in  a timeestablishment of mechanism and settle the pending cases in  a time
bound manner.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to monitorbound manner.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to monitorbound manner.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to monitorbound manner.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to monitorbound manner.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to monitor
the progress in this regard.the progress in this regard.the progress in this regard.the progress in this regard.the progress in this regard.
The Committee have been apprised of the difficulties such asThe Committee have been apprised of the difficulties such asThe Committee have been apprised of the difficulties such asThe Committee have been apprised of the difficulties such asThe Committee have been apprised of the difficulties such as
non-availability of updated record of rights, delay in authenticationnon-availability of updated record of rights, delay in authenticationnon-availability of updated record of rights, delay in authenticationnon-availability of updated record of rights, delay in authenticationnon-availability of updated record of rights, delay in authentication
of ownership by the State Governments, non-production of relevantof ownership by the State Governments, non-production of relevantof ownership by the State Governments, non-production of relevantof ownership by the State Governments, non-production of relevantof ownership by the State Governments, non-production of relevant
documents to establish ownership etc. being faced in disbursingdocuments to establish ownership etc. being faced in disbursingdocuments to establish ownership etc. being faced in disbursingdocuments to establish ownership etc. being faced in disbursingdocuments to establish ownership etc. being faced in disbursing
compensation to PAPs. The Committee feel that application ofcompensation to PAPs. The Committee feel that application ofcompensation to PAPs. The Committee feel that application ofcompensation to PAPs. The Committee feel that application ofcompensation to PAPs. The Committee feel that application of
Information Technology tools like e-governance, e-seva etc. in landInformation Technology tools like e-governance, e-seva etc. in landInformation Technology tools like e-governance, e-seva etc. in landInformation Technology tools like e-governance, e-seva etc. in landInformation Technology tools like e-governance, e-seva etc. in land
reforms can be of immense help to overcome these difficulties.  Thereforms can be of immense help to overcome these difficulties.  Thereforms can be of immense help to overcome these difficulties.  Thereforms can be of immense help to overcome these difficulties.  Thereforms can be of immense help to overcome these difficulties.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Coal shouldCommittee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Coal shouldCommittee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Coal shouldCommittee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Coal shouldCommittee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Coal should
pursue the Ministry of Rural Development(Department of Landpursue the Ministry of Rural Development(Department of Landpursue the Ministry of Rural Development(Department of Landpursue the Ministry of Rural Development(Department of Landpursue the Ministry of Rural Development(Department of Land
Resources) to carry out land reforms like updating relevant landResources) to carry out land reforms like updating relevant landResources) to carry out land reforms like updating relevant landResources) to carry out land reforms like updating relevant landResources) to carry out land reforms like updating relevant land
records and establishing authenticity of land ownership rights ofrecords and establishing authenticity of land ownership rights ofrecords and establishing authenticity of land ownership rights ofrecords and establishing authenticity of land ownership rights ofrecords and establishing authenticity of land ownership rights of
concerned PAPs in the coal bearing States.concerned PAPs in the coal bearing States.concerned PAPs in the coal bearing States.concerned PAPs in the coal bearing States.concerned PAPs in the coal bearing States.
E.E.E.E.E. PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS (PAPs)PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS (PAPs)PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS (PAPs)PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS (PAPs)PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS (PAPs)
45. The Committee was apprised of the efforts being made to
associate PAPs in preparation, planning and implementation of
resettlement projects/schemes as follows:—
“The modified R&R Policy of CIL provides that once
the demographic and socio-economic data is available,
the Rehabilitation Action Plan(RAP) will be formulated in

23
consultation with the PAPs and the State Government. The RAP
will be formulated as a simultaneous activity with the land
acquisition process.”
46.    The Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) especially locals
who are well acquainted with the local problems and mindset of the
PAPs, can play an important role in the planning and implementation
of the schemes for PAPs.  When asked whether the services of NGOs
have ever been taken in this regard, the Ministry of Coal in a written
reply stated that local NGOs are proposed to be engaged to facilitate
in conducting demographic survey, preparation of RAP, training of
PAPs, formulation of Self Help Groups (SHGs) and implementation
of R&R Plans.
47. When asked about the results/outcome of the special rehabilitation
entitlements for share croppers, land-leassees, tenants, day labourers
and landless tribals affected by coal projects, the Ministry in a written
reply have stated as under:—
“The subsidiary companies assist EPAPs (Share-croppers, land
lessees, tenants and day labourers & Landless Tribals ) to establish
non farm self employment through the provision of infrastructure,
petty contracts or formation of co-operatives or jobs with
contractors. Contractors are being persuaded to provide jobs to
eligible PAPs on a preferential basis, wherever feasible. The
Subsidiary Companies are shifting the tribal community as a unit
and providing facilities to meet the specific needs of the tribal
community that allows them to maintain their unique cultural
identity. “
48. When enquired as to what extent the Ministry/Coal PSUs have
been able to persuade contractors to give job to eligible project affected
persons on preferential basis, the Ministry of Coal in a written reply
have informed the following:—
“The subsidiary companies of CIL have made serious efforts to
persuade contractor for providing employment to eligible project

24
affect persons and local labourers on preferential basis. Some
subsidiaries have been incorporating a suitable clause on
employment of local labourers, specially PAPs in tender
documents for hiring of Heavy Earth Moving Machineries
(HEMMs), coal transportation & wagon loading works and tree
plantation contracts etc. Payment of fair/minimum wages to the
enagaged PAPs or local labourers is also ensured by the
management.”
49. Asked whether CIL and its subsidiaries have well equipped
infrastructure to give training to PAPs and their children, the Ministry
in a written reply have stated as follows:—
“CIL is well equipped with infrastructure to extend training to
the PAPs and their children.
CIL have 26 well equipped training centers which are functioning
in the subsidiaries. CIL also impart training to the persons, who
are employed under “Land Loser “ scheme of CIL through these
training centers for making them skilled to suit the job
requirement.
Details of 26 training centers of the subsidiary companies are
given hereunder:
ECL 4
BCCL 4
CCL 5
WCL 4
SECL 4
MCL 3
NCL 1
CMPDIL 1.”

25
50. When enquired whether PAP Co-operative Societies or individual
PAPs approach the Coal Subsidiaries for award of petty contracts, the
Ministry have stated as under:—
“If Co-operative/Societies and individual PAPs approach the
project for award of petty contracts like construction of boundary
wall, cleaning of township etc., preference is given to such PAP
Co-operative and also the individual PAP.”
51.51.51.51.51. The Committee have been apprised that as a part ofThe Committee have been apprised that as a part ofThe Committee have been apprised that as a part ofThe Committee have been apprised that as a part ofThe Committee have been apprised that as a part of
compensation package CIL and its subsidiaries would assist PAPscompensation package CIL and its subsidiaries would assist PAPscompensation package CIL and its subsidiaries would assist PAPscompensation package CIL and its subsidiaries would assist PAPscompensation package CIL and its subsidiaries would assist PAPs
to establish non-farm self-employment through provision ofto establish non-farm self-employment through provision ofto establish non-farm self-employment through provision ofto establish non-farm self-employment through provision ofto establish non-farm self-employment through provision of
infrastructure, petty contracts or formation of cooperatives.  Theinfrastructure, petty contracts or formation of cooperatives.  Theinfrastructure, petty contracts or formation of cooperatives.  Theinfrastructure, petty contracts or formation of cooperatives.  Theinfrastructure, petty contracts or formation of cooperatives.  The
Committee feel that success of the above initiatives is possible onlyCommittee feel that success of the above initiatives is possible onlyCommittee feel that success of the above initiatives is possible onlyCommittee feel that success of the above initiatives is possible onlyCommittee feel that success of the above initiatives is possible only
if the PAPs are provided proper marketing facilities for theirif the PAPs are provided proper marketing facilities for theirif the PAPs are provided proper marketing facilities for theirif the PAPs are provided proper marketing facilities for theirif the PAPs are provided proper marketing facilities for their
products. The Committee, therefore, recommend that CIL shouldproducts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that CIL shouldproducts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that CIL shouldproducts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that CIL shouldproducts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that CIL should
provide marketing facilities to PAPs for their products and to instilprovide marketing facilities to PAPs for their products and to instilprovide marketing facilities to PAPs for their products and to instilprovide marketing facilities to PAPs for their products and to instilprovide marketing facilities to PAPs for their products and to instil
entrepreneurial skills in them. For this, active support andentrepreneurial skills in them. For this, active support andentrepreneurial skills in them. For this, active support andentrepreneurial skills in them. For this, active support andentrepreneurial skills in them. For this, active support and
participation of NGOs and State Governments should be obtained.participation of NGOs and State Governments should be obtained.participation of NGOs and State Governments should be obtained.participation of NGOs and State Governments should be obtained.participation of NGOs and State Governments should be obtained.
F.   IMPLEMENTATION & MONITORING OF R&R SCHEMESF.   IMPLEMENTATION & MONITORING OF R&R SCHEMESF.   IMPLEMENTATION & MONITORING OF R&R SCHEMESF.   IMPLEMENTATION & MONITORING OF R&R SCHEMESF.   IMPLEMENTATION & MONITORING OF R&R SCHEMES
52. Even though the R&R Policy of CIL is well defined, there is some
difficulties in proper implementation. According to the Ministry, fund
for R&R is provided in the overall budget under the head of Account
“Land”.  But no separate budget provision is generally made for
implementation of R&R Schemes. However, for implementation of
R&R scheme, year-wise  expenditure incurred by the subsidiaries since
2000-01 is given below:—
(Rs. in lakhs)
2000- 2001- 2002- 2003- 2004- 2005- 2006- 2007-
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
(Prov.)
12345678
ECL 56.68 145.86 194.60 419.17 388.35 426.40 331.21 447.85

26
1 2 345678
CCL 46.00 54.00 44.00 77.00 56.00 43.00 4.00 156.00
NCL 19.97 97.50 100.47 30.21 16.16 23.0 15.49 14.50
WCL 228.00 127.00 285.00 665.00 448.00 138.00 282.00 283.00
SECL 822.16 205.05 332.85 66.14 161.00 537.58 506.65 140.21
MCL 181.07 177.78 115.11 317.91 173.51 47.84 964.80 239.31
Note : There was no R & R Scheme in BCCL  during these periods.
53. Asked whether the funds provided for implementation of R&R
Schemes were adequate, the Ministry have stated as under:—
“Yes, the funds provided for implementation of R&R schemes are
adequate.” Compensation is given as per approved schemes which
are prepared as per the provision of compensation provided in
R&R Policy of State / CIL.
54. On being asked about the number of  R&R schemes/ projects
taken up for implementation during the Tenth Plan, the Ministry have
furnished the follwing information:—
“ECL – 3   nos.
CCL – 1   no.
NCL – 5   nos.
WCL – 6   nos.
SECL – 17  nos.
MCL – 17  nos.”

27
55. The status of R&R schemes/projects which have been spilled over
from 10th Plan to 11th Plan is given below:—
Name of the No of R&R Present Status
Subsidiary Scheme
ECL 3 Land acquisition is in progress for
continued mining operation. R&R will
follow accordingly.
CCL 1 R&R Scheme is in progress.
WCL 5 Resettlement is in progress in one Scheme.
Finalisation of resettlement site is in
progress in four Schemes.
SECL 16 R&R Scheme is in progress
MCL 9 Resettlement work is under process.
The details of R&R schemes/ projects taken up/ to be taken up
during the Eleventh Plan are as under:—
Name of the No. of Details of Schemes
Subsidiary Scheme
12 3
CCL 8 2 (two) R&R Schemes have been  taken
up in the Eleventh Plan period.  One
scheme has already been completed and
the other one is in progress.
In addition to the above, 6 (six) R&R
Schemes will be taken up during Eleventh
Plan period.
NCL 1 One R & R Scheme is to be taken up
during the Eleventh Plan period.

28
12 3
WCL 5 Five R&R Schemes will be taken up
during the Eleventh Plan period.
SECL 12 Twelve R&R Schemes are being taken up
during Eleventh Plan period.
MCL 7 Seven new R&R Schemes will be taken up
during the Eleventh Plan period.
56. When enquired whether the  Coal India Limited (CIL) has been
facing any difficulties in implementing its R&R Policy, the Ministry
have stated:—
“The R&R Policy of State Government varies from State to
State. The Coal Companies face difficulties particularly in case
of release of employment and taking physical possession of
acquired land. It is necessary to have a uniform approach
throughout the Company, the mines of which are spread over in
different States.”
57. Regarding the details of the coal mining projects which could not
be started due to slow progress of R&R schemes, the Ministry of Coal
have informed that in SECL,three projects viz., Amera OC, Amadand
OC and Mahan OC have been delayed due to slow progress in R&R/
land acquisition acivities.
58.     When asked about areas that are facing more problems of land
acquisition and compensation, the Ministry stated in their post-
evidence reply as follows:—
“Land acquisition and related activities like Rehabilitation &
Resettlement are major areas of concern in project implementation
in all the States. However, there are more problems of land
acquisition and compensation in the State of Jharkhand,
Maharashtra and Orissa.  The State Governments of these States
should extend help & support for early acquisition and delivery

29
of land to coal companies.  However, follow up for early
completion of land acquisition proceedings is undertaken by the
Coal Companies regularly.  Periodical meetings are also held at
different levels of the State Government for expeditious clearance
of the land acquisition proposal.”
Further, the Committee was apprised of projects pending due to
land acquisition as follows:—
State   Name of Projects
Jharkhand Hurra OC, Chuperbhita OC, Magadh OC,
Amrapali OC, Block II OC, Viswakarma OC
Maharashtra Gouri Deep OC, Junakunada OC, Bhanegaon
OC
Madhya Pradesh Khadia OC, Urdhan OC
Orissa Bhubaneswari OC, Garjanbahal OC, Kaniha
OC
59. To a query whether any mechanism exists in the Ministry to
monitor R&R schemes, the Ministry of Coal in a written reply have
stated as under:—
“Ministry of Coal organises regular meetings with Chairman, CIL
and CMDs of Coal companies to monitor the progress of R&R
Schemes in coal companies. The progress is also reviewed at the
level of MOS(C) and Secrtary(Coal). “
60.60.60.60.60. The Committee note that funds for implementation of R&RThe Committee note that funds for implementation of R&RThe Committee note that funds for implementation of R&RThe Committee note that funds for implementation of R&RThe Committee note that funds for implementation of R&R
schemes are  provided in the overall budget under the head ofschemes are  provided in the overall budget under the head ofschemes are  provided in the overall budget under the head ofschemes are  provided in the overall budget under the head ofschemes are  provided in the overall budget under the head of
Account “Land” and no separate budget provision is made for thisAccount “Land” and no separate budget provision is made for thisAccount “Land” and no separate budget provision is made for thisAccount “Land” and no separate budget provision is made for thisAccount “Land” and no separate budget provision is made for this
purpose.  The Committee feel that implementation and progresspurpose.  The Committee feel that implementation and progresspurpose.  The Committee feel that implementation and progresspurpose.  The Committee feel that implementation and progresspurpose.  The Committee feel that implementation and progress
of R&R schemes can be well monitored if separate allocation isof R&R schemes can be well monitored if separate allocation isof R&R schemes can be well monitored if separate allocation isof R&R schemes can be well monitored if separate allocation isof R&R schemes can be well monitored if separate allocation is
made therefor.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that amade therefor.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that amade therefor.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that amade therefor.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that amade therefor.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a
separate budgetary head should be made for allocation of fundsseparate budgetary head should be made for allocation of fundsseparate budgetary head should be made for allocation of fundsseparate budgetary head should be made for allocation of fundsseparate budgetary head should be made for allocation of funds
for R&R schemes.for R&R schemes.for R&R schemes.for R&R schemes.for R&R schemes.

30
61.61.61.61.61. The Committee observe that  problems relating to landThe Committee observe that  problems relating to landThe Committee observe that  problems relating to landThe Committee observe that  problems relating to landThe Committee observe that  problems relating to land
acquisition and compensation is more pronounced in the major coalacquisition and compensation is more pronounced in the major coalacquisition and compensation is more pronounced in the major coalacquisition and compensation is more pronounced in the major coalacquisition and compensation is more pronounced in the major coal
bearing States.   34 R&R Schemes in Coal India Ltd.(CIL) and itsbearing States.   34 R&R Schemes in Coal India Ltd.(CIL) and itsbearing States.   34 R&R Schemes in Coal India Ltd.(CIL) and itsbearing States.   34 R&R Schemes in Coal India Ltd.(CIL) and itsbearing States.   34 R&R Schemes in Coal India Ltd.(CIL) and its
subsidiaries are stated to have  been spilled over from 10subsidiaries are stated to have  been spilled over from 10subsidiaries are stated to have  been spilled over from 10subsidiaries are stated to have  been spilled over from 10subsidiaries are stated to have  been spilled over from 10 ththththth Five Five Five Five Five
Year Plan to 11Year Plan to 11Year Plan to 11Year Plan to 11Year Plan to 11 ththththth Five Year Plan and are under progress.  The Five Year Plan and are under progress.  The Five Year Plan and are under progress.  The Five Year Plan and are under progress.  The Five Year Plan and are under progress.  The
Committee desire that ongoing R&R Schemes/projects should beCommittee desire that ongoing R&R Schemes/projects should beCommittee desire that ongoing R&R Schemes/projects should beCommittee desire that ongoing R&R Schemes/projects should beCommittee desire that ongoing R&R Schemes/projects should be
implemented without any further delay.  In addition, some projectsimplemented without any further delay.  In addition, some projectsimplemented without any further delay.  In addition, some projectsimplemented without any further delay.  In addition, some projectsimplemented without any further delay.  In addition, some projects
of SECL namely Amera OC, Amadand OC and Mahan OC couldof SECL namely Amera OC, Amadand OC and Mahan OC couldof SECL namely Amera OC, Amadand OC and Mahan OC couldof SECL namely Amera OC, Amadand OC and Mahan OC couldof SECL namely Amera OC, Amadand OC and Mahan OC could
not be started due to slow progress in R&R/land acquisitionnot be started due to slow progress in R&R/land acquisitionnot be started due to slow progress in R&R/land acquisitionnot be started due to slow progress in R&R/land acquisitionnot be started due to slow progress in R&R/land acquisition
activities.  The reasons for poor implementation of R&R schemesactivities.  The reasons for poor implementation of R&R schemesactivities.  The reasons for poor implementation of R&R schemesactivities.  The reasons for poor implementation of R&R schemesactivities.  The reasons for poor implementation of R&R schemes
might be either the land oustees are unwilling to shift  or non-might be either the land oustees are unwilling to shift  or non-might be either the land oustees are unwilling to shift  or non-might be either the land oustees are unwilling to shift  or non-might be either the land oustees are unwilling to shift  or non-
acceptance of compensation packages offered to them or faultyacceptance of compensation packages offered to them or faultyacceptance of compensation packages offered to them or faultyacceptance of compensation packages offered to them or faultyacceptance of compensation packages offered to them or faulty
approach to the Project Affected Persons(PAPs).  The Committeeapproach to the Project Affected Persons(PAPs).  The Committeeapproach to the Project Affected Persons(PAPs).  The Committeeapproach to the Project Affected Persons(PAPs).  The Committeeapproach to the Project Affected Persons(PAPs).  The Committee
feel that sincere efforts for speedy clearance of land acquisitionfeel that sincere efforts for speedy clearance of land acquisitionfeel that sincere efforts for speedy clearance of land acquisitionfeel that sincere efforts for speedy clearance of land acquisitionfeel that sincere efforts for speedy clearance of land acquisition
and compensation cases are need of the hour so that coal productionand compensation cases are need of the hour so that coal productionand compensation cases are need of the hour so that coal productionand compensation cases are need of the hour so that coal productionand compensation cases are need of the hour so that coal production
is not affected.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that theis not affected.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that theis not affected.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that theis not affected.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that theis not affected.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry of Coal should facilitate CIL and its subsidiaries in closeMinistry of Coal should facilitate CIL and its subsidiaries in closeMinistry of Coal should facilitate CIL and its subsidiaries in closeMinistry of Coal should facilitate CIL and its subsidiaries in closeMinistry of Coal should facilitate CIL and its subsidiaries in close
coordination with Governments of coal bearing States in landcoordination with Governments of coal bearing States in landcoordination with Governments of coal bearing States in landcoordination with Governments of coal bearing States in landcoordination with Governments of coal bearing States in land
acquisition and settlement of compensation cases.acquisition and settlement of compensation cases.acquisition and settlement of compensation cases.acquisition and settlement of compensation cases.acquisition and settlement of compensation cases.
G.G.G.G.G. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIESCOMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIESCOMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIESCOMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIESCOMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
62. Subsidiary companies provide proper  infrastructural facilities  in
the vicinity of areas  of coal projects . However, in some cases  there
may be some constraint  including  hindrances/problems created by
villagers/local people for selection of site for  community development
work and other local problems, delay in finalisation of the Action Plan
by the Members/Committees, delay in completion of work by
Contractors.
63. As  per  Policy  for Community  and Peripheral Development
of CIL and its subsidiaries received  from  Director, Ministry of Coal
vide  letter No. 55011/5/2004-PRIW dated 15.06.2005,  the mechanism
to supervise  the peripheral development activities  is as under:—
(i) As Area Community Development Committee (ACDC)
constituted for the purpose at the area level  will take

31
decisions regarding identifying  the activities, preparation  of
budget, reviewing  and approving  the action plan  and
monitoring  the activities  during implementation. The
Committee will consist of Area Chief General Manager/
General Manager as Chairman assisted by the members
from Finance, Civil and Personnel Departments  and the
Area CGM/GM and/or the Union representatives may
nominate some other members. A Committee of local
people’s representative would  be constituted, in consulta-
tion with the District Collector. This  Committee  may also
be associated with identifying activities specific to village/
area. The responsibility of actual planning and implemen-
tation will rest with the CD/R&R officers  or officers of any
other designation vested with the responsibility.
(ii) At  Subsidiary headquarter level, the Welfare  Board  will
oversee the CD activities.
(iii) Assistance of NGOs may be sought, if necessary, for
preparation of baseline data, CD plan  and involvement of
the local communities. For this purpose, only NGOs of
national repute  or with a good track record would be
involved.
64. Acquisition of land for public purpose deprive people of their
land, livelihoods and resource base.  Besides, displacement has other
traumatic, psychological and socio-cultural consequences.  Keeping this
in view, provision has been made in the R&R Policy of CIL to provide
various community facilities:—
(a) The subsidiary will provide at the resettlement site school,
road with street light, pucca drain, pond, dugwell and/or
tubewell for drinking water supply, community center, place
of worship, graveyard, dispensary, grazing land for cattle
and play ground.  Similar infrastructural facility, if
necessary, will be extended to the host locality. The
community facilities and services would be available to all

32
residents of the area, including PAPs and the host
population.
(b) The approach for operation of community facilities would
be flexible and all efforts will be made to secure community
participation besides involving the State and local self
Government/Panchayat for operating the facilities.  To
achieve this, subsidiaries will pursue with these agencies to
ensure the same.  The planning of the community facilities
and their construction should be undertaken in consultation
with the affected community.
65. At the resettlement site, facility such as roads, drains, street lights,
school buildings, drinking water, market place, playground, place of
worship, etc. are provided to the displaced families.  Endeavour is made
by subsidiaries of Coal India Ltd. to provide better facilities at such
sites than it was available to them at their old site.
66. When asked about details of budget allocation and actual
expenditure incurred on the community development activities in the
coal mining areas of CIL  and subsidiaries from the years 2000-01 to
2007-08, the Ministry of Coal have furnished the following information:—
 (Figures in Rs. Lakh)
Company  2000-2001 2001-2002 2002-2003 2003-04
Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
1 23456789
ECL 65.00 56.95 65.00 49.28 65.00 50.93 74.59 75.42
BCCL 117.00 43.24 45.00 21.65 80.00 43.41 70.00 31.11
CCL 85.20 56.25 85.20 50.34 85.20 61.51 71.13 39.43
WCL 75.50 74.78 91.37 66.72 121.60 76.29 157.47 108.44
SECL 273.50 225.34 412.63 352.68 649.61 551.00 512.41 392.17

33
1 23456789
MCL 558.23 369.58 742.00 270.38 1098.11 466.31 618.65 365.32
NCL 103.00 86.19 337.00 376.43 184.00 178.96 250.00 219.97
NEC 12.45 7.48 19.24 15.73 8.08 8.08 9.31 9.31
TOTAL 1289.88 919.81 1797.44 1203.21 2291.60 1436.49 1763.56 1241.17
(Figures in Rs.Lakh)
Company 2004-2005 2005-2006 2006-2007 2007-08
Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget
(Prov.)
ECL 70.00 60.93 220.00 107.36 200.00 125.98 200.00
BCCL 70.00 54.18 200.00 128.33 230.00 156.44 240.00
CCL 104.50 59.99 250.46 203.73 445.58 291.91 492.00
WCL 345.00 222.71 375.00 335.52 432.00 374.97 439.07
SECL 500.00 473.20 800.73 957.75 830.00 746.39 885.00
MCL 907.00 374.12 907.00 379.47 820.00 395.89 946.47
NCL 220.85 122.25 272.45 183.27 512.00 235.78 520.00
NEC 15.74 9.18 6.53 6.53 10.40 11.40 11.00
TOTAL 2233.09 1376.56 3032.17 2301.96 3479.48 2338.76 3733.54
67. To a query about budgetary provision for Community
Development, the representatives of the Ministry during the evidence
stated:—
“It is only to give the Community whatever they want.  We give
medicare facility, hospitals or schools etc. as per their demand

34
and accordingly budgetary provisions are made. We provide
1 to  2 ½ %  retained earning in our profit making units like NCL,
MCL, WCL, SICL, CCL.  This is over and above additional
provision, since there is no retained earning in ECL and BCCL
we are giving 1% retained earning of Coal India Ltd.  This is
in addition.”
68. The Committee have been informed that CIL and itsThe Committee have been informed that CIL and itsThe Committee have been informed that CIL and itsThe Committee have been informed that CIL and itsThe Committee have been informed that CIL and its
subsidiaries undertake Community Development activities in thesubsidiaries undertake Community Development activities in thesubsidiaries undertake Community Development activities in thesubsidiaries undertake Community Development activities in thesubsidiaries undertake Community Development activities in the
coal mining areas and earmark 1 to  2coal mining areas and earmark 1 to  2coal mining areas and earmark 1 to  2coal mining areas and earmark 1 to  2coal mining areas and earmark 1 to  2 ½ % of their retained earning % of their retained earning % of their retained earning % of their retained earning % of their retained earning
on such activities.   During the last seven years, there  had beenon such activities.   During the last seven years, there  had beenon such activities.   During the last seven years, there  had beenon such activities.   During the last seven years, there  had beenon such activities.   During the last seven years, there  had been
lesser utilization of budgetary funds earmarked for Communitylesser utilization of budgetary funds earmarked for Communitylesser utilization of budgetary funds earmarked for Communitylesser utilization of budgetary funds earmarked for Communitylesser utilization of budgetary funds earmarked for Community
Development.  The Committee are unhappy over dismal perfor-Development.  The Committee are unhappy over dismal perfor-Development.  The Committee are unhappy over dismal perfor-Development.  The Committee are unhappy over dismal perfor-Development.  The Committee are unhappy over dismal perfor-
mance of CIL and its subsidiaries in utilization of funds earmarkedmance of CIL and its subsidiaries in utilization of funds earmarkedmance of CIL and its subsidiaries in utilization of funds earmarkedmance of CIL and its subsidiaries in utilization of funds earmarkedmance of CIL and its subsidiaries in utilization of funds earmarked
for Community Development.  The Committee, therefore, desirefor Community Development.  The Committee, therefore, desirefor Community Development.  The Committee, therefore, desirefor Community Development.  The Committee, therefore, desirefor Community Development.  The Committee, therefore, desire
that CIL and its subsidiaries should make sincere  efforts to utilizethat CIL and its subsidiaries should make sincere  efforts to utilizethat CIL and its subsidiaries should make sincere  efforts to utilizethat CIL and its subsidiaries should make sincere  efforts to utilizethat CIL and its subsidiaries should make sincere  efforts to utilize
the earmarked funds fully for Community Development activities.the earmarked funds fully for Community Development activities.the earmarked funds fully for Community Development activities.the earmarked funds fully for Community Development activities.the earmarked funds fully for Community Development activities.
Welfare of PAPs should be taken care of under various programmes/Welfare of PAPs should be taken care of under various programmes/Welfare of PAPs should be taken care of under various programmes/Welfare of PAPs should be taken care of under various programmes/Welfare of PAPs should be taken care of under various programmes/
schemes with a major emphasis on providing facilities for higherschemes with a major emphasis on providing facilities for higherschemes with a major emphasis on providing facilities for higherschemes with a major emphasis on providing facilities for higherschemes with a major emphasis on providing facilities for higher
and technical education to the children of PAPs.and technical education to the children of PAPs.and technical education to the children of PAPs.and technical education to the children of PAPs.and technical education to the children of PAPs.
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
16 October , 2008 Chairman,
24 Asvina , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

35
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
CONTAINED IN THE REPORT
Sl. Reference Recommendations/Observations
No. Para No.
of the
Report
12 3
1. 15 The Committee note that Coal India Ltd.(CIL),
keeping in view the fact that lives and
livelihoods of a large number of people are
affected by forced displacement due to coal
mining projects, framed its Rehabilitation and
Resettlement (R&R) Policy in 1994 to safeguard
the interests of the Project Affected People
(PAPs) so that they may regain their original
standard of living and earning capacity after a
reasonable transition period.  This policy has
been in operation with modifications from time
to time. This Rehabilitation and Resettlement
(R&R) Policy of Coal India Ltd. (CIL) has
now been revised in 2008  in consonance with
the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Policy (NRRP) 2007.  The Committee, however,
observe that even after the revision of the
policy by CIL, much needs to be done.  In some
cases, NRRP-2007 is more progressive and
pragmatic vis-à-vis CIL’s R&R Policy 2008.  For
example, while NRRP contains a provision of
providing ‘land-for-land’ subject to availability
of the Government land, there is no such
provision in R&R Policy of CIL.  Similarly,
NRRP-2007 provides for house-site to Project
35

36
Affected Persons (PAPs) in proportion to the
actual loss of land but not more than
250 sq. m in rural area and 50 sq.m. in urban
area, whereas CIL’s policy offers 150 sq.m.
irrespective of the size of house whether it is
less or more acquired.  The Committee feel that
CIL’s R&R packages should not be less than
that of NRRP. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that these provisions of NRRP
relating to ‘land-for-land’ and house-site should
be suitably incorporated/modified in R&R
Policy of CIL.
2. 22 The Committee note that Coal India Limited
acquires land for coal mining under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 and Coal Bearing Areas
(Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and
in certain cases, by direct purchase.  Whenever
any land in any locality/area is to be acquired,
a notification under the above Acts, to that
effect, is published in the Official Gazette
wherein the extent of land, so required, is
notified.  In case of any objection to the
acquisition of such land, the interested person(s)
can file his/their objections within 30 days from
the date of publication of notification.  It is
pertinent to note that the coal reserves in the
country are mostly in the far-flung areas
inhabited by the tribal communities, most
backward and weaker sections of the society.
They hardly have any access to the Official
Gazette wherein they could see that their lands
are to be acquired for public purposes.  The
Committee feel that a mechanism may be in
12 3

37
place to ensure that such people automatically
become aware of the acquisition of their land
and  if necessary, they could timely file any
objection therefor within 90 days instead of the
present provision of 30 days. For this purpose
local NGOs may be involved and wide
publicity through print and electronic media
can also be given. Necessary action may be
taken to amend the  said Acts, in this regard,
if required.
3. 23 The Committee are given to understand that
CIL is in possession of unutilized land acquired
for mining and also reclaimed land.  At present,
there is no provision under CBA(A&D) Act,
1957, for returning acquired land to PAPs.  The
Committee  have been informed that measures
are being contemplated by CIL for returning
mined out areas and unutilized land, which are
no more required by the coal companies. The
Committee hope that necessary changes in this
Act  should be effected to ensure return of
unutilized land to the PAPs after proper
development. The Committee also recommend
that CIL should plan their land requirements
so that the same is judiciously and optimally
utilized.
4. 30 The Committee note that as per the revised
R&R Policy of CIL, one employment is released
for each two acres of land acquired (irrespective
of category of land) subject to availability of
vacancy and suitability of the candidate in the
descending order of land lost. The Committee
12 3

38
observe that the assurance for providing
employment is subject to availability of vacan-
cies and suitability of the affected persons and
not as a guarantee.  As such the assurance of
employment is often found as a lip-service
rather than any serious efforts to achieve it.
The Committee, therefore, feel that the PAPs
should have the right to get employment in the
projects as the employment remains the most
preferred option of the PAPs since it is a
permanent source of income.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend that instead of
conditional provision of employment, CIL
should provide employment on mandatory
basis within a reasonable time.  The Committee
also recommend that the employment in lieu
of acquisition of land should be provided to the
oustees in ascending order of land lost so that
the interests of the poorest of the poor are taken
care of.  The Committee further recommend
that employment may be provided to the
PAPs according to their qualifications.  The
Committee hope that the Ministry would
ensure that there is no discrimination against
women in employment under CIL and its
subsidiaries.
5. 38 The Committee find that CIL makes the
payment of compensation for the loss of means
of livelihood of the Project Affected
Persons(PAPs) as per their R&R Policy in
vogue.  In lieu of employment, the Policy
12 3

39
provides for cash compensation   of Rs.2 lakh
for 1st acre of land, Rs.1.50 lakh for the 2nd
and 3rd acres of land and Rs.1 lakh for beyond
3 acres in addition to the compensation paid
under CBA & LA Acts.   The Committee are
not satisfied with compensation as it is not
proportionate to acre of land acquired.  The
Committee, therefore, desire that compensation
should be paid equally for each acre of land
which will create a sense of financial security
in the minds of PAPs.  The Committee would
also like CIL to come with a package of
compensation that yields a permanent source of
income not only to the head of the family but
also to other dependants of the family.
The Committee note that the private players are
able to overcome the land acquisition by
offering attractive compensation package,
whereas the CIL and its subsidiaries take into
consideration registration value of the land,
which is far below the prevailing market rate
for fixing compensation.  The Committee
apprehend that CIL may not be in a position
to offer attractive rate to the land oustees.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that coal
subsidiaries should become competitive
vis-à-vis private players in their approach while
dealing with land acquisition.  The Committee
also recommend that CIL and its subsidiaries
should become more flexible in finalizing the
relief packages according to the prevailing
12 3

40
ground realities.  For this it may be desirable
that CIL may study and analyse packages being
offered by the private parties to the PAPs.
6. 44 The Committee note that around 4500 cases of
compensation are pending with CIL  and its
subsidiaries.  The  Committee also note that CIL
and its subsidiaries propose to set up a
mechanism for dealing with the disputes of
PAPs.  The Committee, therefore, desire that
the CIL and its subsidiaries should expedite the
establishment of mechanism and settle the
pending cases in  a time bound manner.  The
Committee also desire the Ministry to monitor
the progress in this regard.
The Committee have been apprised of the
difficulties such as non-availability of updated
record of rights, delay in authentication of
ownership by the State Governments, non-
production of relevant documents to establish
ownership etc. being faced in disbursing
compensation to PAPs. The Committee feel that
application of Information Technology tools
like e-governance, e-seva etc. in land reforms
can be of immense help to overcome these
difficulties.  The Committee, therefore, recom-
mend that the Ministry of Coal should pursue
the Ministry of Rural Development(Department
of Land Resources) to carry out land reforms
like updating relevant land records and estab-
lishing authenticity of land ownership rights of
concerned PAPs in the coal bearing States.
12 3

41
7. 51 The Committee have been apprised that as a
part of compensation package CIL and its
subsidiaries would assist PAPs to establish
non-farm self-employment through provision
of infrastructure, petty contracts or formation of
cooperatives.  The Committee feel that success
of the above initiatives is possible only if the
PAPs are provided proper marketing facilities
for their products. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that CIL should provide marketing
facilities to PAPs for their products and to instil
entrepreneurial skills in them. For this, active
support and participation of NGOs and State
Governments should be obtained.
8. 60 The Committee note that funds for implemen-
tation of R&R schemes are  provided in the
overall budget under the head of Account
“Land” and no separate budget provision is
made for this purpose.  The Committee feel that
implementation and progress of R&R schemes
can be well monitored if separate allocation is
made therefor.  The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a separate budgetary head
should be made for allocation of funds for R&R
schemes.
9. 61 The Committee observe that  problems relating
to land acquisition and compensation is more
pronounced in the major coal bearing States.
34 R&R Schemes in Coal India Ltd.(CIL) and
its subsidiaries are stated to have  been spilled
over from 10th Five Year Plan to 11th Five Year
12 3

42
Plan and are under progress.  The Committee
desire that ongoing R&R Schemes/projects
should be implemented without any further
delay.  In addition, some projects of SECL
namely Amera OC, Amadand OC and Mahan
OC could not be started due to slow progress
in R&R/land acquisition activities.  The reasons
for poor implementation of R&R schemes
might be either the land oustees are unwilling
to shift  or non-acceptance of compensation
packages offered to them or faulty approach to
the Project Affected Persons(PAPs).  The
Committee feel that sincere efforts for speedy
clearance of land acquisition and compensation
cases are need of the hour so that coal
production is not affected.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Coal
should facilitate CIL and its subsidiaries in
close coordination with Governments of coal
bearing States in land acquisition and settle-
ment of compensation cases.
10. 68 The Committee have been informed that CIL
and its subsidiaries undertake Community
Development activities in the coal mining areas
and earmark 1 to  2 ½% of their retained earning
on such activities.   During the last seven years,
there  had been lesser utilization of budgetary
funds earmarked for Community Development.
The Committee are unhappy over dismal
performance of CIL and its subsidiaries in
utilization of funds earmarked for Community
12 3

43
Development.  The Committee, therefore,
desire that CIL and its subsidiaries should
make sincere  efforts to utilize the earmarked
funds fully for Community Development
activities.  Welfare of PAPs should be taken
care of under various programmes/schemes
with a major emphasis on providing facilities
for higher and technical education to the
children of PAPs.
12 3

44
ANNEXURE I
COMPARATIVE STATEMENT SHOWING CIL’S R&R POLICY 2000,
NRRP-2007 AND CIL’S R&R POLICY, 2008
As per CIL’s R&R As per NRRP-2007 Modifications in CIL
Policy 2000 R&R Policy, 2008
123
1.   DEFINITION OF PROJECT AFFECTED PERSON/FAMILY1.   DEFINITION OF PROJECT AFFECTED PERSON/FAMILY1.   DEFINITION OF PROJECT AFFECTED PERSON/FAMILY1.   DEFINITION OF PROJECT AFFECTED PERSON/FAMILY1.   DEFINITION OF PROJECT AFFECTED PERSON/FAMILY
2.2.2.2.2. DEFINITION OF FAMILYDEFINITION OF FAMILYDEFINITION OF FAMILYDEFINITION OF FAMILYDEFINITION OF FAMILY
Project Affected
Persons (PAPs) is
defined as:—
- Persons from
whom land is
acquired including
tribal cultivating
under traditional
right.
- Persons whose
homestead is
acquired
- Share croppers,
land lessees, tenants,
day labourer, tribal
dependent on
forest produce.
The family in relation
to displaced person
would mean husband,
wife with their minor
children below 18 years
Project Affected family
is defined as:—
- Family whose
property or source
of livelihood is
adversely affected.
- Tenure holder,
tenant, lessee or
owner of other
property.
- Agri./Non Agri.
Labourer,  Land-
less persons, rural
artisan, small
trader, self em-
ployed persons af-
fected due to land
acquisition.
Definition of family—
“Family” includes a
person, his/her spouse,
minor sons, unmarried
daughters, minor
As per NRRP-2007
As per NRRP-2007.
44

45
123
and unmarried/wid-
owed daughters on or
before the date of no-
tification in respect of
the area/village. Major
unmarried sons will be
also included in the
family.
However, each major
married son will con-
stitute a separate fam-
ily.  (This is for the
purpose of extending
resettlement benefits).
3.   EMPLOYMENT3.   EMPLOYMENT3.   EMPLOYMENT3.   EMPLOYMENT3.   EMPLOYMENT
On Land LostOn Land LostOn Land LostOn Land LostOn Land Lost
One employment for
loosing 2 acres of irri-
gated or 3 acres of un-
irrigated land subject
to availability of va-
cancy and suitability
of the candidate.
brothers, unmarried
sisters, father, mother
and other relatives re-
siding with him or her
and dependent on him
or her for their liveli-
hood; and includes
“nuclear family” con-
sisting of a person, his
or her spouse and
minor children.
Preference to the af-
fected families- one
person per nuclear
family.
On Land AcquiredOn Land AcquiredOn Land AcquiredOn Land AcquiredOn Land Acquired
(Package concept)(Package concept)(Package concept)(Package concept)(Package concept)
Provision of employ-
ment is considered
under package.  For
each two acres of land
acquired (irrespective
of category of land)
one employment will
be released subject to
availability of vacancy
and suitability of the
candidate in the de-
scending order of land
lost.

46
123
4.4.4.4.4. CASH COMPENSATION IN LIEU OF EMPLOYMENTCASH COMPENSATION IN LIEU OF EMPLOYMENTCASH COMPENSATION IN LIEU OF EMPLOYMENTCASH COMPENSATION IN LIEU OF EMPLOYMENTCASH COMPENSATION IN LIEU OF EMPLOYMENT
5.5.5.5.5. LAND FOR LANDLAND FOR LANDLAND FOR LANDLAND FOR LANDLAND FOR LAND
(Package concept is a
major change as lesser
land holder (<2 acre)
will have a chance
for the employment
subject to other
conditions.
Cash compensation as
announced by State
Government if there is
no such provision of
State Government then,
cash compensation in
lieu of employment has
been enhanced to
Rs. two lakh for 1st
acre (minimum 0.50
lakh), Rs. 1.50 lakh for
2nd & 3rd acre and
Rs. 1.00 lakh for
beyond 3 acres.
No provision
750 days of MAW
Agriculture land or
cultibavel waste land
to the extent actual
land loss subject to
maximum 1 Ha. Irri-
gated or 2 Ha. Un-
irrigated land/culti-
vable waste land, if
Government land is
available.
Rs. one lakh for 1st
acre (minimum Rs. 0.25
lakh), Rs. 0.75 lakh for
2nd & 3rd acre and Rs.
0.50 lakh beyond 3
acres.
No provision

47
123
6.6.6.6.6. SHARE CROPPERS, LAND LESSEES, TENANTS & DAYSHARE CROPPERS, LAND LESSEES, TENANTS & DAYSHARE CROPPERS, LAND LESSEES, TENANTS & DAYSHARE CROPPERS, LAND LESSEES, TENANTS & DAYSHARE CROPPERS, LAND LESSEES, TENANTS & DAY
LABOURERSLABOURERSLABOURERSLABOURERSLABOURERS
7.7.7.7.7. RESETTLEMENT BENEFITRESETTLEMENT BENEFITRESETTLEMENT BENEFITRESETTLEMENT BENEFITRESETTLEMENT BENEFIT
Non-farm self employ-
ment through provi-
sion of infrastructure,
petty contracts, forma-
tion of cooperatives or
job with contractor
(contractor will be per-
suaded for preferential
treatment)
150 Sq.m of land in the
RS. RS is provided
with all necessary ba-
sic infrastructure.
Same as NRRP-2007.
Financial assistance for
land development for
waste land or degraded
land.
Skill development op-
portunities.  Preference
for out sourced con-
tracts, shops or other
economic opportuni-
ties.  Preference in
engagement of labour
in construction phase.
Actual loss of Area of
the House but not more
than 250 Sq.m in Rural
Area & 50 Sq.m in
Urban Area.
@25 days MAW per
month for one year to
the displaced affected
family.
Non-farm self employ-
ment through provi-
sion of infrastructure,
petty contracts, forma-
tion of co-operatives or
job with contractor
(contractor will be per-
suaded for preferential
treatment)
Home Land
100 Sq.m of land in the
Resettlement Site (RS).
RS is provided with
all necessary basic
infrastructure. Shifting
cost.
Subsistence-allowance
No Provision.

48
123
Same as NRRP-2007.
Same as NRRP-2007.
One lakh
Same as NRRP-2007.
One time financial as-
sistance of Rs. 25000/-
for construction of
working shed or shop
to the displaced rural
artisan, small trader or
self employed person.
Affected displaced
family having cattle
shall be given finan-
cial assistance of
Rs. 15000/- for con-
struction of cattle shed.
No Provision
Tribal affected family
will be given one time
Assistance for con-
struction of working
shed or shop
No Provision.
Assistance for cattleAssistance for cattleAssistance for cattleAssistance for cattleAssistance for cattle
shedshedshedshedshed
No provision
Cash compensation inCash compensation inCash compensation inCash compensation inCash compensation in
lieu of all resettle-lieu of all resettle-lieu of all resettle-lieu of all resettle-lieu of all resettle-
ment enefit to personment enefit to personment enefit to personment enefit to personment enefit to person
whose homestead iswhose homestead iswhose homestead iswhose homestead iswhose homestead is
acquiredacquiredacquiredacquiredacquired
Rs. 0.5 lakh
Compensation for loss
of customary right/
forest produce for
Tribals
No Provision

49
123
financial assistance of
500 days of MAW for
loss of customary right
or usage of forest pro-
duce.
Tribal affected fami-
lies settled out of the
district shall be given
25% higher rehabilita-
tion & resettlement
benefit.
No provision
Same as NRRP-2007.
Inclusive development
based on community
engagement/public
participation backed by
necessary budgetary
provision incorporated.
Additional Compen-
sation for tribals
settling outside the
district
No Provision
No provision
8.  COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT BACKED BY BUDGETARY8.  COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT BACKED BY BUDGETARY8.  COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT BACKED BY BUDGETARY8.  COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT BACKED BY BUDGETARY8.  COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT BACKED BY BUDGETARY
PROVISIONPROVISIONPROVISIONPROVISIONPROVISION

50
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2006-07) HELD ON
20.9.2006 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI.
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1700 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Hansraj G.Ahir
13. Shri Hiten Barman
14. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey
15. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
16. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
17. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
18. Smt. Karuna Shukla
19. Shri Sugrib Singh
10. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
11. Shri Surendra Lath
12. Shri Ajay Maroo
13. Shri B.J. Panda
14. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Under Secretary
50

51
WITNESSES
Sl.No.  Name      Designation
1. Shri H.C. Gupta Secretary
2. Shri Pradeep Kumar Spl. Secretary
3. Shri Rajiv Sharma Joint Secretary
4. Shri K.S. Kropha Joint Secretary
5. Shri P.R. Mandal Adv. (Project)
6. Shri Shashi Kumar CMD, Coal India Ltd. (CIL)
7. Shri P.S. Bhattacharya CMD, Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.
(BCCL)
8. Shri B.K. Sinha, CMD, South Eastern Coalfields
Ltd.
9. Shri S. Jayaraman CMD, Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Ltd.
10. Shri G.S. Chug CMD, Western Coalfields Ltd. (WCL)
11. Shri Abhiram Sharma CMD, Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.
(MCL)
12. Shri V.K. Singh CMD, Northern Coalfields Ltd. (NCL)
13. Shri Ajay Kumar Dir. (P), Central Coalfields Ltd.
(CCL)
14. Shri D. Chakravorty CMD, Eastern Coalfields Ltd. (ECL)
15. Shri Md.Salimmudin Dir. (P&IR), Coal India Ltd.
16. Shri S. Choudhuri CMD,  Central Mine Planning &
Design Institute  Ltd. (CMPDIL)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and
Steel welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary and
Officers of the Ministry of Coal to the sitting of the Committee.

52
3.  Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal gave a power-point
presentation on the subject “Rehabilitation and Resettlement in Coal
Sector”. The following important points were discussed during the
meeting:-
(i) R&R Policy of Coal India Ltd.(CIL);
(ii) Employment to the land losers;
(iii) Payment of compensation;
(iv) Training for self-employment;
(v) R&R Policy of CIL vis-à-vis NPRR-2003;
(vi) Protecting the cultural identity of project affected tribal
communities; &
(vii)  Providing infrastructural facilities and community develop-
ment in the resettled villages/areas to uplift the living
standard of project affected families.
The Committee then adjourned.

53
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2006-07) HELD ON 14.6.2007 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 139, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1700 hours.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
12. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
13. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
14. Shri  Chandra Shekhar Dubey
15. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
16. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
17. Shri Brajesh Pathak
18. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
19. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla
11. Shri Anirudh Prasad Alias Sadhu Yadav
12. Shri Ali Anwar
13. Shri Surendra Lath
14. Shri Ajay Maroo
15. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
16. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
17. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
53

54
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional  Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
LIST OF W ITNESSES
Sl.No. Name & Designation Ministry/PSU
1. Shri H.C. Gupta, Secretary Ministry of Coal
2. Shri Sharad Ghodke, Director -do-
3. Shri P.S. Bhattacharya, CMD Coal India Ltd.
4. Shri R. Mohandas, Director -do-
5. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee, Ministry of Rural
Ad. Secretary Development
6. Shri G.B. Upadhyay, Under Secretary  -do-
2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel welcomed the Members of the Committee  and, the
representatives of the Ministries of Coal and Rural Development  to
the sitting of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Rural
Development briefed the Committee on “National Policy on Rehabili-
tation and Resettlement (R&R), 2003”. Then the Secretary, Ministry of
Coal briefed the Committee on the subject “Rehabilitation and
Resettlement in Coal Sector”. The following important points emerged
out of the discussion:—
(i) R&R Policy of Ministry of Rural Development – 2003;
(ii) R&R of Coal India Ltd. – 2000;

55
(iii) Proposed R&R Policy of Ministry of Rural Development;
(iv) Amendments in Land Acquisition Act, 1894; and
(v)  Need to have a rationale R&R Policy.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been
kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

56
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 19th May, 2008 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM  No. ‘139’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1310 hours.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
12. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
13. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
14. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
15. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
16. Shri Prabhunath Singh
17. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
18. Shri Sugrib Singh
19. Shri Anirudh Prasad Alias Sadhu Yadav
10. Shri Ali Anwar
11. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
12. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Kumar — Deputy Secretary
56

57
WITNESSES
1. Shri H.C. Gupta, Secretary Ministry of Coal
2. Shri Rajiv Sharma, Addl. Secretary -do-
3. Dr. S.P. Seth, Addl. Secretary -do-
4. Shri Sharad Ghodke, Director -do-
5. Shri P.S. Bhattacharya, CMD Coal India Ltd.
6. Shri A.K. Paul, CMD Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.
7. Shri S. Chakraborty, CMD Eastern Coalfields Ltd.
8. Shri V.K. Singh, CMD Northern Coalfields Ltd.
9. Shri B.K. Sinha, CMD South Eastern Coalfields
Ltd.
10. Shri D.C. Garg, CMD Western Coalfields Ltd.
11. Shri R.K. Saha, Director Central Coalfields Ltd.
12. Shri G.D. Gulab, Director Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.
13. Shri P.K. Saxena, Director Northern Coalfields Ltd.
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed representatives of the
Ministry of Coal to the sitting of Committee and apprised them of
the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha.
3. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry of Coal gave
a visual presentation on the subject “Rehabilitation and Resettlement
in Coal Sector” followed by briefing by the Coal Secretary. The points
discussed during the sitting broadly related to the issues such as
providing employment to all land losers; fixation of quantum of
compensation; problems of land acquisition, implementation of R&R
schemes, etc. The Coal Secretary explained to the various queries raised

58
by the Members on the subject to the extent possible. The Chairman
directed the representatives of Coal Ministry to submit detailed replies
on the points which were not clarified during evidence.
4. *** *** *** ***
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

59
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 15th SEPTEMBER, 2008 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1615 hours to consider and
adopt the Report on the subject “Rehabilitation and Resettlement by
Coal India Ltd.” of Ministry of Coal.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — — — — — Chairman
MEMBERS
12. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
13. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
14. Shri Hiten Barman
15. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
16. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla
18. Shri Sugrib Singh
19. Shri Anirudh Prasad Alias Sadhu Yadav
10. Shri Arun Yadav
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Jesudas Seelam
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
14. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
15. Shri B.J. Panda
16. Shri R.C. Singh
17 Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
59

60
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
2. ** ** ** **
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft
Report on the subject “Rehabilitation and Resettlement by Coal India
Ltd.” without any amendment.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Report after making consequentials change arising out of factual
verification by the concerned Ministry and to present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Does not pertain to this Report.

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.