28
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COAL
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Twenty Third Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)


TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COAL
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Twenty Third Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.12.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 7.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)

CC&S No. 28
Price : Rs. 54.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 14
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................ 41
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ................................... 42
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 44
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2007-08) held on 5th December, 2007 .... 45
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ......................................................... 47
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2007-08)
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri D.K.Audikesavulu
4. Shri Hiten Barman
5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
7. Shri Chandrakant B.Khaire
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
12. Shri Brajesh Pathak
13. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
14. Shri Tarachand Sahu
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
16. Smt. Karuna Shukla
17. Shri Prabhunath Singh
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
19. Shri Sugrib Singh
20. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
21. Shri Anirudh Prasad a lias Sadhu Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar
23. Shri Devdas Apte*
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
25. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose

(iv)
26. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
27. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
28. Shri B.J. Panda
29. Shri Jesudas Seelam
30. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
31. Shri Yashwant Sinha*
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
4. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
* Nominated w.e.f. 6.9.2007 Vice S/Shri Surendra Lath, MP and Ajay Maroo, MP

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Twenty Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Coal”.
2. The Twenty Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 27th
April, 2007. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 16th August, 2007.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 5th December, 2007.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December, 2007 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (2006-07) on “Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry
of Coal” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2007.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21 and 22.
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Sl. No. NIL
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. No. 7
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. 4
1.3 The Committee desire that final reply in respect of the
recommendation which has been categorized as interim reply by the
Committee should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.
1.4 The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, it is not possible for the Government to
implement any recommendations(s) in letter and spirit for any reasons,
the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons
for non-implementation.

2
1.5 The Committee now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations made in
the Twenty-Third Report.
I. Environmental Measures and Subsidence Control
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.19)
1.6 The Committee were perturbed to note the sluggish pace at
which different schemes under Environmental Measures & Subsidence
Control (EMSC) were being implemented resulting in under utilization
of budgeted amount. The budget estimate amounting to Rs.  55.90
crore for the year 2006-07 for EMSC scheme was drastically reduced
to Rs. 8.00 crore at RE stage but the coal PSUs could barely utilize
Rs.  7.78 crore for the different schemes under EMSC. The Committee
were anguished to note that the utilization of funds for EMSC schemes
had also been quite dismal during the entire 10th Five Year Plan as is
evident from the fact that CIL could spend only Rs.  52.41 crore of
Rs.  163.00 crore approved by Planning Commission. The reasons
adduced for slow progress for these schemes such as frequent stoppage
of work by villagers, revision in some of the schemes, land dispute
cases in Dhanbad Court and non-acceptability of approved R&R
package etc. were reflection on the administrative efficiency of the
Ministry of Coal/CIL. The Committee were of the view that there had
been serious deficiencies in the implementation of EMSC schemes. The
Committee, therefore, desired that Government should review the
schemes, prioritize them and prepare a comprehensive plan for their
implementation without further loss of time so that the allocated funds
provided for the purpose could be utilized optimally.
1.7 The Ministry in its reply has stated that the schemes taken up
under the plan head of EMSC are part of the Master Plan prepared on
the basis of the recommendations of high level committee in 1996. It
is a fact that there have been some constraints in successful
implementation of these schemes mainly on account of Resettlement
and Rehabilitation (R&R) problems. However, a detailed Action Plan
has been formulated on the basis of the Master Plan covering Jharia
& Raniganj coal fields and the same is under consideration of
Government. A note for COS has been circulated for a decision on the
Action Plan. The salient features of the Action Plan are:
Jharia Coalfield of BCCL
(i) The existing 67 nos of fires are proposed to be controlled/
extinguished by implementing 45 numbers of fire projects
in 12 years time with a total investment of Rs. 2152.51 crore.

3
(ii) Total 595 number of sites are proposed to be resettled. Total
number of houses to be rehabilitated has been estimated at
98314 and they include both BCCL houses as well as non-
BCCL/private houses.
BCCL houses : 44155
Non-BCCL houses :
(Authorised Private) : 29444
Un-authorised (Encroachers) : 23847
Others (religious structures, schools,
Post office etc.) : 868
Total : 98314
(iii) The houses from the endangered area to be rehabilitated in
4 to 5 satellite townships in non coal bearing areas along
the periphery of Jharia Coalfield. The total investment has
been estimated at Rs. 4185.94 crore to be spent in 12 years
time frame.
(iv) The rehabilitation of BCCL houses shall be the responsibility
of BCCL. Rehabilitation of Non-BCCL houses from the
endangered areas shall be the responsibility of State Govt.
of Jharkhand and necessary fund will be made available to
the state Govt. by BCCL.
(v) An authority namely Jharia Rehabilitation and Development
Authority (JRDA) has been constituted by State Govt. under
the Chairmanship of Commissioner North Chotanagpur for
the purpose of rehabilitation on non-BCCL houses.
(vi) A Demonstration Scheme for shifting of 3100 non-BCCL
houses (un-authorised) is under implementation at Belgoria
mouza where work is in progress for which a total fund of
Rs. 16.4 crores has already been made available to JRDA
till date.
(vii) Since 1997-98, 9 (nine) Environment Measures & Subsidence
Control (EMSC) schemes and 4 (four) Rehabilitations &
Control of Fire and Subsidence (RCFS) were sanctioned for
a total outlay of about Rs.  42 crores.
(viii) 7 EMSC schemes have been completed, 3 RCFS schemes
are under implementation and 1 RCFS scheme dropped due
to dismantling of Dhanbad. Patherdib Rly. Line.

4
(ix) 3100 non-BCCL houses are under construction under
Demonstration Scheme and 900 houses are expected to be
completed by July, 2007.
(x) BCCL is shifting its own ‘employees from endangered area
to safer place.
Raniganj Coalfield of ECL
(i) Total Capital investment Rs.  2300.42 crores
(ii) No. of sites proposed to be rehabilitated
Including on-going scheme 139
(iii) No. of houses to be rehabilitated 33196
(iv) Time frame for implementation 10 years
(v) Estimated capital requirement Rs.  2256.82 crores
(vi) Diversion of rail/road covers a length of Rs.  7.72 crores
4400 Meters at 7 locations
(vii) For dealing with fire at 7 locations covering Rs.  35.88 crores
an Affected area of 755 ha.
1.8 Keeping in view the slow pace of implementation of different
schemes under Environment Measures and Subsidence control, the
Committee had desired the Ministry of Coal to review the schemes,
prioritize them and prepare a comprehensive plan for their
implementation so that allocated funds provided for the purpose
might be utilized. The Ministry in its reply has admitted that though
there have been some constraints in successful implementation of
these schemes, a number of schemes have been taken up as part of
‘Master Plan’ prepared on the basis of the recommendation of High
Level Committee in 1996. The Ministry has further stated that it has
prepared an Action Plan covering Jharia and Raniganj coalfields and
the same is under the consideration of the Government. The
Committee, however, note that the progress made in this regard has
been far from satisfactory. Out of 9 Environmental Measures and
Subsidence Control (EMSC) schemes and 4 Rehabilitation and
Control of Fire and Subsidence (RCFS) schemes sanctioned during
1997-98, 7 EMSC schemes have been completed, 3 RCFS schemes are
under implementation and one RCFS scheme has been dropped due
to dismantling of Dhanbad Patherdib Railway Line. The Committee
are extremely anguished at this man made suffering being inflicted
upon inhabitant of coal bearing areas due to inefficient handling of
the situation by the coal companies. The Committee are constrained

5
to feel that the schemes which are vital for the people of the area
have taken 10 to 12 years for completion. The Committee desire the
Ministry to initiate measures to ensure the completion of the ongoing
schemes within a short time frame as to obviate hazardous living
conditions of the people in the vicinity of these projects.
1.9 The Committee are dismayed to note that scant attention has
been paid to the recommendations of the High Level Committee
made in 1996 as most of them are either not implemented or being
implemented at snail’s pace manner. The Ministry have not indicated
any time schedule within which the ‘Master Plan’ is to be completed.
The Committee desire the Ministry to constitute a ‘Expert Group’ to
review the working of the said ‘Master Plan’ to see how far this has
been useful and the time by which it would be completed. The
Committee should be kept informed of the working of the proposed
‘Expert Group’.
II. Science and Technology Project
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.23)
1.10 The Committee noted that the Budget Estimates(BE) for
Research and Development(R&D) activities under Science & Technology
(S&T) grant of Ministry of Coal amounting to Rs. 21.09 crore for the
year 2006-07 were reduced drastically to Rs. 6.00 crore at the RE stage
and actual utilization was only Rs. 7.61 crore. The fund utilization by
the coal companies for the R&D activities during the entire 10th Plan
Period had also not been upto the mark. Out of a total of Rs. 81.08
crore provided during the 10th Five Year Plan for R&D activities, the
coal PSUs could utilize Rs. 50.94 crore which comes to 62.82%. As far
as implementation of the R&D projects was concerned, out of 47
projects sanctioned during 10th Plan, the coal PSUs could complete
only 15 projects, 1 project was terminated and rest of the 31 projects
have spilled over to the 11th Plan Period. The reasons advanced by
the Ministry of Coal for the lower allocations and even lesser utilization
of funds generally pertained to delay in procurement of imported
equipments, delay in award of contracts, etc.
1.11 The Committee were dismayed to note that the R&D projects,
which do have a direct and immediate impact on the growth of coal
industry, had been a neglected area. Not only the budgetary allocations
for R&D activities had been very low as compared to the total turn
over of the industry but also the utilization of the same had been

6
very poor resulting in non-completion of the projects within the
scheduled time. The Committee did not approve of the delays for the
simple fact that barely 1/3rd of the projects sanctioned during 10th
Plan could be completed. The Committee felt that Central Mine
Planning and Design Institute (CMPDI), which is the nodal agency for
coordination and monitoring of coal S&T projects funded by the
Ministry of Coal and also projects funded by CIL, had failed in
delivering the targeted results. The Committee, therefore, impressed
upon the Ministry of Coal to have an adequate control and supervision
over the agencies responsible for the implementation of the various
R&D projects to avoid time and cost overrun and ensure full utilization
of funds. The Committee further desired that the Ministry of Coal
should introduce a stringent system of accountability and responsibility
in dealing with Coal S&T projects by the various research and academic
institutes who have been assigned research work.
1.12 The Ministry in its reply has stated that the out of the 47
projects approved during X Plan, 15 nos. of projects have been
completed and one project was terminated.
1.13 The S&T project duration normally varies from 2-4 years.
There are 15 projects which have duration of 3 to 4 years and were
sanctioned during later half of the Xth plan period. These projects
have been shifted to XI Plan as on-going projects without any time
overrun. However, 16 nos. of projects which were scheduled to be
completed within X Plan could not be completed and got extended
due to various reasons like delay in procurement of imported
equipment, delay in getting statutory permission/environmental
clearance etc.
1.14 Extension of time for any of the S&T projects is granted only
after detailed deliberations by the sub-committee concerned of Standing
Scientific Research Committee (SSRC) and extension is normally of
specified duration along with updated activity plan.
Steps taken to facilitate timely completion of the projects:
(i) Progress of S&T projects is monitored by CMPDI and
reviewed by SSRC sub-committees and SSRC headed by
Secretary, Ministry of Coal. Progress of the projects is also
monitored by periodic visits to the implementing institutes
by the officials of S&T Department of CMPDI to monitor/
coordinate the implementation of projects.

7
(ii) To obviate the delay in field trials due to non-availability of
mining faces/sites, CMPDI extends help to implementing
agencies in selecting alternative sites for field trials.
(iii) Progress reports (both physical and financial) as received
from implementing agencies on a quarterly basis are
reviewed by CMPDI. The causes of delay, if any, are
discussed in detail and remedial measures are suggested.
1.15 The Committee had earlier desired the Ministry to introduce
a stringent system of accountability and responsibility in dealing
with coal S&T projects since out of 47 S&T projects sanctioned
during 10th Plan, only 15 projects could be completed. The Ministry
has informed the Committee that the S&T projects duration normally
varies from 2-4 years.  The Committee regret to note that despite
project duration of 2-4 years and monitoring by Central Mines and
Planning Design Institute Ltd. (CMPDIL) and Standing Scientific
Research Committee (SSRC), 32 projects have still not been
completed. It was for this reason that the Committee had desired
the Ministry to introduce stringent system of accountability and
responsibility for implementation of S&T projects. However, the
Ministry is silent on this matter. The Committee, therefore, would
like to reiterate their recommendation in this regard.
1.16 The Committee had also impressed upon the Ministry to
have an adequate control and supervision over CMPDIL for the
implementation of various S&T projects. Though the Ministry has
stated that CMPDIL monitor the projects, extends help to
implementing agencies in selecting alternative sites for field trials
and review the progress reports quarterly received from implementing
agencies, much needs to be done to further improve the working of
this premier agency. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry/
Coal India Ltd. to take adequate measures to make CMPDIL a more
professional and effective organisation for time bound
implementation of various S&T projects. There is also an urgent
need to carefully select the subjects for S&T projects. These should
be to solve practical problems faced by various coal companies in
mining the coal and in improving the quality & quantity of the
mined coals, their gasification, etc. so that the production can be
increased.
III. Emergency Coal Production Plan
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 4.20)
1.17 The Committee noted that in view of increase in demand of
coal, Coal India Ltd. (CIL) has prepared an ‘Emergency Coal Production

8
Plan’ to boost the coal production in the country. For this purpose, 16
opencast projects/mines involving an investment of Rs.  3073 crores
had been identified, which had adequate reserves, where production
from the existing mines/projects could be enhanced at a higher level
yielding additional production of 71.30 mt. The built-up of incremental
production will be 18 mt. for the 1st year and progressively reaching
to 71.30 mt in 8th year. The increased coal production and overburden
removal would be carried out through departmental equipment as
well as by outsourcing at different projects depending on present
operating conditions. Although the emergency coal production plan
envisaged by CIL looked quite ambitious and rosy, it was, however, to
be seen how far the plan was able to boost coal production keeping
in view the perennial problems being faced by it in the timely
completion of coal projects. With a view to meet increasing demand of
coal in the country of various consuming sectors, the Committee desired
that the Ministry of Coal to identify various difficulties which check
coal production and prepare a contingency plan to find out quick
solution to these problems.
1.18 The Ministry in its reply has stated that the Coal India Limited
under “Emergency Coal Production Plan” has identified 16 opencast
projects/mines where production from the existing mines/projects will
be enhanced to a higher level yielding additional 71.3 Mt. Besides this
following steps have also been taken to increase coal production:
• 130 coal blocks have been allotted to different consumers to
be operated by private/public sector for captive end uses/
commercial mining.
•T o reduce the gap between demand and supply of coal, 119
mining projects of Coal India Limited and 25 mining projects
of Singareni Collieries Company Limited are envisaged to
be undertaken in XI Plan.
• Improvement in equipment utilization and mechanization/
modernization of existing mines.
1.19 Since there were perennial problems adversely affecting the
timely completion of coal projects, the Committee had desired the
Ministry to prepare a contingency plan to find quick solution to the
problems. In a reply the Ministry has stated that Coal India Ltd.
(CIL) under “Emergency Coal Production Plan’ has identified 16
opencast projects/mines where production from the existing mines/
projects will be enhanced to a higher level yielding additional
71.3 mt coal. The Ministry has further stated that 130 coal blocks

9
have been allotted to different consumers and 144 coal mining
projects are envisaged to be undertaken during 11th Plan to reduce
the gap between demand and supply of coal. Although the Ministry
has informed that with improvement in utilisation of equipments
and mechanization /modernization of existing mines will increase
the coal production. The Ministry has not identified the problems
hampering the development of coal mines and coal projects. The
Committee feel that since the coal blocks being allotted by the
Ministry of Coal are not being developed as per schedule and the
completion of various coal projects lagging far behind, it is doubtful
whether the ambitious ‘Emergency Coal Production Plan’ to accelerate
coal production would bring the desired results. The Committee
would, therefore like to stress that the Coal India Ltd. should focus
on bridging the gap between demand and supply of the coal by
increasing the production from the identified 16 opencast mines,
optimum utilisation of men and machinery and ensuring early
production from the allotted captive coal blocks.
IV . Coal Gasification
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 6.23)
1.20 The Committee had been informed that coal gasification is
the process of converting coal through reactions with gasifying media
like air, oxygen, steam or mixture of these into a gaseous product. The
gasification of coal is possible both at surface and underground. The
underground coal gasification offers a potential economic means of
extracting energy from deep seated deposits which were not amenable
to conventional physical extraction economically. The Committee found
that a pilot project at Merta lignite deposit found to be technologically
feasible for studies for techno-economic evaluation was taken up but
later on suspended in view of the chances of contamination of aquifiers
lying above and below of the lignite seam. The Committee were
dismayed to note that another project taken up in collaboration with
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)/Global Environment
Facility at Moonidih and Sudamdih mines of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.
in Jharia Coalfields, sanctioned on 15 September, 1999 with the project
duration of 5 years, is still under development. The Committee noted
that recently CIL had entered into MoUs with Oil & Natural Gas
Corporation (ONGC) and Gas Authority of India Ltd. (GAIL) to jointly
pursue the underground coal gasification and recovery of Coal Bed
Methane (CBM). The Committee were unhappy to note that the
underground coal gasification and recovery of CBM for its commercial
utilization was taken up as a National Project in early 80’s but even

10
after the lapse of about 25 years, no significant achievement had been
made. A number of projects taken up by the Government to recover
CBM, were still at data generation stage and no appreciable
achievements had been made. The Committee have been further
informed that economic viability of UCG was yet to be assessed by
CIL which could be made after generation of data from the pilot
study. The Committee were constrained to note that even the regulatory
framework for underground coal gasification programme had still not
been put in place. In view of above, the Committee desired the Ministry
of Coal to expedite its efforts to complete the pilot projects within the
scheduled time so that the valuable coal reserves at deep seams which
are not amenable to conventional physical extraction economically, were
exploited by converting them into gases.
1.21 The Ministry in its reply has stated the followings:—
(i) The Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) was taken up as
a national project in the early 80’s. However, on the
apprehension of contamination of ground water, the S&T
project in the selected pilot project site of Merta Road Lignite
Deposit for ascertaining the techno-economic viability of the
project was not pursued after May , 1995.
In most of the countries world over, the activities related to
UCG are in developmental stage. Neyveli Lignite
Corporation has taken up an UCG project under S&T
funding in lignite deposits in Rajasthan in September, 2005,
but the project is delayed due to delay in appointment of
consultant even though a global tender was floated. CIL
has entered into an agreement with ONGC in Feb.’2005 to
pursue UCG through an Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU). Out of the 5 blocks identified for UCG by CMPDI,
only one block Kasta was selected in January 2006 by Soviet
experts, appointed by ONGC, for generation of additional
data for evaluating its suitability for pilot scale studies of
UCG. CMPDIL/CIL has taken up the job related to
generation of additional data, which may be available by
December 2008. CIL/CMPDIL is also examining possibilities
of identification of additional blocks for taking up UCG in
the command areas of CIL.
Directives for expeditious efforts for taking up of pilot
projects of UCG have been noted for action.
(ii) Ministry of Coal has taken initiatives for encouraging the
coal gasification technology by participation of private

11
entrepreneurs. Recently, MoC has notified production of syn-
gas obtained through coal gasification (underground and
surface) and coal liquefaction to be end uses under the
provisions of coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act 1973.
(iii) The Coal Bed Methane (CBM) policy was formulated by
Govt. of India in the year 1997 after which impetus on
development of CBM in the country has started. So far, 26
CBM blocks involving resource of 1.45 TCM have been
allotted by Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) on
behalf of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in 3 rounds
of bidding where work is progressing in terms of agreed
minimum work programme between the respective parties
and Govt. of India
(iv)  A collaborative demonstration project on Coal Bed Methane
Recovery & Commercial Utilization is under implementation
at Moonidih and Sudamdih mines of BCCL, Dhanbad in
Jharia coalfield. The revised schedule completion of project
is December’ 2007. The envisaged activities are in progress
as per revised schedule and utilization of CBM/Coal Mine
Methane (CMM) is likely to be demonstrated by December’
2007.
1.22 Since the projects taken under Underground Coal
Gasification (UCG) has been taking considerable time to materialize,
the Committee had recommended the Ministry to make efforts to
complete the pilot projects within the schedule time. The Ministry
in its reply to the Committee has admitted that UCG was taken up
as a National project of Merta Road Lignite Deposit in the early 80’s
and had to be abandoned in 1995 on the apprehension of
contamination of ground water. The Committee consider it as glaring
lapse as about 15 years were taken to ascertain the techno-economic
viability of the project before abandoning it. It has further been
stated that Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) has taken up an UCG
project under S&T funding in lignite deposit in Rajasthan. The
Committee desire the Ministry/NLC to complete the required
formalities of approval of consultant and obtaining techno-economic
feasibility at the earliest so that the project is completed as per
schedule. The Committee also desire that other Coal Bed Methane
(CBM) projects and a collaborative demonstration project on Coal
Bed Methane Recovery and commercial utilisation at Moonidih and
Sudamdih mines of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.(BCCL) should be
accorded utmost priority and completed on time.

12
V. Safety in Coal Mines
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 7.30)
1.23 The Committee noted that safety in all coal mines of India
was governed by the Mines Act, 1952 and rules, regulations, bye-laws
and orders framed thereunder. The Directorate General of Mines Safety
(DGMS), under the Ministry of Labour, was empowered to administer
these safety statutes. In the light of the statutory framework for safety
in coal mines, Coal India Ltd. had laid down a Safety Policy for
implementation in all its subsidiaries and for this purpose, had formed
a structured multi-disciplinary Internal Safety Organisation (ISO).
1.24 The Committee noted that as per the findings of various Court
of Inquiries appointed from time to time to go into the coal mine
accidents, most of the accidents take place essentially due to human
failure in complying with the statutory provisions. Over the years,
after the Nationalization of coal mines in 1971 and 1973, CIL had not
been able to change this scenario. The suggestions made by DGMS
from time to time, on safety measures, were not implemented properly
and timely. There had been instances where the delay in implementing
the suggestions were attributed to delay in procuring imported
equipments. The Committee took these issues very seriously as they
pertain to the safety and security of all those engaged in the coal
mining and, therefore, desired that CIL should take all corrective
measures where they were lagging behind to improve the safety
standards in coal mines and special attention should be given to the
procurement of equipments, both indigenous and imported, so that
the same were introduced without any loss of time.
1.25 The Ministry in its reply has stated that the Observations &
recommendations made by DGMS officials are strictly followed by
Mine Management and monitored by Sr. Officials of the area and
Internal Safety Organization (ISO) of the company . It may be noted
that over the years since nationalization, safety status of coal mines of
CIL has improved and rate of accident has shown a down ward trend.
The rate of fatalities per million tonne of output in Coal India Ltd.
has come down from 2.62 in the year 1975 to 0.17 in the year 2007.
CIL has constituted an expert committee to ensure proper specification/
selection and procurement of safety related equipment in CIL. At times
DGMS approval is required for procurement of indigenous as well as
imported equipments. Top Management also monitors the timely
procurement of safety items by follow up at different levels.

13
1.26 The Committee note that safety in coal mines has remained
a major concern which has not been adequately addressed so far
resulting in fatal accidents. The Committee had therefore, desired
the Ministry to take all the corrective measures to improve the safety
standards in the coal mines and special attention to be given for the
procurement of required equipments. The Ministry of Coal has
informed the Committee that Coal India Ltd. (CIL) has constituted
an ‘Expert Committee’ to ensure proper specification/selection and
procurement of safety related equipments in CIL. The Committee
understand the adverse conditions under which the miners are
required to work and any slackness in the safety related matters
could be catastrophic. The Committee need not emphasise that safety
in coal mines not only boost up the moral of workers but also helps
in creating congenial atmosphere for coal production. The Committee
hope that the ‘Expert Committee’ constituted in this regard would
work in right perspective and bring about accident free atmosphere
in Coal India Ltd. The Committee are extremely concerned of
increasing frequency of fatal accident and greater loss of human
lives and desire the Ministry to fix responsibility for such mishaps
and take stringent punitive action against the guilty officers.

14
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 22)
The Committee hope that the Ministry of Coal will implement the
recommendations in a time bound manner which the Committee
commented upon in their Action Taken Report. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the Action Taken in respect of the
recommendations not accepted by the Committee.
Action Taken
The replies of the Government were not accepted by the Standing
Committee in respect of Recommendations No. 6 and 12 of 15th Report.
Recommendation No. 6 of 15th Report
A Standing Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary
(Environment & Forests) has been constituted to periodically review
the progress of environmental and Forest clearances on coal projects
for the XI Five Year Plan and to evolve strategies and measures needed
to expedite the process of forestry and environmental clearances. The
Committee comprises of Secretary (Coal) as the Convener and Chief
Secretaries of M.P ., Jharkhand, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra
and Orrisa as members.  The first meeting was held on 27.07.07.
Recommendation No. 12 of 15th Report
For cost-effective project implementation in coal projects,
outsourcing of coal as well as OB is being increasingly recommended
at various forums. Outsourcing is done only for additional capacity
building and not at the cost of capacity of departmental fleet and
equipments. However, departmental option is being considered as a
fall back option in case outsourcing option is not effective or possible
due to IR issues.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]

15
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.12)
The Committee note that the total Budget Estimate (BE) of the
Ministry for the year 2006-07 was Rs. 205.71 crore which was revised
to Rs. 337.50 crore at RE stage. The Ministry, however, could utilize
only Rs. 183.85 crore upto 20.3.2007. The Committee are unhappy to
note that the Ministry failed to utilize even the full outlay given to it
at BE stage. The Committee feel that scar resources of the Government
were unnecessarily blocked which could have been gainfully utilized
elsewhere. The Committee desire that immediate corrective steps should
be taken in the matter so that it does not reoccur.
Action Taken
In BE 2006-07, provision of Rs. 37.00 crore and Rs. 168.71 crore
was made as Non-plan and Plan expenditure respectively. The Non-
plan allocation was enhanced to Rs. 37.50 crore and Plan allocation
was enhanced to Rs. 300.00 crore at RE stage. The Ministry of Finance
has granted Supplementary Grant of Rs. 131.21 crore in the end of
December, 2006 for augmenting the budget provisions for the two
CCDA Schemes namely (i) Conservation and Safety in Coal Mines,
and (ii) Development of Transport Infrastructure in Coalfield Areas.
Exemption from the provisions of FRBM Act on expenditure in the
last quarter of the financial year as also EFC process was obtained
from Ministry of Finance in February, 2007. The Ministry of Finance
has approved re-appropriation of savings under other Heads for
augmenting the funds for the above schemes only on 28.03.2007.
Accordingly, by the end of 2006-07 (as on 31.03.2007), out of a Non-
plan provision of Rs 37.50 crore, Rs 36.34 crore was spent which is
about 97% of the total Non-plan provision. Out of total RE provision
of Rs 300.00 crore for Plan expenditure, Rs. 269.37 crore has been
spent. An amount of Rs 30.00 crore earmarked for NE Region as per
requirement has been transferred to Non-lapsable Pool of Central
Government. Thus, the total expenditure as on 31.3.2007 was Rs. 299.37
crore out of the RE provision of Rs. 300.00 crore which is 99.76% of
RE provision in the Plan side.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl No. 3, Para No. 3.13)
The Committee are equally unhappy to note that the performance
of the coal companies in utilizing the allocations made for the centrally

16
sponsored schemes during the entire 10th Plan Period has also not
been satisfactory. Out of a total allocations of Rs. 1156.71 crore made
during the Tenth Plan, the actual utilization has been only Rs. 850.50
crore. The Committee are not averse to increase the budgetary
allocations for accomplishing the various centrally sponsored schemes
under Plan head with an ultimate aim to boost coal production
provided the same are utilized optimally. The Committee hope that
the allocations made for the year 2007-08 will be fully utilized
particularly additional funds earmarked for Detailed Drilling. At the
same time, the Committee desire the Ministry of Coal to streamline
the budget making process in the Ministry so that realistic budget
estimates are prepared and also remove the bottlenecks which were
responsible for lesser utilization of funds. The Committee would like
to know the details of the schemes which could not be implemented
due to under utilization of funds and steps taken to complete the
pending works.
Action Taken
a. During X Plan the BE provision of Rs. 1156.71 crores was revised
to Rs. 1122.01 crores at RE stage.
b. A sum of Rs. 105.09 crores (in RE) was earmarked in the X Plan
for NE provision, which could not be utilized. This unutilized amount
was transferred to Non-Lapsable pool of Central Government.
c. The actual expenditure for X Plan of Rs. 850.50 crores is based
on the utilization of fund made during the year 2006-07 up to
20th March 2007. In between 20th March and 31st March 2007 a sum
of Rs. 85.52 crores was utilized. Hence the actual expenditure for the
X Plan shall be Rs. 936.02 crores. Thus, revised allocations for the
X Plan was Rs. 1122.01 crores (including NE provision of Rs. 105.09
crores) and the actual utilization was Rs. 936.02 crores. The percentage
utilisation of funds (excluding NE provision) was 92.04%.
d. Promotional (regional) Exploration in Coal & Lignite: During
the Mid Term review, the X Plan scheme allocations were revised to
Rs. 261.55 crore with 6.9 lakh metre of Promotional (regional) drilling
in coal & lignite sectors.  The targeted drilling included additional
drilling of 90 thousand metre as compared to original proposal of
6.0 lakh m. As against this the cumulative expenditure in the X Plan
was Rs. 206.19 cr. (78.84%). And actual drilling achieved was 6.288
lakh mt (91.13%). Main reasons for this short fall have been delay in
commencement of Indian Integrated Coal Resources Information System

17
(ICRIS), Integrated Lignite Resources Information System (ILRIS) &
Coal Bed Methane (CBM) Studies and some constraints in Rajasthan
due to heavy rains and difficult geological formation encountered in
the field and law & order problems in some of the areas.
e. Targets of drilling in 2006-07 could not be met due to the reason
such as programme of promotional drilling was facing difficulties in
execution mainly due to unprecedented rains in Rajasthan area (water
logging in Barmer Sector), poor occurrence of lignite in Bikaner-Nagpur
Sector, failure to take up drilling in Gujarat area (lack of State Govt.
permission) and difficult geological formations and law & order
conditions encountered.
f. A sum of Rs. 63.59 crore has been provided in 2007-08 RE (ex-
NE) for Promotional Scheme. Executing agencies have drawn a
programme to achieve the targeted drilling etc., which will lead to
utilization of fund.
g. Detailed Drilling in Non-CIL Blocks: As against the Xth Plan
target of 2.83 lakh meter of drilling with Rs. 93.84 cr. Of outlay, the
actual expenditure has been Rs. 93.84 cr. and actual drilling has been
2.84 lakh mt. The provision of Rs. 104.15 crore for undertaking
1.86 lakh metre of drilling in 2007-08 has been made. This envisages
outsourcing of substantial amount of drilling as it is beyond the drilling
capacity of CMPDI. For this, process of outsourcing has been initiated
by CMPDI.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.15)
The Committee are equally concerned to note the poor
implementation of two schemes of ‘Conservation and Safety in Coal
Mines’ and ‘Development of Transport Infrastructure in Coalfield Areas’
for which a token provision of Rs. 1.00 lakh each had been kept. In
fact, the Government collect stowing excise duty and release such funds
for the activities specified in the Coal Mines (Conservation &
Development) Act, 1974. The Committee would like to have the details
of the amount collected as excise duty by the Coal India Ltd. (CIL),
subsidiary-wise, during the last three years, the targets fixed and
achieved under the two schemes for the same period and the total
amount spent. The Committee desire that the Coal India should draw
up detailed programmes for both the schemes during 11th Plan. The
Committee should be kept informed of the Action Taken in the matter.

18
Action Taken
Amounts collected by the subsidiary companies of CIL in the last
3 years is furnished in the table below:
(Figures in Rs. crores)
Company 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
ECL 271.77 253.26 288.55
BCCL 226.20 217.52 259.95
WCL 399.72 417.93 456.62
SECL 774.70 812.43 909.23
NCL 489.58 513.27 527.18
CCL 414.25 386.92 379.59
MCL 651.46 619.82 797.66
NEC 6.88 11.21 11.62
Total CIL 3234.59 3232.38 3630.43
The outlay proposed and actual disbursement of this scheme in
the budget of 2006-07 was as under:
(Rs. crore)
BE RE Amount
disbursed
Conservation and Safety 0.01 180.00 180.00
in Coal Mines
Development of Transport 0.01 13.81 13.81
Infrastructure in coalfield areas
For 2007-08, a token provision of Rs. 1 lakh each has been kept in
BE 2007-08 for both the schemes pending decision of taking up these
schemes under plan or non-plan head. However, the envisaged
requirement for both the schemes during 2007-08 is Rs. 210 crores
(Rs. 135+75 crores) which will be taken care at RE stage.

19
For these two schemes an outlay of Rs. 1665.60 crs.  has been
proposed during the XI plan period as per details given below:
Scheme Amount in Rs. (crore)
1. Conservation & safety 692.95
2. Development of Transport 972.65
Infrastructure in Coalfield Areas
Total: 1665.60
Section 9 of CM(C&D) Act, 1974 empowers the Govt. to disburse,
in each financial year, a sum not exceeding the net proceeds from
such collection during preceding year or years to the coal companies
under the two major heads viz. “Conservation & Safety in Coal mines”
(for conservation of coal coupled with allied safety aspects in mines)
and Development of Transport infrastructure in Coalfield areas (for
facilitating quick despatch of mined coal from mine pit head to
consumer end). For this purpose, Section 10 of CM(C&D) Rules, 1975
provides to constitute the self regulatory Committee called the “Coal
Conservation & Development Advisory Committee” (CCDAC) to advise
the Central Government on procedure and manner of the disbursement
of the net proceeds of duties of excise Section 12 provides for the
disbursement of SED lying in credit with the Govt. on the
recommendation of the CCDAC.
In each financial year, coal companies apply to the CCDAC with
concrete proposals with a clear mention of programme for
implementation of each of the proposed jobs and corresponding
financial involvement under each of the major schemes to be
undertaken during the year. The CCDAC accepts those proposals, which
are admissible for reimbursement as per guidelines framed by the
Committee. Subsequently after the job has actually beet done, the coal
companies submit claims on each of the two schemes. This is the
target of the Coal companies. In each half year, on the basis of
recommendation on various claims by HODs of the coal companies
through certified check list, the Sub-Committee of the CCDAC examines
all the claims strictly in the light of guidelines framed by the CCDAC
under respective head and recommends the admissible claims (out of
those being applied by the coal companies) to the CCDA. These claims
are finally scrutinized by the CCDAC before recommending the
admissible reimbursable claims to the Govt. for necessary release of
fund to assist the coal companies as reimbursement towards the jobs
actually done and expenditure incurred by the coal companies. This is

20
the achievement of the coal companies enjoying Govt. assistance.
However, the actual reimbursement is limited to certain percentage of
the actual viz. 75%, 90% and 70% in case of stowing, protective works
and road infrastructure development from second half year period of
2005-06. The rate of assistance prior to this was limited to 60%, 75%
and 50% respectively . R&D and Rail projects enjoy 100% CCDA
assistance from the Govt.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.19)
The Committee are perturbed to note the sluggish pace at which
different schemes under Environmental Measures & Subsidence Control
(EMSC) are being implemented resulting in under utilization of
budgeted amount. The budget estimate amounting to Rs. 55.90 crore
for the year 2006-07 for EMSC scheme was drastically reduced to
Rs. 8.00 crore at RE stage but the coal PSUs could barely utilize
Rs. 7.78 crore for the different schemes under EMSC. The Committee
are anguished to note that the utilization of funds for EMSC schemes
has also been quite dismal during the entire 10th Five Year Plan as is
evident from the fact that CIL could spend only Rs. 52.41 crore of
Rs. 163.00 crore approved by Planning Commission. The reasons
adduced for slow progress for these schemes such as frequent stoppage
of work by villagers, revision in some of the schemes, land dispute
cases in Dhanbad Court and non-acceptability of approved R&R
package etc. are reflection on the administrative efficiency of the
Ministry of Coal/CIL. The Committee are of the view that there have
been serious deficiencies in the implementation of EMSC schemes. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Government should review the
schemes, prioritize them and prepare a comprehensive plan for their
implementation without further loss of time so that the allocated funds
provided for the purpose could be utilized optimally.
Action Taken
The schemes taken up under the plan head of EMSC are part of
the Master Plan prepared on the basis of the recommendations of high
level committee in 1996. It is a fact that there have been some
constraints in successful implementation of these schemes mainly on
account of Resettlement & Rehabilitation (R & R) problems. However,
a detailed Action Plan has been formulated on the basis of the Master
Plan covering Jharia & Raniganj coal fields and the same is under
consideration of govt. A note for COS has been circulated for a decision
on the Action Plan. The salient features of the Action Plan are:

21
Jharia Coalfield of BCCL
(i) The existing 67 numbers of fires are proposed to be
controlled/extinguished by implementing 45 numbers of fire
projects in 12 years time with a total investment of Rs.
2152.51 crores.
(ii) Total 595 number of sites are proposed to be resettled. Total
number of houses to be rehabilitated has been estimated at
98314 and they include both BCCL houses as well as
non-BCCL/private houses.
BCCL houses : 44155
Non-BCCL houses :
(Authorised Private) : 29444
Un-authorised (Encroachers) : 23847
Others (religious structures, schools,
Post office etc.) : 868
Total : 98314
(iii) The houses from the endangered area to be rehabilitated in
4 to 5 satellite townships in non coal bearing areas along
the periphery of Jharia Coalfield. The total investment has
been estimated at Rs. 4185.94 crores to be spent in 12 years
time frame.
(iv) The rehabilitation of BCCL houses shall be the responsibility
of BCCL. Rehabilitation of Non-BCCL houses from the
endangered areas shall be the responsibility of State Govt.
of Jharkhand and necessary fund will be made available to
the state Govt. by BCCL.
(v) An authority namely Jharia Rehabilitation and Development
Authority (JRDA) has been constituted by State Govt. under
the Chairmanship of Commissioner North Chhotanagpur for
the purpose of rehabilitation on non-BCCL houses.
(vi) A Demonstration Scheme for shifting of 3100 non-BCCL
houses (un-authorised) is under implementation at Belgoria
mouza where work is in progress for which a total fund of
Rs. 16.4 crores has already been made available to JRDA
till date.
(vii) Since 1997-98, 9 (nine) Environment Measures & Subsidence
Control (EMSC) schemes and 4 (four) Rehabilitations &

22
Control of Fire and Subsidence (RCFS) were sanctioned for
a total outlay of about Rs. 42 crores.
(viii) 7 EMSC schemes have been completed, 3 RCFS schemes
are under implementation and 1 RCFS scheme dropped due
to dismantling of Dhanbad. Patherdib Rly. Line.
(ix) 3100 non-BCCL houses are under construction under
Demonstration Scheme and 900 houses are expected to be
completed by July, 2007.
(x) BCCL is shifting its own ‘employees from endangered area
to safer place.
Raniganj Coalfield of ECL
(i) Total Capital investment Rs.  2300.42 crores
(ii) No. of sites proposed to be rehabilitated
Including on-going scheme 139
(iii) No. of houses to be rehabilitated 33196
(iv) Time frame for implementation 10 years
(v) Estimated capital requirement Rs.  2256.82 crores
(vi) Diversion of rail/road covers a length of Rs.  7.72 crores
4400 Metres at 7 locations
(vii) For dealing with fire at 7 locations covering Rs.  35.88 crores
an Affected area of 755 ha.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 1.8 and 1.9 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 3.24)
The Committee note that for the 10th Plan Period, the Planning
Commission had approved Rs. 100.00 crore for the R&D activities under
S&T grants of the Ministry of Coal. The Committee desire that more
funds should be provided for the various R&D projects during the
11th Plan to ensure that the fund constraints may not adversely affect
the R&D activities.
AND

23
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 3.25)
The Committee note that the major areas of R&D in Coal Sector
pertain to production, productivity and safety, coal benefication and
coal utilization, environment and ecology. The Committee recognize
the importance of R&D for sustainable growth of the Coal Sector and
therefore, recommend that more and more quality and innovative R&D
projects should be taken up during 11th Plan for the betterment of the
industry.
Action Taken
The approved budget and disbursement for R&D activities during
IX, X & XI Plans is as under —
(Rs. in crore)
Plan Approved Budget Actual Expenditure
IX Plan 80.0 24.97
X Plan 100.0 51.42
XI Plan            100.0 (Proposed)
From the above figures of approved budget and corresponding
disbursement made during the IX and X Plan period, it is evident that
no project has suffered due to lack of fund. Considering the expected
disbursement for projects in hand and the expected research projects
in XI Plan period, a provision of Rs.  100.0 crore has been made for
XI plan period. As of now under R&D head the research projects are
received from various research/academic institutes on the basis of their
perceptions of the industry. In case less No. of research projects are
received from these institutes, the approved funds for the R&D activities
are under-utilised. At the same time total investment for R&D is also
rather low.
It is, to mention that the Working Group on Coal & Lignite has
recommended the following new areas for R&D in coal sector during
XI Plan:
Insitu coal gasification, coal liquefaction, carbon sequestration,
CBM/CMM, etc. in addition to other areas of interest to industry such
as coal preparation, underground mining, environment management,
opencast mining, high wall mining, safety etc. These identified subjects
are going to be very prominent in our pursuit of Clean Coal Technology
as well as supplementary energy resources.

24
Ministry of Coal has taken initiatives to involve more research/
academic institutes for quality and innovative R&D projects. CMPDI
has been advised to float Expression of Interest (EOI) for undertaking
the identified R&D work under S&T Scheme from established R&D/
Scientific Institutes, academic institutions, other organisations engaged
in manufacture/supply of mining equipment/accessories or related
mining and allied services/activities. It is hoped that these steps will
considerably improve industry oriented R&D activities and also total
investment for it.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 4.15)
The Committee observe that Rs. 14,310.00 crore was allocated by
Planning Commission to Coal India Ltd.(CIL) for the Tenth Plan Period.
However, this was revised to Rs. 10,975.13 crore at the time of mid-
term appraisal. The Committee are perturbed to note that CIL could
expend approximately Rs. 6944.61 crore which comes to 49% of the
approved outlays and 64% of the revised outlays for the 10th Plan.
The fund utilization performance of CIL during the terminal year i.e.
2006-07 of Tenth Plan has also not improved. Out of Rs. 3067.70 crore,
allocated for 2006-07 which was later on reduced to Rs. 2420.00 crore,
CIL could utilize only Rs. 1796.07 crore. The reasons furnished by
Coal India Ltd. for under-utilization of funds viz. delay in acquisition
of land, delay in rehabilitation, delay in forestry EMP Clearances and
delay in finalization of tender for procurement of equipments. The
Committee note that these are the reasons which have come up for
delays in project implementation time and again. But the Ministry
have not come out with any permanent solutions to these problems.
The Committee desire that these problems should be analysed in depth
and some lasting solutions should be found. The Committee should
be informed of the Action Taken in the matter.
Action Taken
Coal India Limited(CIL) spent approximately Rs. 7220.24(Prov.)
during Xth Plan period and not Rs. 6944.61 crore as mentioned, which
is about 50.45% of the approved outlay and 65.79% of the revised
outlay for the period.
Similarly CIL utilised Rs. 2071.70 crore(Prov.) during 2006-07 and
not Rs. 1796.07 crore as mentioned, which come to about 67.62% of BE
and 85.61% of RE for this year.

25
The major reasons for low fund utilization are given below:—
(i) Budget estimates provide 100% allocation against different
activities to avoid difficulty in obtaining budget concurrence.
All activities do not take place due to various reasons
resulting in shortfall in budget materialization.
(ii) Delay in project implementation due to difficulties in land
acquisition including physical possession because of demand
for employment.
(iii) Delay in rehabilitation due to reluctance of PAPs to leave
homestead land and variation in CIL’s R&R Policy with
that of different State Governments.
(iv) Delay in project implementation due to delay in approval
of PR, EMP clearance and forestry clearance.
(v) Delay in procurement of major equipment due to delay in
finalization of tender/need for re-tendering.
(vi) Projects originally taken up with the departmental option
but subsequently implemented with outsourcing option.
The planned steps of CIL to improve capital utilization are as
under:—
(i) A high-powered Committee under the Chairmanship of
Secretary(Coal) has been constituted for effectively improving
the fund utilization. First meeting of the Committee was
held on 12.3.2007.
(ii) Probabilistic projections of capital estimates to be given in
future.
(iii) A Committee has been formed for Standardization of NITs
for quicker procurement action.
(iv) A Committee has been formed for streamlining procedure
for “Survey off” equipment.
(v) Steps are being taken to make re-appropriation of fund much
simpler.
In addition, CIL envisages that following steps to improve fund
utilization:—
(i) Task force by difference State Governments to facilitate land
acquisition process.

26
(ii) Uniform R&R Policy to be acceptable to all States.
(iii) Environmental and forestry clearance simultaneously
processed.
(iv) Single Stage forestry clearance which will reduce the overall
time to less than two yeaRs.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 4.16)
The Committee, however, note that during this period of Tenth
Plan, CIL has been able to achieve its physical targets of coal
production. From a production level of 279.56 million tonne (mt) during
the terminal year i.e. 2001-02 of Ninth Plan, CIL produced about
360.00 mt during the terminal year of Tenth Plan. Though CIL had
been able to achieve 100% coal production targets, yet there remained
a wide gap of about 41.79 mt between All India coal demand and
supply during the terminal year of Tenth Plan. The Committee feel
that the progress of implementation of the various projects under the
jurisdiction of CIL for development and exploitation of coal resources
has been far from satisfactory. The Committee are pained to find that
CIL had been facing various procedural problems since the beginning
of the 10th Plan and the same could not be overcome by the end of
the Plan by the Ministry/CIL. Had CIL chalked out a plan to settle
the various issues relating to implementation of coal projects, the gap
between the demand and supply would have been abridged to a great
extent. The Committee are anguished to note that though a High Level
Monitoring Committee, under the Chairmanship of Secretary , Coal exists
in the Ministry, no significant improvement has been noticed in the
projects development. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Ministry of Coal to chalk out a time frame for settling the various
bottlenecks which are adversely affecting the timely development and
implementation of coal projects so that the funds allocated for the
various projects are utilized optimally.
Action Taken
There has been a delay in approving X Plan projects initially due
to lengthy procedure for appraisal and approval prescribed earlier.
Continuous efforts had been taken by Ministry of Coal to simplify the
procedure. As a result of which two stage of appraisal/approval viz.
in-principle approval by Planning Commission and Pre-PIB have been
dispensed with. This has facilitated early approval of coal projects in
the last two years of X Plan.

27
A high level monitoring committee under the chairmanship of
Secretary (Coal) has also been constituted for effectively improving
and overseeing the fund utilization. 1st meeting of the committee has
been held on 12.3.2007 and the 2nd meeting on 17.04.2007. Following
measures were chalked out for setting the various bottlenecks which
are adversely affecting the timely development and implementation of
coal projects so that the funds allocated for the various projects are
utilized optimally :
1. A high level committee has been set up at CIL to facilitate
a. Timely procurement of equipment.
b. Development of a standard NIT which can be used
across all the subsidiaries of CIL.
2. To process EMP clearance simultaneously with the proposal
for forestry clearance so that both can be obtained in a
reasonable time.
Forestry clearance is to be expedited by MoEF through single stage
clearance i.e. after payment of fees as per demand and without
repeating the entire process through various levels at stage-II. Further
CIL, NCL, MCL, SECL and WCL have been accorded Mini Ratna
status. This will give them enhanced delegation of powers.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 4.20)
The Committee note that in view of increase in demand of coal,
CIL has prepared an ‘Emergency Coal Production Plan’ to boost the
coal production in the country. For this purpose, 16 opencast projects/
mines involving an investment of Rs. 3073 crores have been identified,
which have adequate reserves, where production from the existing
mines/projects can be enhanced at a higher level yielding additional
production of 71.30 mt. The built-up of incremental production will be
18 mt. for the 1st year and progressively reaching to 71.30 mt in 8th
year. The increased coal production and overburden removal would
be carried out through departmental equipment as well as by
outsourcing at different projects depending on present operating
conditions. Although the emergency coal production plan envisaged
by CIL looks quite ambitious and rosy, it is, however, to be seen how
far the plan is able to boost coal production keeping in view the
perennial problems being faced by it in the timely completion of coal
projects. With a view to meet increasing demand of coal in the country

28
of various consuming sectors, the Committee desire that the Ministry
of Coal to identify various difficulties which check coal production
and prepare a contingency plan to find out quick solution to these
problems.
Action Taken
Coal India Limited under “Emergency Coal Production Plan” has
identified 16 opencast projects/mine where production from the existing
mines/projects will be enhanced to a higher level yielding additional
71.3 mt. Besides this following steps have also been taken to increase
coal production.
• 130 coal blocks have been allotted to different consumers to
be operated by private/public sector for captive end uses/
commercial mining.
•T o reduce the gap between demand and supply of coal, 119
mining projects of Coal India Limited and 25 mining projects
of Singareni Collieries Company Limited are envisaged to
be undertaken in XI Plan.
• Improvement in equipment utilization and mechanization/
modernization of existing mines.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 5.28)
The Committee observe that under the Coal Mines (Nationalisation)
Act, 1973, as amended from time to time, the coal blocks for captive
mining are allocated to public and private companies engaged in the
production of iron and steel, generation of power, washing of coal
obtained from a mine and such other end use as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify. The allottees are required to
prepare a mining plan which is thereafter submitted to the Standing
Committee set up in the Ministry under the provisions of the Mines
& Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act for scrutiny and
approval. They are allowed to develop the mines in synchronization
with the end use plants so that when the plant is commissioned, the
mine would have reached its rated capacity and meet the requirement
of the plant.

29
The Committee have been informed that 229 coal blocks have been
identified for captive mining. Out of these 229 blocks, 130 coal blocks
have so far been allotted to eligible Government as well as private
companies. The Committee are dismayed to note that the coal blocks
allotted as back as 1998 to 2000 have still not been developed and
only 8 coal blocks have started producing coal.
Keeping in view the non-development of captive coal blocks by a
large number of allottees even after lapse of a considerable time, the
Committee in their 8th Report, had desired that further allotment of
captive coal blocks should be put on hold and new allotments
considered only after the system is fine-tuned. The Committee are sad
to note that the Ministry of Coal had completely ignored their
recommendations and made allotment of about 65 coal blocks thereafter.
The Committee note that the procedure laid down for allotment of
coal blocks is very cumbersome and needs to be simplified e.g. the
allottee has to get the mining plan prepared and then approach the
State Government concerned for grant of mining lease and the State
Government grants mining lease only after obtaining previous approval
of the Central Government which in fact initiate the whole exercise.
This leads to wastage of lot of time. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the whole process should be re-examined and simplified.
Action Taken
The Committee in para 5.28 has observed that some of the coal
blocks allotted as back as 1998 to 2000 have still not been developed
and only 8 coal blocks have started producing coal. In this regard, it
is submitted that Ministry had already informed the Committee that
out of 19 coal blocks allotted up to 2002, 11 have already come into
production and six more are expected to commence production during
2007. This fact is already recorded in para 5.24 of 23rd Report of the
Standing Committee.
The 8th Report of the Committee was submitted during the year
2004-05. The position has since improved on account of the measure
taken by the Ministry such as intensive monitoring being done on
regular intervals, prescription of time-bound milestones, introduction
of bank guarantee deposit system etc. It is expected that the number
of coal blocks coming into production would increase considerably
during the XI Plan period. The Working Group on Coal and Lignite,
constituted by the Planning Commission, has estimated coal production
of 104 million tonnes by 2011-12 (terminal year of XI Plan) from these
coal blocks. Also, as the economy has been growing at the rate of

30
more than 8%, there was a huge demand for allocation of new coal
blocks from the critical infrastructure sectors such as, power, steel and
cement. Therefore, it was not possible to put the whole process of
allocation on hold, as this would have jeopardized the pace of economic
growth in the medium and long term.
The process of grant of mineral concessions is governed by the
provisions of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 and the Mines
and Minerals (Development & Regulation) (MMDR) Act, 1957 and the
Rules made thereunder. Entities permitted to carry on coal mining in
India under the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act follow the provisions
of the MMDR Act and rules made thereunder for acquiring mineral
rights, mining lease and other matters related to mineral administration.
The procedure for approval of mining plan, grant of prior permission
before execution of mining lease etc. is being followed as per the
stipulations contained in the MM(D&R) Act and Mineral Concession
Rules. The procedures as laid down in the statute cannot be dispensed
with. However, within the extant legal framework, concerted efforts
are made by this Ministry to streamline and expedite the process of
allocation of coal blocks. This is borne out by the fact that 86 coal
blocks were allocated during 2005-06, against the total allocation of
130 coal blocks since 1993.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 5.29)
The Committee are perturbed to note the lackadaisical approach
of the Ministry in monitoring the progress of captive coal blocks allotted
to different parties. The Committee have been informed that monitoring
of progress of allocated coal blocks was done in the review meeting
of the Screening Committee. As a need was felt to review the progress
on continuous basis and to carry out monitoring, the Office of the
Coal Controller has been mandated to check the progress in the
allocated captive coal mining blocks and the associated end-use projects
on six monthly basis. Keeping this in view, the Committee desire that
the Coal Controller’s Office should be strengthened adequately so that
they could monitor the progress as provided under the rules and take
corrective steps.
Action Taken
A study was carried out through the Indian School of Mines,
Dhanbad of the functioning and operations of the Coal Controller’s
Organization. Based on the recommendations of the study, it is

31
contemplated that the role, functions and duties of the Coal Controller’s
Organization would be reviewed and the Organization would be
suitably restructured.
It is noticed that the monitoring being done by the Coal Controller’s
Organization at present is quite effective.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 5.30)
The Committee feel that the main objective of exploration and
extraction of coal from the captive coal blocks has still remained a
dream as most of the coal blocks are yet to be developed for coal
production. The Committee, therefore, desire that in the case of coal
blocks where the coal production has not been started even after the
lapse of normative time limit which ranges from 36 to 54 months,
whether public or private company should be issued a final notice
asking them to develop the coal blocks within a stipulated time
otherwise the coal blocks allotted to them would be de-allocated.
Action Taken
It needs to be recognized that coal mining has a long gestation
activity. It takes 3 to 4 years to develop an opencast mine and another
1 or 2 years more to develop an underground mine. It takes further
2 to 3 years to attain the optimal rated capacity of the mine. A number
of statutory clearances (forest, environment, water etc.) are required to
be obtained from various authorities at the State and Central
Government levels. Large areas are required for mining operations
and acquisition of land for mining purposes is becoming increasingly
difficult and sensitive. There are problems associated with resettlement
and rehabilitation issues. Virtually the same difficulties are also
associated with the development of linked end use projects. More over,
for the new players entering the coal mining arena, it is not the area
of their core competence. Therefore, it would take greater effort and
time for the new players to organize the pre-mining clearances and to
develop the coal blocks. However, the coal blocks are at different stages
of development, and as mentioned earlier, by the end of the XI Plan,
these blocks are expected to contribute coal production of about
104 million tonnes. Ministry of Coal will closely monitor this. Wherever
wilful and deliberate delays in the development of coal blocks and
end use projects are detected, the Ministry will not hesitate to de-
allocate the coal blocks.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]

32
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 6.23)
The Committee have been informed that coal gasification is the
process of converting coal through reactions with gasifying media like
air, oxygen, steam or mixture of these into a gaseous product. The
gasification of coal is possible both at surface and underground. The
underground coal gasification offers a potential economic means of
extracting energy from deep seated deposits which are not amenable
to conventional physical extraction economically. The Committee find
that a pilot project at Merta lignite deposit found to be technologically
feasible for studies for techno-economic evaluation was taken up but
later on suspended in view of the chances of contamination of aquifers
lying above and below of the lignite seam. The Committee are
dismayed to note that another project taken up in collaboration with
United Nations Development Programme(UNDP)/Global Environment
Facility at Moonidih and Sudamdih mines of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.
in Jharia Coalfields, sanctioned on 15 September, 1999 with the project
duration of 5 years, is still under development. The Committee note
that recently CIL has entered into MoUs with Oil & Natural Gas
Corporation(ONGC) and Gas Authority of India Ltd.(GAIL) to jointly
pursue the underground coal gasification and recovery of Coal Bed
Methane(CBM). The Committee are unhappy to note that the
underground coal gasification and recovery of CBM for its commercial
utilization was taken up as a National Project in early 80’s but even
after the lapse of about 25 years, no significant achievement has been
made. A number of projects taken up by the Government to recover
CBM, are still at data generation stage and no appreciable achievements
have been made. The Committee have been further informed that
economic viability of UCG is yet to be assessed by CIL which can be
made after generation of data from the pilot study. The Committee are
constrained to note that even the regulatory framework for
underground coal gasification programme has still not been put in
place. In view of above, the Committee desire the Ministry of Coal to
expedite its efforts to complete the pilot projects within the scheduled
time so that the valuable coal reserves at deep seams which are not
amenable to conventional physical extraction economically, are exploited
by converting them into gases.
Action Taken
(i) The Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) was taken up as a
national project in the early 80’s. However, on the apprehension of
contamination of ground water, the S&T project in the selected pilot
project site of Merta Road Lignite Deposit for ascertaining the techno-
economic viability of the project was not pursued after May , 1995.

33
In most of the countries world over, the activities related to UCG
are in developmental stage. Neyveli Lignite Corporation has taken up
an UCG project under S&T funding in lignite deposits in Rajasthan in
September, 2005, but the project is delayed due to delay in appointment
of consultant even though a global tender was floated. CIL has entered
into a agreement with ONGC in Feb.’2005 to pursue UCG through an
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). Out of the 5 blocks identified
for UCG by CMPDI, only one block Kasta was selected in January
2006 by Soviet experts, appointed by ONGC, for generation of
additional data for evaluating its suitability for pilot scale studies of
UCG. CMPDIL/CIL has taken up the job related to generation of
additional data, which may be available by December 2008. CIL/
CMPDI is also examining possibilities of identification of additional
blocks for taking up UCG in the command areas of CIL.
Directives for expeditious efforts for taking up of pilot projects of
UCG have been noted for action.
(ii) Ministry of Coal has taken initiatives for encouraging the coal
gasification technology by participation of private entrepreneurs.
Recently, MOC has notified production of syn-gas obtained through
coal gasification (underground and surface) and coal liquefaction to be
end uses under the provisions of Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act
1973.
(iii) The Coal Bed Methane (CBM) policy was formulated by Govt.
of India in the year 1997 after which impetus on development of CBM
in the country has started. So far, 26 CBM blocks involving resource
of 1.45 TCM have been allotted by Directorate General of Hydrocarbons
(DGH) on behalf of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in 3 rounds
of bidding where work is progressing in terms of agreed minimum
work programme between the respective parties and Govt. of India.
(iv) A collaborative demonstration project on Coal Bed Methane
Recovery & Commercial Utilization is under implementation at
Moonidih and Sudamdih mines of BCCL, Dhanbad in Jharia coalfields.
The revised schedule completion of project is December, 2007. The
envisaged activities are in progress as per revised schedule and
utilization of CBM/Coal Mine Methane (CMM) is likely to be
demonstrated by December, 2007.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter I of the Report)

34
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No.6.24)
The Committee also recommend the Ministry and coal/lignite
producing companies to prepare an action plan for the early execution
of MoUs entered into with ONGC, GAIL and other organisations to
achieve the above objectives.
Action Taken
CMPDI/CIL is executing the work related to development of CBM
in Jharia and Raniganj blocks allotted to the consortium of ONGC-
CIL as per the schedule envisaged in the contract with the Govt. The
action plan for development of UCG will be prepared after generation
of additional data in Kasta Block and its evaluation for suitability of
pilot scale studies by Soviet experts.
For developing under ground lignite gasification in country NLC
has taken up two projects, one under Coal-S&T scheme funded by
Ministry of Coal, Dept. of Science & Technology (DST) & NLC, and
the other project under NLC-ONGC joint venture.
STATUS OF UCG COAL—S&T PROJECT
As UCG is a technology for which technical know how is not
available within country, NLC has floated Global tender for
appointment of consultant to the project. The tendering process is
underway for appointment of Consultant. The duration of the project
is 49 months and the total approved cost is 11.25 crore. The Raneri
Lignite block in Bikaner district of Rajasthan is tentatively identified
for undertaking the UCG Pilot Study.
STATUS OF UCG STUDY UNDER NLC – ONGC, MOU
Under NLC – ONGC - MOU on Underground Coal Gasification
study, a number of Lignite blocks were studied, considering the
suitability parameter to take up the pilot UCG study. Finally,
Tadkeshwar block in South of Gujarat and Hodu-Sindhari block in
Barmer district in Rajasthan have been selected for forwarding the
details to Skonsechisky Institute of Mining, Russia (SIM) for further
study. However, it was felt that the available data is not adequate as
per the SIM’s requirement. Accordingly exploration to generate
additional data is underway and is expected to be completed in another
4 months.

35
COAL BED METHANE (CBM)
In view of the deep seated occurrence and vast potential of Lignite
resources of Mannargudi area, the block is expected to contain CBM
resources and NLC has identified this block for CBM exploration and
development. NLC has already applied to Ministry of Coal for
allotment of the block. The Govt. of Tamil Nadu has proposed to
recommend to DGH for allotment of the block in favour of NLC.
Once this block is allotted to NLC further action would be initiated
for CBM exploration and development.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 7.30)
The Committee note that safety in all coal mines of India is
governed by the Mines Act, 1952 and rules, regulations, bye-laws and
orders framed thereunder. The Directorate General of Mines Safety
(DGMS), under the Ministry of Labour, is empowered to administer
these safety statutes. In the light of the statutory framework for safety
in coal mines, Coal India Ltd. has laid down a Safety Policy for
implementation in all its subsidiaries and for this purpose, has formed
a structured multi-disciplinary Internal Safety Organisation(ISO).
The Committee note that as per the findings of various Court of
Inquiries appointed from time to time to go into the coal mine
accidents, most of the accidents take place essentially due to human
failure in complying with the statutory provisions. Over the years,
after the nationalisation of coal mines in 1971 and 1973, CIL has not
been able to change this scenario. The suggestions made by DGMS
from time to time, on safety measures, are not implemented properly
and timely. There have been instances where the delay in implementing
the suggestions are attributed to delay in procuring imported
equipments. The Committee take these issues very seriously as they
pertain to the safety and security of all those engaged in the coal
mining and, therefore, desire that CIL should take all corrective
measures where they are lagging behind to improve the safety
standards in coal mines and special attention should be given to the
procurement of equipments, both indigenous and imported, so that
the same are introduced without any loss of time.
Action Taken
Observations and Recommendations made by DGMS officials are
strictly followed by Mine Management and monitored by Sr. Officials

36
of the area and Internal Safety Organization (ISO) of the company. It
may be noted that over the years since nationalization, safety status of
coal mines of CIL has improved and rate of accident has shown a
downward trend. The rate of fatalities per million tonne of output in
Coal India Ltd. has come down from 2.62 in the year 1975 to 0.17 in
the year 2007. CIL has constituted an expert committee to ensure proper
specification/selection and procurement of safety related equipment in
CIL. At times DGMS approval is required for procurement of
indigenous as well as imported equipments. Top Management also
monitors the timely procurement of safety items by follow up at
different levels.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 7.31)
The Committee have been informed that identification of potential
dangers during inspections by the ISO is a continuous process and
whenever any potentially dangerous area is identified, reports are
submitted to appropriate authorities for taking corrective measures.
The Committee have further been informed that as regards highly
gassy and fiery mines, precautions appropriate to the situation as laid
down in the Coal Mines Regulations are taken. The precautions in
regard to highly gassy and fiery mines relate to monitoring of
ventilation, monitoring the presence of inflammable or noxious gases,
analysis of environmental conditions, surface blanking, effecting changes
in the ventilation parameters, etc. The Committee are of the firm
opinion that had the appropriate precautions been taken by the CIL,
the lives of a large number of workers who died in the coal mine
accidents occurred in the past including Bhatdee colliery accident in
Dhanbad, due to fire-damp explosion on 6 September, 2006 could have
been saved. The accident in Central Saunda on 15th June, 2005 where
14 miners died due to sudden inrush of water is no different from the
Bhatdee colliery accident. There too, ISO of CIL and the subsidiary
concerned miserably failed to detect the presence of water in the nearby
area. The Committee desire that safety audits and inspections should
be conducted regularly and all precautions are taken for identification
of potential dangers from gases, fire, inundation, roof/side fall, etc. as
per the recommendations of these audits

37
Action Taken
Most of the accidents can be attributed to human failure due to
non-compliance of statutory provisions as laid down in law. Special
precautions are taken to guard against danger from fires, explosion,
inundation and roof fall. Safety audit is carried out for all mines.
Safety Audit is a continuous process. Fresh Safety Audit in 373 mines
of CIL subsidiary companies is being done with special attention on
inundation, fire, strata control and spontaneous heating in the current
year i.e. 2007. The recommendations of Safety Audit completed earlier
are also being monitored at the highest level.
The status of safety audit was also reviewed in the 30th meeting
of the Standing Committee on Safety in Coal Mines held on 27-6-2007
under the Chairmanship of Minister of State for Coal.
Regular inspection of the mine workings are being done by the
officials of mine, ISO and Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS).
The deficiencies pointed out against danger are rectified promptly .
Risk assessment and management is being practiced by all coal
companies to address the safety issues with an aim to achieve Zero
harm to miners.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 7.32)
The Committee desire that deterrent punitive action should be taken
against the officials from ISO and DGMS responsible for carrying out
last inspection before the accident so as to make the inspections more
meaningful to check the accidents in coal mines. Any Court of Inquiry
constituted after any mine accident should invariably consider the role
of these inspecting organizations responsible for safety and sees whether
they had correctly assessed the situation in their last inspections before
the accidents. If not, then suitable punitive actions should be taken.
Action Taken
Punitive actions against the officials are being initiated by the coal
companies on the basis of departmental inquiry. DGMS also initiate
disciplinary action against the persons held responsible for the mine
accidents on the basis of their enquiry.
Courts of Enquiry to look into the mine accidents are constituted
by Ministry of Labour & Employment under the provisions of Mines

38
Act, 1952. Ministry of Labour & Employment has been informed about
the views of the Committee regarding fixing the responsibility of the
inspecting organisations.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 7.33)
The Committee are constrained to note that Coal India Ltd.(CIL)
and Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) have been unable to utilize
their budgetary allocations on safety related activities. During the last
five years of 10th Plan, out of the total budgetary allocations of
Rs. 282.50 crore, CIL could utilize 77 per cent of it i.e. Rs. 218.76 crore.
Similarly, NLC out of Rs. 3.11 crore provided under the Capital and
Revenue Heads for the safety related activities could utilize only
Rs. 2.40 crore. The major reasons for shortfall in expenditure have
been attributed to delay in procurement of equipment. The Committee
have further been informed that there has been excess provisioning of
safety budget during the Tenth Plan Period. The Committee are
surprised to note that coal companies consider the funds provided for
safety related activities in excess of their requirement. The Committee
strongly deprecate such approach of coal companies and disapprove
the reasons advanced by them for under-utilization of the budget
knowing fully well that it concerns the safe working of the mines and
invaluable human lives. The Committee feel that the rigmaroles
hampering the procurement of imported and indigenous equipments
could have been overcome with simplification of the procurement
procedures. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry and
Coal India Ltd. to take measures for full utilization of budget by the
management so that the very purpose of safety budget is not defeated.
Action Taken
The issue of utilization of safety budget is being discussed and
reviewed by Coal India Limited (CIL) and Ministry of Coal regularly.
In the recently held 42nd meeting of CIL Safety Board on 22.06.07,
Chairman, CIL advised all companies to scrutinize the budget
provisions for safety and efforts should be made for 100% utilization
of allocated funds.
The issue of utilization of safety budget was discussed in detail in
the 30th meeting of the Standing Committee on Safety in Coal Mines
held on 27-6-2007 under the Chairmanship of Minister of State for
Coal. Coal companies have reported that they are taking all possible

39
measures for full utilization of Safety Budget. All companies were
advised to make need based safety budget and there should be no
constraint for budget for safety.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 7.34)
CIL has brought to the notice of this Committee some of the major
constraints in safety areas like numerous small underground mines
whose locations are not accurately known as old plans are doubtful;
development of extensive areas of coal seams in Jharia, Raniganj and
Karanpura coalfields making maintenance of these working difficult
and numerous small underground mines inherited by CIL which cannot
be reorganise due to geo-technical reasons and workforce from there
cannot be redeployed due to socio-political reasons.
The Committee are very unhappy to note that even after 35 years
of nationalization of coal mines, CIL has not been able to update their
mining maps, check the developments of extensive areas of coal seams
making their maintenance difficult and have failed to re-deployed the
excess manpower in other areas due to socio-political reasons. The
Committee desire that immediate corrective steps should be taken on
the points mentioned above so that safety and security of the miners
is not affected adversely. The Committee should be informed of the
action taken in the matter within 6 months of this report.
Action Taken
To ensure the correctness of mine plans, regular check surveys &
co-relation surveys are being done and location of mines are established
as per National Grid. Regarding re-deployment of manpower, action is
being taken as per need and it is a continuous process. The specific
action taken by coal companies in this respect are given below:
ECL: The mining plans of all the existing mines have been updated
& connected to the national grid and has been verified by a technical
team of ECL.
Surplus manpower (male) has been identified and some of them
have been diverted to other mines for gainful utilisation and for balance
manpower action is being taken and this is a continuous process.
Safety Audit of current mines conducted during last few years has
assessed same constraints and recommended precaution to be taken.
Accordingly, operation in seven mines have been suspended in recent
past and in few mines action for suspension of operations are under

40
process i.e. by replacing three shifts working to two and one then
finally suspending total operations keeping safety aspect in view.
BCCL: BCCL inherited 218 (two hundred eighteen) nos. of mines
at the time of nationalization and after detailed deliberations small
mines were amalgamated. At present 85 mines are in existence. Check
surveys of working seams in mines of BCCL have been done and
check survey of non-working approachable areas is in progress.
Total nos. of mines, where check survey has been
done in working seam: 68
Total nos. of mines, where check survey has been
done in non-working seam: 9
Total nos. of mines, where check survey has been
done by external agencies: 6
Total nos. of mines, where check co-relation survey 69 pits/
has been done by external agencies: 42 mines.
Manpower spread on account of amalgamation and other activities
are redeployed gainfully and it is routine process.
CCL: In CCL all the mines are connected with National Grid and
location of mines and Mining maps are updated and kept properly .
Regular Check survey is also being made in all mines of CCL.
SECL: Mine Plan of all mines of SECL are being updated regularly
with advancement of mine working. Need based gainful redeployment
of work force is being done as when required in the mines of SECL.
MCL: Mine plans are quarterly updated and check survey is being
done as per statute. The manpower of closed mines is redeployed in
other mines.
WCL : In operational command Area of WCL, there is no mine
whose location is not accurately known on the plans of WCL & which
can not be reorganized due to geo-technical and socio-political reasons.
Thus with respect to the above, no corrective action is required in
WCL.
The observation of the committee is noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]

41
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

42
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.23)
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (BE) for Research
and Development (R&D) activities under Science & Technology (S&T)
grant of Ministry of Coal amounting to Rs. 21.09 crore for the year
2006-07 were reduced drastically to Rs. 6.00 crore at the RE stage and
actual utilization is only Rs. 7.61 crore. The fund utilization by the
coal companies for the R&D activities during the entire 10th Plan
Period has also not been upto the mark. Out of a total of Rs. 81.08
crore provided during the 10th Five Year Plan for R&D activities, the
coal PSUs could utilize Rs. 50.94 crore which comes to 62.82%. As far
as implementation of the R&D projects is concerned, out of 47 projects
sanctioned during 10th Plan, the coal PSUs could complete only
15 projects, 1 project was terminated and rest of the 31 projects have
spilled over to the 11th Plan Period. The reasons advanced by the
Ministry of Coal for the lower allocations and even lesser utilization
of funds generally pertained to delay in procurement of imported
equipments, delay in award of contracts, etc.
The Committee are dismayed to note that the R&D projects, which
do have a direct and immediate impact on the growth of coal industry,
has been a neglected area. Not only the budgetary allocations for R&D
activities has been very low as compared to the total turn over of the
industry but also the utilization of the same has been very poor
resulting in non-completion of the projects within the scheduled time.
The Committee do not approve of the delays for the simple fact that
barely 1/3rd of the projects sanctioned during 10th Plan could be
completed. The Committee feel that Central Mine Planning and Design
Institute (CMPDI), which is the nodal agency for coordination and
monitoring of coal S&T projects funded by the Ministry of Coal and
also projects funded by CIL, has failed in delivering the targeted results.
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry of Coal to have
an adequate control and supervision over the agencies responsible for
the implementation of the various R&D projects to avoid time and
cost overrun and ensure full utilization of funds. The Committee further
desire that the Ministry of Coal should introduce a stringent system of

43
accountability and responsibility in dealing with Coal S&T projects by
the various research and academic institutes who have been assigned
research work.
Action Taken
Out of the 47 projects approved during Xth Plan, 15 Nos. of projects
have been completed and one project was terminated.
The S&T project duration normally varies from 2-4 years.  There
are 15 projects which have duration of 3 to 4 years and were sanctioned
during later half of the Xth plan period. These projects have been
shifted to XIth Plan as on-going projects without any time overrun.
However, 16 Nos. of projects which were scheduled to be completed
within Xth Plan could not be completed and got extended due to
various reasons like delay in procurement of imported equipment, delay
in getting statutory permission/environmental clearance etc.
Extension of time for any of the S&T projects is granted only after
detailed deliberations by the sub-committee concerned of Standing
Scientific Research Committee (SSRC) and extension is normally of
specified duration along with updated activity plan.
2. Steps taken to facilitate timely completion of the projects:
(i) Progress of S&T projects is monitored by CMPDI and
reviewed by SSRC sub-committees and SSRC headed by
Secretary, Ministry of Coal. Progress of the projects is also
monitored by periodic visits to the implementing institutes
by the officials of S&T Department of CMPDI to monitor /
coordinate the implementation of projects
(ii) To obviate the delay in field trials due to non-availability of
mining faces/sites, CMPDI extends help to implementing
agencies in selecting alternative sites for field trials.
(iii) Progress reports (both physical and financial) as received
from implementing agencies on a quarterly basis are
reviewed by CMPDI. The causes of delay, if any, are
discussed in detail and remedial measures are suggested.
 [Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 1.15 and 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report)

44
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.14)
The Committee note that the two schemes viz. ‘Conservation &
Safety in Coal Mines’ and ‘Development of Transport Infrastructure in
Coalfield Areas’ which were being operated as Non-Plan schemes for
the last 30 years were transferred by Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance as Plan schemes at RE stage during financial year
2005-06. However, the Planning Commission disagreeing with the
decision of the Ministry of Finance directed that these two schemes
should be operated as Non-Plan schemes with only a token provision
of Rs. 1.00 lakh each at BE stage in the next year. The Committee are,
however, surprised that again in 2006-07, Ministry of Finance insisted
that the schemes should be under Plan Head and provided funds
through supplementary grants. The Committee are astonished to
observe similar situation occurring once again in the year 2007-08 when
the proposal of the Ministry of Coal for a provision of Rs. 135.00 crore
for Conservation and Safety in Coal Mines and Rs. 75.00 crore for
Development of Transport Infrastructure in Coalfield Areas under Plan
Head was not agreed to by the Planning Commission and, therefore,
again a token provision of Rs. 1.00 lakh each for the two schemes has
been made. The Committee are extremely constrained to observe an
ironical situation repeated thrice in the years 2005-06, 2006-07 and
2007-08 which Ministry of Coal, Finance and Planning Commission
has failed to resolve whether the funds for these schemes should be
provided under Plan or Non-Plan Head. The Committee deprecate
this unprecedented state of affairs and recommend the Ministry of
Coal to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance in consultation
with the Planning Commission for resolving the issue once for all.
Action Taken
The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission for resolving the issue once for all. The decision
is awaited.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2007-IF, dated 08.08.2007]
 N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA,
5 December, 2007 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

45
 ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2007-08) HELD ON
5.12.2007 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1530 hrs.  to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya —Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Hiten Barman
4. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury
5. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey
6. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
7. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
9. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla
11. Shri Ali Anwar
12. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
13. Shri Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri B.J. Panda
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson, welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the

46
following draft Reports on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministries of Coal, Mines and Steel:—
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twenty Third Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(2006-07) on “Demands for Grants (2007-08)” of the Ministry
of Coal.
(ii) ** ** ** ** **
(iii) ** ** ** ** **
4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor
additions/deletions/amendments.
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports
after making consequential change arising out of factual verification
by the concerned Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses
of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Does not pertain to this Report.

47
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY
THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 22
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the  20
Government
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22)
Percentage of total 90.90
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire NIL
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  01
Government have not been accepted by the Committee
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. 7)
Percentage of total 4.54
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies 01
of the Government are still awaited
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. 4)
Percentage of total 4.54