 
5 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2004-2005) 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2004-2005)  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2004 / Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON COAL AND STEEL 
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2004-2005)  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  23.12. 2004 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on   23.12. 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2004 / Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

CC&S No. 5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.18.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of th e Rules of Procedure and Conduc t of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi-11005. 

CONTENTS 
  
 
               
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION   
 
CHAPTER I 
  
Report    
 
   
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
 
  
   
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
 
   
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which replies of 
the Government have not been  accepted by the Committee 
 
 
   
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
   
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Approved Plan outlays and expenditure during first  three years of 10th Plan 
(NALCO) from 2002-03 to 2004-05  
 
 
II.  Minutes of Seventh sitting of th e Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
(2004-05) held on 22.12.2004 
 
 
III. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of  the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel 
 
  
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2004-05)          
 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar    - Chairman 
 Members 
            
           Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Bikash Chowdhury 
6. Shri  Chandra Sekhar Dubey 
7. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
9. Shri Nitish Kumar 
10. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam 
11. Shri  Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta 
12. Shri Hemlal Murmu 
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad Alias Sadhu Yadav 
14. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
16. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
18. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
19. Shri Rewait Raman Singh 
20. Shri Ramsewak Singh (Babuji) 
21. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Devdas Apte 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
24. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
25. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad 
26. Shri B.J.Panda 
27. Shri Jibon Roy 
28. Shri G.K.Vasan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.K.Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Madhu Tandon - Committee Assistant  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  on “Demands  for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Mines”.  
 
2.  The Second Report on the Standing Committ ee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 25th August, 2004. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 6th December, 2004.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  considered and adopted this Report at their 
sitting held on 22nd   December, 2004.   
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the G overnment on the recommendations contained in 
the Second Report  of the Committee is given at Annexure-III.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observatio ns and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    ANANTH KUMAR 
22   December, 2004                                                    Chairman, 
1 Pausa , 1926 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    ANANTH KUMAR 
       December, 2004   __                                            Chairman, 
    Pausa , 1922 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER -I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel on “Demands for Grants  (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Mines” which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 25.8.2004.    
 
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised as follows:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that ha ve been accepted by the Government:  
   
Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 24 and 25.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee do   not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies :  
 
Sl.Nos.13 and 18.  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee :  
 
SI. Nos. 19, 20 and 21. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  reply of the Government are still 
awaited :     
 
   Sl.Nos.5 and 16.   
 
1.3. The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given to the implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by the Government. In case,  where it is not possible for the Government 
to implement the recommendations in letter and spir it for any reasons, the matter should be reported 
to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation.  
 

1.4. The Committee will now deal with the Ac tion Taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations/Observations made in the Second Report. 
 
 
A. Plan Outlay 
 
Recommendation  (Sl.No.1, Para No.2.14) 
 NALCO 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed that the financia l achievements of National Aluminium Co. Ltd 
and Geological Survey of India (GSI) were not  upto the mark. On the other hand, Hindustan Copper 
Ltd.(HCL) has expended the funds much more than the allocations.  In the year 2002-2003, the BE 
for NALCO was kept at Rs.900.00 crore but the actual was Rs.608.69 crore. In 2003-2004, against 
the BE of Rs.650.00 crore, the actual remained as low as Rs.229.85 crore. Now a provision of 
Rs.310.00 crore has been made for the year 200 4-2005. The Budget Estimate of Geological Survey 
of India for 2003-04 was Rs.176.00 crore but they co uld utilize only Rs.113. 38 crore. As regards 
Hindustan Copper Ltd., a provision for Rs.25.00 cror e were made at BE 2002-03 stage but actually 
Rs.85.00 crore were expended. In the year 2 003-2004, the Budget Estimates were reduced to 
Rs.20.00 crore but actually Rs.113.84 crore, i.e., Rs.93.84 crore more were spent. Thus there does 
not appear to be any financial prudence in the Ministry as far as Budget utilization is concerned. The 
Ministry should take immediate corrective steps.  
 
1.6 The Government have in thei r reply  stated that  the fina ncial achievement of the Company 
over the last 3 years 2001-02 to 2003-04 as reflected  at para 4.13 of the report of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of the Department of Mines has been 
quite good.                                                                
 
1.7 The break up of approved outlay of Rs.900 crore and actual expenditure of Rs.608.69 crore 
in 2002-03, the break up of approved outlay of Rs .650 core and actual expenditure of Rs.229.85 
crore in 2003-04 and break up of provision of Rs.310 crore in 2004-05 is given in Annexure-A. 
From the Annexure, it may be observed that the shortfall in the capital expenditure compared to 
the approved outlay is mostly in respect of 1
st phase expansion project,  Mines & Refinery (M&R) 
Expansion Project, Smelter & Power Plan t (S&P) Expansion Project including 7 th unit of CPP and 
8th unit of CPP, deferral in the provision for ne w schemes and in schemes aimed at maximizing 

benefits (Addition, Modification & Replacements).  In the M&R expansion project under the 1st 
phase expansion projects, there has been a saving of around Rs.300 crore.  
 
1.8 The M&R expansion, S&P expansion including 7 th Unit of CPP and 8 th Unit of CPP were 
approved in December 1996, February 1998 and February 2001 respectively and were 
commissioned in phases, the latest commissioni ng of balance 120 pots bei ng in October 2004. In 
course of the implementation of different project s the savings were concretized as the projects 
progressed towards completion. It may please be appreciated that all these projects were 
implemented when there was a recessionary conditi on both within the country and abroad. In the 
competitive bidding process, there was a major sa ving with reference to the budgetary quotations. 
Due to better internal resource ge neration there was a subs tantial savings in financial charges. At 
the time of DFR preparation due to uncertainty in cenvat credit utilization the project cost did not 
take into account this credit, which was availe d during the execution of the project. The major 
imports of equipment for expansion of Refinery and Smelter Plant is in Euro. During the import 
of equipments, the euro weakened vis-à-vis USD and in turn with reference to Indian Rupee 
necessitating lesser payment in terms of Indian Rupees.  
 
GSI 
1.9 As regard corrective steps/action taken for fund s utilization, it may be stated that a Project 
Proposal Review Committee has been set up unde r the Chairmanship of  Additional Secretary 
(Mines) for monthly review of pr ogress of expenditure in Geological Survey of India procurement 
action etc. 
 
HCL 
 
1.10 In 2002-03, Plan fund of Rs.25.00 cror e in Budget allocation was for replacement and 
renewal of plants and machineries.  But later in RE stage Rs.60 cror e  in addition to R&R fund of 
Rs. 25.00 crore was allocated in order to provide cash support to the company and also to keep net 
worth positive. 
 
1.11 In 2003-04 plan fund of Rs.20.00 crore in Budget allocation was for replacement and 
renewal of plants and machineries. Supplementary grant of Rs.93.84 crore was provided in the form 
of equity to liquidate past liabilities on account of overdue Bonds & Debentures, to clear statutory 
dues and to keep net worth positive.  

Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No.2.17) 
1.12  The Committee were unhappy to note that wh ile on the one hand there has been reduction in 
Plan outlay, on the other hand the utilization of funds by PSUs like NALCO and subordinate 
organizations like GSI had not been  satisfactory. In the year 2002- 03, the BE for NALCO was kept 
at Rs.900.00 crore but the actual utilisation was Rs.608.69 crore. In the year 2003 -04 against the 
allocated BE of Rs.650.00 crore only Rs.229.85 crore were utilized by the organization. The 
Committee felt that the Department of Mines shoul d have undertaken realis tic calculation of the 
needs of PSUs and organizations under its administ rative jurisdiction and accordingly projected its 
plan outlay. The Committee also observed that the National Aluminium Co. Ltd. failed to utilize the 
allocated amount for critical ongoing schemes and for new schemes during the first two years of 
Tenth Plan. There was a general slackness in utilizat ion of funds allocated to the organizations & 
PSUs and the Committee desired the necessary corrective action be taken by the Government to 
ensure that funds  allocated be expended as targeted.  
 
1.13 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that it is a fact that the utilization 
of funds was less than the approved outlay of the Company in the years 2002-03 and 2003-04   in 
the first two years of Tenth Plan. The adhoc plan outlay of Rs.100 crore for 2 nd phase expansion 
was postponed from BE 2003-04 to BE 2004-05 for want of Government approval. The plan 
outlay and utilization of funds on 1 st phase expansion was gradually reduced from year to year 
taking a realistic view on the progress of the project, the cumulative commitments made and the 
actual expenditure incurred. The utilization of lesser funds than the approved outlay did not in any 
way affect the progress of the 1 st phase expansion as the Company was all along comfortably 
placed in providing necessary funds. Apart from  substantial savings in the first phase of 
expansion, there was improvement in internal re source generation leading to external borrowing 
of only Rs.300 crore to finance 1 st phase expansion. All the major expansions could be completed 
mostly on time except for 120 pots in the Smelter Plant expansion, which was linked to 
commissioning of 8
th Unit of CPP. The saving in the proj ect cost was the main reason for the 
reduction in actual expenditure compared to the plan outlay, which is now helping the Company 
in terms of lesser depreciation and lower cost of production, which is comparable to the pre 
expansion cost of production.  
 

Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee were unhappy to note that while on the one hand there had been reduction 
in Plan outlay, on the other hand, there was s ubstantial under-utilization of funds by NALCO and 
the Geological Survey of India (GSI). The Committee had felt that the budgetary planning in the 
Ministry lacked financial prudence and therefore, desired immediate corrective steps. 
 
1.15 The Committee are not satisfied  with the reasons advanced by the Ministry to justify 
under-utilization of the approved outlay, partic ularly by NALCO. The Committee note that 
though the utilization of lesser fund s did not in any way affect the progress of first phase of this 
expansion plan, as the company was all along co mfortably placed in providing necessary funds, it 
sadly reflects on the budgetary planning and non-application of prudence in finalizing  the Budget 
Estimates by NALCO and the Mi nistry. The Committee particular ly concerned that there was 
lack of foresight and anticipation of the changing  scenario on the part of Ministry which resulted 
in the non-utilization of Budgetary allocations which could have been allocated for other 
plans/schemes. 
 
1.16 The Committee expect the Ministry of Mine s and NALCO to further fine-tune planning 
and Budgetary mechanism to ensure  realistic Budgetary Estimates a nd their optimal utilization in 
future, particularly for various projects and pr ogrammes in the second phase of the NALCO’s 
expansion. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para No.2.18) 
 
VRS package for Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. 
 
1.17 The Committee were pained to note that gr ants-in-aid of Rs.79.59 crore were provided to 
Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. During 2003-04 for VRS p ackages could not be ut ilized and had to be 
surrendered, as Cabinet could not give its approval to the propos als of granting VRS package in 
time. The Committee had expressed serious concern over the inordina te delay on the part of the 
Government in taking decision and desired to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
1.18 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that an amount of Rs.83.01 crore 
had made in the BE 2003-04 as grants-in-aid fo r VRS package in Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. 
(BGML). It was expected that th is amount would be fully utili zed in 2003-04 as a proposal for 
implementation of 6.11.2001 VRS package in BGML, was under consideration of the 

Government in pursuance of the recommendations of High Court of Karnataka. A Cabinet Note in 
this regard had been submitted on 27.2.2004. Howeve r, due to declaration of General Elections, 
the said Cabinet Note could not be considered by the Cabinet. The Cabinet Secretariat returned 
Cabinet Note on 17.5.2004 requesting that the Cabinet Note may be brought before the Cabinet 
after formation of new Government and after obta ining fresh approval of Minister-in-charge and 
fresh inter-Ministerial consultations. In view of this, the budgetary provision made in BE 2003-04 
as grants-in-aid for STBP in BGML could not be  utilized in 2003-04 and an amount of Rs.79.59 
crore has to be surrendered. The Cabinet considered the proposal, and referred it to the Committee 
of Secretaries for detailed examination. 
Committees of the Committee 
 
1.19 The Committee had expressed their serious c oncern over the inordinate delay in granting a 
VRs package for Bharat Gold Mi nes Ltd. (BGML). The Committee have now been informed that 
the proposal has again been referred to the Committee of Secretaries for detailed examination. 
 
1.20 The Committee are indeed very unhappy that the Ministry has yet to take a final view on 
the implementation of VRS package though the G overnment accorded permission for the closure 
of BGML in March, 2001. The Committee are of the view that the interest of employee should be 
protected at all costs and therefore, desire th at VRS proposal should be approved within a month 
time. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para No.3.8) 
 
Expert Committee Report on GSI 
 
1.21  The Committee appreciated the role played  by GSI in pre and pos t-independent India as 
premier national scientific survey and research orga nisation. The Committee note that in view of the 
changing environment, the role a nd functions of Geological Survey of India (GSI) vis-a-vis other 
organizations, the role of GSI needs to be examined . To make the role of GSI more relevant in the 
light of development in the field of earth scie nces, etc., the Committee recommended that the Report 
of the Expert Committee may be implemented by th e Department of Mines at the earliest. The 
Committee desired that they may be apprised of the action taken on  the findings of the Expert 
Committee.  
 

1.22 In their reply the Government have stated th at the following actions on implementation of the 
accepted part of the recommendations of the Expert Committee have been initiated. The charter of 
GSI has been revised and notified in the Gazette. The programmes have been classified into the 
hierarchy of Projects-Programmes-Mission and acti ons have been initiated to implement the 
programmes in project mode. The existing structure of the Regional offices and Wings have been 
retained. As a first step for attaining excellence in R&D efforts, three programmes under the recently 
created scope of taking up additional research projects have been included in the Annual Programme 
of GSI in 2004-2005. Actions have been planned to strengthen the GSITI a nd expand its activities. 
For setting up of a commercial wing a proposal is under consideration of the DOM. For developing 
strong management information system, small modul es has been created a nd circulated to the 
Regions and Wings for establishing the database in the personnel information domain and in the case 
of annual programmes this is al ready in practice; to streamlin e the procedure of personnel 
management of Group A, B, C, D proposals have already been submitted to the DOM. The majority 
of the Regions and Wings will be covered under LAN by the end of this financial year and WAN 
will be taken up in the next phase. Time-f rame for modernization of GSI through 10 th plan has been 
indicated to DOM. The infrastructure support needed for optimum utilization of specific 
sophisticated instruments has been identified and necessary action has been initiated to implement 
the same. The programme of the trai ning institute has been suitably tailored to meet the customized 
need of the department as well as scientists from outside organisations involved in the field of earth 
sciences. 
Comments of the Committee 
  
1.23 The Committee had recommended that the Report of the Expert Committee on the role and 
functions of Geological Survey of  India (GSI) might be implemented at the earliest. The Committee 
note that the Government have accepted only so me of the recommenda tions of the Expert 
Committee and taken necessary action for their im plementation. The Committee while appreciating 
the steps taken by the Government to make GSI more  responsive to the scientific and societal needs 
thus making it more transparent, would like to be apprised of the progress in the implementation of 
accepted recommendation and the status of the remaining recommendations of the Expert 
Committee.  

Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para 4.20) 
 
Commissioning of a study to evaluate the working of NALCO 
 
1.24 The Committee noted that the Government  had in 2001 approved the open market sale of 
30% of Government equity in NALCO, bringing down Government equity to 26%/ Thereafter, the 
Committee noted that the disinvestments status of NALCO was being reviewed. The Committee 
desired that they would like to be apprised of the present status of disinvestments of NALCO which 
was reported to be temporarily put on hold. The Committee also recommend that the Government 
should give a fresh and serious look to the disinvestments decision of NALCO keeping in mind the 
various factors that NALCO had emerged as a star performer in production and export in ore and 
had been conferred Mini Ratna status. The Committee also recommended that the Government 
should commission a study to evaluate the working of NALCO. 
 
1.25 The Government in their reply have stated th at the subsequent to the statement of the Prime 
Minister at Bhubaneswar on 15 July 2003, the disi nvestments of NALCO has not been pursued. The 
policy of the Government as stated in the Na tional Common Minimum Programme is that “it is 
pledged to devolve full managerial and co mmercial autonomy to successful profit-making 
companies operating in a competitive environment. Generally profit making companies will not be 
privatized”. The recommendation of  the Committee to commission a study to evaluate the working 
of NALCO is being considered.  
Comments of the Committee 
1.26 The Committee had recommended the Government  to give a fresh look to the disinvestments 
decision of NALCO as well as to commission a st udy to evaluate its wo rking. The Committee note 
that in pursuance of the policy of the Governme nt as enunciated in the National Common Minimum 
Programme that “generally profit making company will not be privatized”. The Committee have also 
been informed that the Government have yet to  take a final decision on commissioning a study to 
evaluate the working of NALCO. The study is crucial in view of  the recent decision of the 
Government for a massive second phase expansion plan  of the NALCO and also the fact that it has 
the potential to emerge as one of the giant companies in the world market.  
  

Recommendation  (Sl.No.19, Para No.5.17) 
 
Disinvestment of HCL 
 
1.27  The Committee noted that HCL has been in curring heavy losses in its operation. During 
1999-2000, it had incurred net loss of Rs.147. 70 crore. During 2001-2002 the Company again 
incurred net loss of Rs.184.04 crore. The financ ial performance of and the accumulated losses of 
HCL were as high as 1171 crore. The Secretary, Department of Mines while conceding that heavy 
losses incurred had however stat ed during evidence that from December, 2003, the Company had 
turned around and at least have saved its cash lo ss with a marginal saving and was repaying part of 
its liabilities. From December 2003, they had avoided cash losses and have done well. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended that all out efforts should be made by the Ministry to make 
HCL financially viable by provi ding financial restructuring pack age. The Committee recommended 
that the question of disinvestment of HCL should be re-examined and it might be resorted to if 
absolutely unavoidable.  
 
1.28 The Government in their reply have stat ed that the issue of disinvestment of HCL 
may be examined once the new policy on disinvestment is finalised by the Government and as and 
when there is a reference from the Department of Disinvestment.  For financial restructuring 
package, a proposal has been received from HCL and is under process in the Ministry of Mines.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.29 The Committee recall its earlier recommendation that the disinvestments of Hindustan 
Copper Ltd. (HCL)  should be re-examined and express their dissatisfaction with  the reply of the 
Government in this regard. They would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation   
 
1.30 The Committee note that a proposal for financ ial restructuring package has been  received 
from HCL and is under process in the Ministry of Mines. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry of Finance/Planning  Commission should be approached    for getting an expeditious  
clearance of the restructuring package of HCL.   
 

Recommendations  on (Sl.No.20, Para No. 6.16) 
MECL  
 
1.31  The Committee observed that MECL which was set up in 1972 was engaged in undertaking 
detailed systematic mineral exploration in the country. The Committee were , however, perturbed to 
note that as far as the achievement in exploration,  mining was concerned, the actual performance of 
MECL had fallen far short of the target. While  the target for mining in 2003-04 was 5000 m, the 
actual mining was only 3357 m. In the context of sa les, while the target was Rs.6,436 lakhs, only 
Rs.6089 lakhs sales was achieved. The Committee reco mmended that all out e fforts should be made 
by MECL for improving their physical and financial performance, laying emphasis on rationalisation 
of manpower to improve performan ce in core activities and in the field of diversification. The 
Committee recommended that the financial restru cturing and implementation of VRS proposal of 
MECL should be approved and implemented without an y further loss of time in  order to enable the 
company to achieve the physical targets, targets of optimal manpower and to earn profits.  
  
1.32 The Government in their reply have stated th at a draft Cabinet Note for a provision of Rs.70 
crore as grant for implementation of VRS in ME CL to reduce the manpower strength  of the 
company to the level of 1,200  along with financial restructuring (waiver of interest, penal interest 
outstanding against  the accumulated losses, transfer of outstanding loan to  capital reserves etc.,  has 
been circulated  to the concerne d  Ministries/Deptts for their comments  after the approval of the 
then Minister-in-Charge. Deptt. of Disinvestment (DoDI)  in th eir comments have stated that 
Cabinet Committee  on Disinvestment (CCD) has a pproved  on 10.7.2003, that  restructuring  of 
MECL would be done in consultation of Advisers  and prospective bidders and would be submitted 
to CCD  for approval. They have also mentioned in their comments  that EOIs have been invited by 
27.2.2004 and the nature of restru cturing would be formed in c onsultation with the Qualified 
Interested  Parties (QIPs) and the  advisers. Hence DoDI has suggested that any proposal for 
restructuring is to be linked to disinvestment of th e company and, therefore, it would be advisable to 
consult the qualified bidders before the proposals are finally put up to CCEA.  With the approval of 
the then MCM , it was decided to pursue the Cabine t Note after a clear  picture  emerges after 
discussion with the Qualified Interested Parties (QIPs). The Deptt. of Disinvestment has been 
reminded in the matter. 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No.21, Para No.6.17) 
1.33 The Committee were please note that MECL ha d recently got major work orders in the field 
of consultancy services even from TISCO, STERLITES, SMC, GEC, AMD, ONGC, Singareni 
Collieries etc. The Committee desired that MECL s hould make adequate efforts to obtain substantial 
orders from not only traditional clients like coal companies but also from newer companies in order 
to generate more internal resources. The Co mmittee further recommended that the Company’s 
proposal to purchase drill for Coal Bed Methane E xploration should be approved at the earliest so 
that it can take a lead in a ne w field and augment its resources, the Government should also take 
immediate steps to modernize MECL so that it can withstand competition from other companies.  
 
1.34 In the Action Taken Reply, the Government ha s stated that the proposal for the purchase of 
Drill for Coal Bed Methane (CBM) exploration and production by MECL at a cost of Rs.23.75 crore 
had been submitted to IF Division of this Deptt. for taking up the matter with the Planning 
Commission. 
 
1.35 Further, the Government had already taken a decision to disinvest its 100% equity in MECL 
in favour of a strategic buyer with  transfer of management control. Further action for disinvestments 
is being processed in the Deptt. of Disinvestment. Perhaps, it would not be appropriate for the Deptt. 
of Mines going for its modernization programme at this stage. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.36 The Committee understand that a decision to disinvest 100 pe r cent equity in MECL in 
favour of a strategic buyer with transfer of ma nagement control had already been taken by the 
Government. However, the Committee note that ther e has been a policy change in regard to the 
disinvestment of all the public sector undertakings and henceforth the policy of disinvestment would 
have to be decided  on a case-to -case basis. The Committee recommend  that a decision to disinvest 
MECL should be taken only if it is absolutely n ecessary. However,   in the meantime VRS proposal 
to reduce the manpower strength of  the Company should be approved to improve  its financial 
position. The Committee would like to be apprised in the matter at the earliest. 
 

1.37 The Committee are astonished to find that on  the one hand the Government have decided to 
disinvest 100 per cent equity in MECL in favour of  a strategic buyer with transfer of management 
control, on the other hand the Government are pur suing the proposal for the purchase of the drill for 
Coal Bed Methane exploration and production at a cost of Rs.23.75 the Committee would like the 
proposal to be suitably reviewed and avoid wasteful expenditure.  
 
Recommendations (Sl.No.25, Para No.8.9) 
 
Science and Technology (S&T) 
 
1.38 The Committee noted that the S&T programme  of the Department of Mines cover vast 
number of disciplines such as  Geology, Exploration, Mining  and Environment, Bleaching, 
Beneficiation, Rock Mechanics, Ground Control and Non-Ferrous  Metallurgy. The Committee were 
also pleased to note that during the X Five Year Plan emphasis will be given  on multi-disciplinary, 
multi-organisational projects catering to nationa l requirements. The Committee were, however, 
unhappy to note that while in the revised estimates 2003-04 an outlay for S&T programmes has been 
retained at Rs.8.05 crore, the funds utilise during  2003-04 was Rs.405.67 lakh  (Rs.4.06 crore). The 
Committee recommended that the Department should ta ke adequate steps to fully utilise the funds 
sanctioned for S&T programmes as these programmes  have wide and varied objectives which have 
national ramifications. The Committee noted that six new projects have been approved for  
Rs.772.17 lakh (Rs.7.7. crore) and desire that these should be completed in a time bound manner 
with optimal utilisation of the sanctioned funds. The Committee also desired that the Department 
should strive to procure more and more S&T projects from other Departme nts/Organisations which 
will help to augment the internal resources of the Department. 
 
1. The Government in their reply have stated that the outlay of Rs.8.05 crore ( Budget Support 
Rs.4.50 crore) was retained in R.E. 2003-04.  Hence the Department of Mines was to provide 
financial assistance of Rs.4.50 crore and the balance Rs.3.55 crore were to be generated as 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resource by three research Institutions viz. National Institute of 
Rock Mechanic, Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminum Research Development Centre and National 
Institute of Miner’s Health. Against these targets Department of Mines released an assistance 
of Rs.4.06 crore (90%) .  NIRM, JNARDDC an d NIRM generated Rs.3 .05 crore (86%) as 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources. 
 

2. The Department of Mines has approved six next projects at a cost of Rs.7.72 crore. However; 
the DOM’s contribution is limited to only Rs.1. 51 (crore).  Balance Rs.6.21 crore is being 
contributed by an International funding agen cy, Deptt. of Steel, Deptt. of Science & 
Technology, Government of India, Govt. of  Nagaland, private Industry and National 
Aluminium Company (PSU). 
 
3. The Deptt. will endeavor to complete six ne w projects in time and strive to procure more 
projects from other Deptt. /Organisations. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.39 The Committee note that the  Ministry of Mines have approved six new projects at a cost of 
Rs.7.72 crore. However, the Ministry of Mines c ontribution is limited to only Rs. 1.51 crore and a 
balance Rs.6.21 crore is being contributed by an International Funding Agency, Ministry of  Steel, 
Department of Science & Technology, Government of India, Government of Nagaland, private 
Industry and NACO. The Committee desire that Ministry of Mines  should make sincere efforts to 
ensure  that the balance amount of Rs.6.21 crore to  be contributed by different departments/agency 
is made available to these research institutes under the  Ministry for undertaking these S&T projects. 
The Committee would like to be apprised  of the acti on taken  by the Government in this regard in a 
time-bound manner. 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para No. 2.14) 
 
It has been observed from the above table that the financial achievements of National 
Aluminium Co. Ltd and Geological Su rvey of India (GSI) have not b een upto the mark On the other 
hand, Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL) has expended th e funds much more than the allocations. In the 
year 2002-2003, the BE for NALCO was kept at Rs .900.00 crore but the actual was Rs.608.69 crore. 
In 2003-2004, against the BE of Rs. 650.00 crore the actual remained as low as Rs.229.85 crore. 
Now a provision of Rs.310.00 crore has been made for the year 2004-2005. The Budget Estimate of 
Geological Survey of India fo r 2003-04 was Rs.176.00 crore but they could utilize only Rs.113.38 
crore. As regards Hindustan Copper Ltd., a provi sion for Rs.25.00 crore were made at BE 2002-03 
stage but actually Rs.85.00 crore were expended. In the year 2003-2004, the Budget Estimates, were 
reduced to Rs.20.00 crore but actually Rs.113.84 cr ore i.e., Rs. 93.84 crore more were spent. Thus 
there does not appear to be any financial prudence in the Ministry as far as Budget utilization is 
concerned. The Ministry should take immediate corrective steps. 
 
Action Taken 
 
NALCO 
 
The financial achievement of the Company ove r last 3 years 2001-02 to  2003-04 as reflected 
at para 4.13 of the report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on Demands for Grants 2004-
05 of the Department of Mines has been quite good. 
 
The break up of approved outlay of Rs.900 cror e and actual expenditure of Rs.608.69 crore 
in 2002-03, the break up of approved outlay of Rs.650 crore and actual expenditure of Rs.229.85 
crore in 2003-04 and break up of provision of Rs .310 crore in 2004-05 is given in Annexure-A. 
From the Annexure, it may be observed that the shortfall in the cap ital expenditure compared to the 
approved outlay is mostly in re spect of 1st phase expansion pr oject, Mines & Refinery (M&R) 
Expansion Project, Smelter & Power Plant (S&P) Expansion Project including 7th unit of CPP and 
8th unit of CPP, deferral in the provision for ne w schemes and in schemes aimed at maximizing 
benefits (Addition, Modification & Replacements).  In the M&R expansion project under the 1st 
phase expansion projects, there has been a saving of around Rs.300 crore. 
 
The M&R expansion, S&P expansion including 7th Unit of CPP and 8th Unit of CPP were 
approved in December 1996, February 1998 and February 2001 respectively and were 
commissioned in phases, the latest commissioni ng of balance 120 pots be ing in October 2004. In 
course of the implementation of different project s the savings were concretized as the projects 
progressed towards completion. It may please be  appreciated that all these projects were 
implemented when there was a recessionary conditi on both within the country and abroad. In the 
competitive bidding process, there was a major sa ving with reference to the budgetary quotations. 
Due to better internal resource generation there was a substantial savings in financial charges. At the 
time of DFR preparation due to uncertainty in cenvat credit utilization the pr oject cost did not take 
into account this credit, which was availed during  the execution of the project. The major imports of 
equipment for expansion of Refinery and Smelter Pl ant is in Euro. During the import of equipments, 

the euro weakened vis-a-vis USD and in turn with reference to Indian Rupee necessitating lesser 
payment in terms of Indian Rupees. 
 
GSI 
 
As regard corrective steps/action taken for funds utilization, it may be stated that a Project 
Proposal Review Committee has been set up unde r the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary 
(Mines) for monthly review of pr ogress of expenditure in Geologica l Survey of India procurement 
action etc. 
 
HCL 
 
In 2002-03, Plan fund of Rs.25.00 crore in Budget allocation was for replacement and 
renewal of plants and machineries. But later in RE  stage Rs.60 crore in addition to R&R fund of  
Rs.25.00 crore was allocated in order to provide cas h support to the company and also to keep net 
worth positive. 
 
In 2003-04 plan fund of Rs.20.00 crore in Budget allocation was for replacement and renewal of 
plants and machineries. Supplementary grant of Rs . 93.84 crore was provided in the form of equity 
to liquidate past liabilities on account of overdue Bonds & Debentures, to clear statutory dues and to 
keep net worth positive. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.14, 1.15 & 1.16 of the Chapter I of the Repor:t) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 2.15) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that the total Plan outlay for the mining sector 
(Department of Mines) during 2003-2004 was Rs. 633.74 comprising Rs.228.50 crore (Plan) and  
Rs.405.24 crore (NonPlan) was reused to Rs.500.00 crore at RE stage comprising of Rs.190.00 crore 
(Plan) and Rs.310.00 crore (Non-Plan). The Committee are further dismayed to note that the 
reduction of plan outlay at BE stage has conti nued and the BE for 2004-2005 has been kept at  
Rs.549.00 crore. The further concern is the fact th at there has been downsizing of Plan expenditure 
from Rs.228.50 crote (Plan) in BE 2003-04 to Rs.190.00 crore (Plan). 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 2.16) 
 
The Committee understands the financial constr aints of Government of India. However, 
keeping in mind the importance of the Mining Industry,  it is desirable that fo r optimal utilization of 
the resources the Ministry of Mines be given su fficient funds. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry of Mines would take up the matte r at RE stage with Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance for more allocation of plan outlay as per requirement. 
 
Action Taken for 2.15 and 2.16 
 
During the year 2003-2004 the tota l allocation of the Department  of Mines in B.E. was  
Rs.633.74 crore comprising Rs.228.50 crore for (Plan) and Rs.405.24 crore (Non-Plan). At RE. stage 
the total allocation was reduced to Rs.500.00 crore comprising Rs.190.00 crores (Plan) and  

Rs.310.00 crores (Non-Plan). However a sum of Rs .93.84 crore was obtained for HCL as equity 
through the last batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants. Therefore, the revised allocation for 
this Department comes to Rs.593.84 crore. A reduc tion of Rs.38.50 crore was made in the plan 
provisions meant for GSI and its budget was reduced  from Rs.176.00 crores to Rs. 137.50 crore. 
This was mainly on account of stoppage of BRGM aid and cuts of Ministry of Finance. The 
Department takes notes of recommendations of Hon'ble Parliamentary Standing Committee and will 
take appropriate steps for increase allocation as per requirement in future. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para No. 2.17) 
 
NALCO 
 
The Committee are also unhappy to note that wh ile on the one hand there has been reduction 
in Plan outlay, on the other hand the utilization of  funds by PSUs like NALCO and subordinate 
organizations like GSI have not been satisfactory.  In the year 2002-03, the BE for NALCO was kept 
at Rs.900.00 crore but the actual utilisation was Rs.608.69 crore. In the year 2003 -04 against the 
allocated BE of Rs.650.00 crore only Rs. 229.85 crore were utilized by the organization. The 
Committee feel that the Department  of Mines should have undertaken  realistic calc ulation of the 
needs of PSUs and organizations under its administ rative jurisdiction and accordingly projected its 
plan outlay. The Committee also observed that the National Aluminium Co. Ltd. failed to utilize the 
allocated amount for critical ongoing schemes and for new schemes during the first two years of 
Tenth Plan. There is a general slackness in utilization of funds allocated to the organizations & PSUs 
and the Committee desire the necessary corrective ac tion be taken by the Government to ensure that 
funds allocated be expended as targeted. 
 
Action Taken 
 
It is a fact that the utiliza tion of funds was less than the approved outlay of the Company in 
the years 2002-03 and 2003-04 in the first two years of  tenth plan. The adhoc plan outlay of Rs.100 
crore for 2nd phase expansion was postponed from BE 2003-04 to BE 2004-05 for want of 
Government approval. The Plan outlay and utilization of funds on 1st phase expansion was gradually 
reduced from year to year taking  a realistic view on the progress of the project, the cumulative 
commitments made and the actual expenditure incu rred. The utilization of  lesser funds than the 
approved outlay did not in any way affect the progr ess of the 1st phase expansion as the Company 
was all along comfortably placed in providing necessary funds. Apart from substantial savings in the 
first phase of expansion, there was improvement in internal resource genera tion leading to external 
borrowing of only Rs.300 crore to finance 1st phase expansion. All the major expansions could be 
completed mostly on time except for 120 pots in the Smelter Plant expansion, which was linked to 
commissioning of 8th Unit of CPP. The saving in the project cost was the main reason for the 
reduction in actual expenditure comp ared to the plan outlay, which is now helping the Company in 
terms of lesser depreciation and lower cost of produc tion, which is comparable to the pre expansion 
cost of production. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.14, 1.15 & 1.16 of the Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 3.8) 
 
Geological Survey of India 
 
The Committee appreciate the role played by GSI in pre and post independent India as 
premier national scientific survey and research orga nisation. The Committee note that in view of the 
changing environment, the role and functions of Geological Survey of India (GSI) vis-a-vis other 
organizations, the role of GSI needs to be examined . To make the role of GSI more relevant in the 
light of development in the fiel d of earth sciences, etc. the Co mmittee recommended that the Report 
of the Expert Committee may be implemented by th e Department of Mines at the earliest. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken on the findings of the Expert Committee. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The following actions on implementation of th e accepted part of the recommendations of the 
Expert Committee have been initiated. The charte r of GSI has been revi sed and notified in the 
Gazette. The programmes have been classified in to the hierarchy of Pr ojects-Programmes-Mission 
and actions have been initiated to implement the programmes in project made. The existing structure 
of the Regional offices and Wings have been retained. As a first step for attaining excellence in 
R&D efforts, three programmes under the recently created scope of taking up additional research 
projects have been included in the Annual Pr ogramme of GSI in 2004-2005 actions have been 
planned to strengthen the GSITI and expand its activities. For setting up of a commercial wing a 
proposal is under consideration of the DOM. Fo r developing strong management information 
system, small modules has been created and circulat ed to the Regions and wings for establishing the 
database in the personnel information domain and in the case of annual programmes this is already 
in practice; to streamline the pr ocedure of personnel management  of Group A, B, C, D proposals 
have already been submitted to the DOM. The majority of the Regions and Wings will be covered 
under LAN by the end of this financial year and WAN will be taken up in the next phase. Time 
frame for modernization of GSI through 10th plan has been indicated to DOM. The infrastructure 
support needed for optimum utilization of specific s ophisticated instruments has been identified and 
necessary action has been initiated to implement the same. The programme of the training institute 
has been suitably tailored to meet the customized need of the department as well as scientists from 
outside organisations involved in the field of earth sciences. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.23 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S1.No. 7, Para No. 3.9) 
 
GSI 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that ach ievement/physical performance of GSI during 
the IXth Plan period (1997-2000) have fallen far short of the actual targets in various fields such as 
systemic Geological Mapping, Thematic Mapping, Aeri al Survey, Drilling, Tr aining, Research etc. 
The reasons advanced by Geological Survey of India (GSI) for the shortfall, such as local law and 
order problems, shortage of professional manpower , old and outdated equipment etc., are also not 
convincing and the Ministry failed to take corrective steps in time. The Committee, therefore, cannot 
but deplore the Department's casual approach to achieve the targets laid and desire that necessary 

steps should be taken to achieve all the targets in  right earnest. Replacement of old and outdated 
equipments should be carried out on war footi ng and other steps like filling up of vacancies of 
professional manpower should be taken up to ensure the achievement of the targets laid for 10th Plan 
Period. 
 
Action Taken 
 
All out effort in right earnest are being taken to achieve the targets are projected in the 10th 
plan document. 60% of the old rigs deployed for drilling have been replaced, sophisticated 
instruments have been procured for the laboratories which includes ICP-MS, ICP-AES, XRF, EPMA 
etc. (capable of high precision and law detection in analyzing individual minerals). Proposal for 
procurement of helicopter borne geophysical survey system is under examination/consideration of 
Department of Mines. 
 

Recommendation (S1.No. 8, 9, 10, Para No., 3.10, 3.22, 3.23) 
 
GSI 
 
The details of the plan outlays  and expenditure furnished by the Department during the IXth 
Plan and first two years of the Xth Plan for GSI also show that the actual expenditure has fallen short 
of the approved outlay for the whole of IXth Plan. Also, during 2003-2004, only Rs.113.38 crore 
were spent against the approved outlay of Rs.176. 00 crore. The Secretary, Department of Mines 
himself conceded during evidence that there has b een sluggishness on the part  of GSI in utilisation 
of funds. The Committee, thus, taki ng note of the dismal performance of GSI in utilization of funds 
feel that funds are no longer a constraint in the task for completion of the projects. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that GSI should take proactive steps to en sure the optimal utilization of the 
sanctioned funds. The Committee also agree with the views of the Secretary that GSI has to show 
anticipation in terms of laying down specifications  and in global tendering in anticipation of the 
financial provisions. 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that th e funds allocated for modernisation and 
replacement in different fields of GSI have not been fully utilised. In 2002-2003, out of BE of  
Rs.80.19 crore, only Rs.11.33 crore have been ut ilized. Also during 2003-204, against the budgetary 
allocation of Rs.76.44 crore, only Rs.31.40 have been expended. The Committee are of the opinion 
that under-utilization of allocated funds is one of  the reasons for downsizing of plan outlay for 
modernisation. The details of th e budget proposals made for the purpo se for the last three years and 
during the year 2004-2005 show that there has been a reduction in budgetary outlay from Rs.71.43 in 
2002-2003 to Rs.67.25 crore in 2003-2004 and to Rs. 32.54 crore in 2004-2005. This clearly shows 
the tardy progress made in the implementation progr amme of modernisation of GSI. The Committee 
recommend that the pace of GSI needs to be accelerated. 
 
The Committee observe that as informed by the Department, there are vast areas for 
modernisation as geochemical, mapping, specialised thematic studies, environmental appraisal, 
natural hazard mitigation, etc. 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.10, 3.22 & 3.23 A Committee under the Chairman ship of Additional Secretary (Mines) has 
been constituted by the Secretary (Mines) to monitor the implementation of the modernization 
programme of the GSI and to suggest the correctiv e steps needed for optimum utilization of the 
allocated Plan fund. 
 
Recommendation (S1.No. 11, Para No. 3.24) 
 
GSI 
 
The Committee feel that the process of furt her modernization of GSI should not suffer for 
want of sufficient funds. The Committee, ther efore, recommend that the Department of Mines 
should not only take adequate steps for optimum utilisation of sanctioned funds but also make 
available adequate funds in the Revised Estimates for the year 2004-05. 
 

Action Taken 
 
The fund allocation as per BE vis-a-vis the amount spent and status of the procurement 
proposal are being examined to estimate requirement of additional fund at the RE stage of 2004-05. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No. 3.27) 
 
The Committee are happy to note the progress ma de in mineral exploration especially in 
Eastern Region, Southern Region, Central Region and Western Region. The Committee are, 
however, dismayed to note the negligible progress made in mineral exploration in North East Region 
and Northern Region. The Committee strongly recommend that the Geological Survey of India 
should enhance the pace of mineral investigation and achieve the targets set for the purpose in a time 
bound manner. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Geological prospectivity is the main factor, wh ich control the exploration activities of any 
region. The problem specific field in the earth science domain of the Northeast region and the 
Northern region are primarily related to natural hazards involving land slides and earthquakes which 
are being given due priority for th ese two regions. A number of geot echnical investigations are also 
being attended in these two regi ons. In terms of hydel power gene ration, communication links etc., 
which are specific of hilly terrains. The due share of mineral investigations also are being carried out 
in the peninsular parts of these regions. Necessary  assistance and guidance is  also being provided to 
the State Directorate of Geology and Mining in the field of mineral exploration. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14, Para No. 4.18) 
 
NALCO 
 
However, despite the commendable performa nce of NALCO since its inception, the 
Committee are perturbed to note the decrease in plan outlay at the RE stage and the huge gap 
between the BE and RE for the year 2003-04. The budget plan outlay of Rs.650 crore for the year 
2003-2004 was revised to Rs.325 crore in RE 2003-2004. The BE for 2004-2005 has been further 
reduced to Rs.310 crore. A sum of Rs.300 crore were projected in BE 2003-04 against Smelter and 
CPP (7th Unit) expansion. However, this was revised to Rs.139.16 crore in RE 2003-04. This clearly 
shows that the Ministry has not been projecting realistic budgetary proposals. Again, a provision of 
Rs.100 crore was kept under BE 2003-04 in anticip ation of Government approval of proposed 2nd 
phase expansion. Since the final approval of the project was dela yed, the BE provision was not 
retained in RE 2003-04 and has been shifted to BE 2004-05. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The decrease in plan outlay at the RE stage from Rs.650 crore to Rs.325 crore and provision 
of Rs.310 crore for BE 2004-05 reflected the reality  as the Company progressed towards completion 
of the expansion projects. Unlike in the previous years, barring an expected commitment of  
Rs.17.75 crore for CPP 8th unit, there was no more co mmitment to be made in respect of Mines and 
Refinery (M&R) expansion and Smelter and CPP 7t h unit (S&P) expansion. Thus while projecting 
RE 2003-04 and BE 2004-05, the Company was nearer  towards the completion cost and savings on 
the projects were more concreti zed than in the previous year. While preparing RE 2003-04 and BE 

2004-05, a total saving of Rs.575.76 crore was projec ted compared to a saving of Rs.368.93 crore at 
the time of preparation of BE 2003-04. The major drop in the outlay in respect of Smelter & CPP 7th 
unit from Rs.300 crore to Rs.139.16 crore was due to utilization of cenvat credit of about Rs.88 
crore, which was not reflected at BE 2003-04. B ecause of the delay in approval to the 2nd phase 
expansion, there was no alternative than to drop it under RE 2003-04 stage and shift to BE 2004-05. 
 
Recommendation (SI.No. 15, Para No. 4.19) 
 
Since the delayed approval of any project co uld lead to serious time and cost overrun 
implications, the Committee strong ly feel that the Government should accord its approval to the 
proposed projects well in time for the overall interest of the economy of the country. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Public Investment Board (PIB) has alr eady recommended in its meeting held on 6th 
February, 2004 the investment on 2nd phase expans ion proposal. The environmental clearance for 
all the segments has since been obtained. The proposal has received the approval of Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). The CCEA meeting was held on 13.10.2004 and the 
minutes of the meeting have been received. 
 
Recommendation (SI.No. 17, Para No. 4.21) 
 
The Committee note that the company is now l ooking forward to an early clearance of its  
Rs.4000 crore expansion project. It  has been indicated that the e xpansion project ma y get the final 
nod of the cabinet by July, 2004. The second phase expansion project of NALCO is now awaiting 
environmental clearance before being sent to the cabinet for final approval. The project was earlier 
cleared by the Public Investment Board. The Comm ittee desire that the Department of Mines should 
pursue the matter for expeditious environmental clearance of the second phase expansion 
programme and its early implementation in a time bound manner. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The environmental clearance for 2nd phase expansion has since been obtained for all the 
segments. The proposal has received the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA). The CCEA meeting was held on 13.10.2004 and the minutes of th e meeting have been 
received. 
 
Recommendation (SI.No. 22,23,24, Para No. 7.5, 7.6, 7.7) 
BGML 
 
The Committee note that BGML which was incorporated as a PSU in 1972 has been consistently 
making losses since its inception due to various reasons such as depletion of reserves, deep level 
of mining, high cost of inputs & surplus manpower. BGML was referred to Board for Industrial 
and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) in 1992 who passed order for winding up of BGML. 
 
The Committee observe that two packages were announced for the workers as a result of 
liquidation of BGML. One was the STBP package in February, 2002 where the monetary relief was 
less. Another package was announced on 6th November which had enhanced 
ex g atia, 
compensation, etc. The Department have informed that the latest High Court judgement has strongly 
r

favoured the 6th November package for the workers.  The Committee are of th e view that after the 
closure of BGML, the interests of employees shoul d be protected in all re spects. Therefore, the 
Committee also recommend the Government to cons ider and implement the 6th November package 
for the employees of BGML. 
 
The Committee also note that the last valuation that was done of BGML as far as its lands 
and assets were concerned was for Rs.112 crore. In  addition, there are huge tailing dumps and there 
is a considerable belief in international community that there is still a lot of gold in these tailings. 
The value of that gold on 1997 valuation was Rs.1200 crore. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
immediate steps should be taken to recover gold fr om the tailing and by disposal/sale/utilisation of 
assets of the company which will help in mitigating to a large extent the liab ilities of the company. 
These steps may be taken concurrent ly with the winding up process if there is no legal bar in it. The 
Committee may be informed of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The actionable points in the above mentioned recommendations of the Committee are as follows. 
 
(i) Government to consider and implement the 6th November, 2001 VRS package in respect 
of the employees of BGML. 
 
(ii) Immediate steps should be taken to recover gold from the tailings and for 
disposal/sale/utilization of the assets of BG ML, which will help in mitigating to a large 
extent the liabilities of the company. 
 
A Cabinet Note has been finalized which inter- alia includes a proposal for implementation of 
6.11.2001 VRS package in respect of BGML employees. In the said Cabinet Note  it is also proposed 
that in consultation with the Government of Karn ataka a scheme will be presented to the High Court 
of Karnataka, where the winding up/liquidation pro ceedings are pending, for disposal of land and 
properties of BGML, which inter-alia must provide, after discharge of liabilities, for issue of a global 
tender for ascertaining the true value of gold to be extracted fr om the tailing dumps, as also, 
potential extraction of gold from BGML premis es. The Cabinet has referred the matter to the 
Committee of Secretaries. 
 
Recommendation (S1.No. 25, Para No. 8.9) 
 
The Committee note that the S&T programme of the Department of Mines cover vast number 
of disciplines such as Geology, Exploration, Mining and Environment, Bleaching, Beneficiation, 
Rock Mechanics, Ground Control and Non-Ferrous Metallurgy. The Committee are also please to 
note that during the X Five Year Plan empha sis will be given on multi-disciplinary, multi-
organisational projects catering to national requi rements. The Committee are, however, unhappy to 
note that while in the revised estimates 2003-04 an outlay for S&T programmes has been retained at 
Rs.8.05 crore, the funds utilise during 2003-04 wa s Rs. 405.67 lakh (Rs.4.06 crore). The Committee 
recommend that the Department should take adequa te steps to fully utilise the funds sanctioned for 
S&T programmes as these programmes have wide and varied objectives  which have national 
ramifications. The Committee note that six new pr ojects have been approved for Rs.772.17 lakh  
(Rs.7.7 crore) and desire that these should be  completed in a time bound manner with optimal 
utilisation of sanctioned funds. The Committee also desire that the Department should strive to 
procure more and more S&T projects from other Departments/Organisations  which will help to 

augment the internal resources of the Department. 
 
Action Taken 
 
1. The outlay of Rs.8.05 crore (Budget Support Rs.4.50 crore) was retained in RE. 2003-04. 
Hence the Department of Mines was to provid e financial assistance of Rs.4.50 crore. 
Balance Rs. 3.55 crore were to be generated as Internal and Extra Budgetary Resource by 
three research Institutions viz. National Institute of Rock Mechanic, Jawaharlal Nehru 
Aluminium Research Development Centre and National Institute of Miner's Health. 
Against these targets Department of Mines re leased assistance of Rs.4.06 crore (90%). 
NIRM, JNARDDC and NIRM generated Rs.3. 05 crore (86%) as Internal and Extra 
Budgetary Resources. 
 
2. The Department of Mines has approved six next projects at a cost of Rs.7.72 crore. 
However, the DOM's contribution is limited to only Rs.1.51 (crore). Balance Rs.6.21 
crore is being contributed by an Internationa l funding agency, Deptt. of Steel, Deptt. of 
Science & Technology, Government of India, Govt. of Nagaland, pr ivate Industry and 
National Aluminium Company (PSU). 
 
3. The Deptt. will endeavour to complete six new projects in time and strive to procure 
more projects from other Deptt./Organisations. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.39 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (S1.No. 13, Para No. 4.17) 
 The Committee note that the National Alum inium Company Ltd. (NALCO) which was 
incorporated on 7th January, 1981 is Asia's largest integrated aluminium complex. The company was 
commissioned during 1985-87 and has emerged as a star performer in pr oduction and export of 
alumina and aluminium. The Committee also observe that NALCO has been conferred Mini Ratna 
and Star Trading House status by Government of India. The Committee appreciate the achievements 
of NALCO both in regard to phy sical and financial performance and hope that the company will 
continue to keep the pace of performance in the years to come.  
 
Action Taken 
 
The Department expresses its thanks for a ppreciations given by the Hon'ble Committee and 
will strive continuously to keep the pace of performance in the years to come. 
Recommendation (S1.No. 18, Para No. 5.16) 
 
HCL 
 
The Committee note that there has been a cont inuous decline in the physical and financial 
achievements of the company duri ng the last three years and the company was incurring heavy 
losses. This has happened due to factors like intense competition, steep decline in international 
prices and increase in the cost of infrastruc ture like power and also because of the surplus 
manpower. To overcome the question of surplus manpower, the company is implementing a scheme 
of Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS). The Committee observe that a grant of Rs.120.00 crore was 
made to HCL in BE 2003-2004 as Non-Plan expenditu re. As this was not utili sed in that year and 
was utilised during 2003-2004. The Revised Estimates  was therefore, reduced to Rs.25 crore for 
2003-2004. In BE 2004-2005, Rs.60 crore have been gr anted to HCL as Non-Plan expenditure for 
separation of manpower through VRS. 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
This is factual position, it needs no comments. 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (S1.No. 19, Para No. 5.17) 
 
HCL 
 
The Committee note that HCL has been incurring heavy losses in its operation. During 1999-
2000, it incurred net loss of Rs.147.70 crore. During 2001-2002 the company again incurred net loss 
of Rs.184.04 crore. The financial performance of and the accumulated losses of HCL were as high as 
1171 crore. The Secretary, Department of Mines wh ile conceding that heavy losses incurred have 
however stated during evidence that from December, 2003, the company has turned around and at 
least saved its cash loss with a marginal saving and is repaying part of its liabilities. From December, 
2003, they have avoided cash losses and have done well. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
all out efforts should be made by the Ministry to make HCL financially viable by providing financial 
restructuring package. The Committee recommend that the question of disinvestment of HCL should 
be reexamined and it may be resorted to if absolutely unavoidable. 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
The issue of disinvestment of HCL may be examined once the new policy on disinvestment 
is finalised by the Government and as and when  there is a reference from Department of 
Disinvestment. For financial restru cturing package, a proposal has been received from HCL and is 
under process in the Ministry of Mines. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.29 & 1.30 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S1.No. 20, Para No. 6.16) 
 
MECL 
 
The Committee observed that MECL which wa s set up in 1972 is engaged in undertaking 
detailed systematic mineral exploration in the country. The Committee are, however, perturbed to 
note that as far as the achievement in exploratio n, mining are concerned, the actual performance of 
MECL has fallen far short of the target. While  the target for mining in 2003-04 was 5000 m, the 
actual mining was only 3357 m. In the context of sale s, while the target was Rs.6,436 lakhs, only  
Rs.6089 lakhs sales was achieved. The Committee reco mmended that all out e fforts should be made 
by MECL for improving their physical and financial performance, laying emphasis on rationalisation 
of manpower to improve performan ce in core activities and in the field of diversification. The 
Committee recommend that the financial restructuring and implementation of VRS proposal of 
MECL should be approved and implemented without an y further loss of time in  order to enable the 
company to achieve the physical targets, targets of optimal manpower and to earn profits. 
 

Action Taken Note 
 
A draft Cabinet note for a provision of Rs.70 crore as grant for implementation of VRS in 
MECL to reduce the manpower strength of the compa ny to the level of 1,200,  along with financial 
restructuring (waiver of interest, penal interest ou tstanding against the accumulated losses, transfer 
of outstanding loan to capital reserves etc., has been circulated to the concerned Ministries/Deptts for 
their comments after the approval of the then Minister-in-Charge, Deptt. of  Disinvestment (DOD) in 
their comments have stated that Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment (CCD) has approved on 
10.7.2003, that restructuring of MECL would be done  in consultation of A dvisers and prospective 
bidders and would be submitted to CCD for approval.  They have also mentioned in their comments 
that EOIs have been invited by  27.2.2004 and the nature of restructuring would be formed in 
consultation with the Qualified Interested Part ies (QIPs) and the advisers. Hence DoDI has 
suggested that any proposal for re structuring is to be linked to disinvestment of the company and, 
therefore, it would be advisable to consult the qu alified bidders before the proposals are finally put 
up to CCEA. With the approval of the then MCM, it was decided to pursue the Cabinet Note after a 
clear picture emerges after discus sion with the Qualified Interested Parties (QIPs). The Deptt. of 
Disinvestment has been reminded in the matter. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.36 & 1.37 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 21, Para No. 6.17) 
 
MECL 
 
The Committee are pleased to note that MECL has recently got major work orders in the 
field of consultancy services even from TISC O, STERLITE, SMC, GEC, AMD, ONGC, Singareni 
Collieries etc. The Committee desire that MECL should make adequate efforts to obtain substantial 
orders from not only traditional clients like coal companies but also from newer companies in order 
to generate more internal resources. The Committee further recommend that the Company's proposal 
to purchase drill for Coal Bed Methane Exploration should be approved at the earliest so that it can 
take a lead in a new field and augment its res ources, the Government shoul d also take immediate 
steps to modernise MECL so that it can withstand competition from other companies. 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
The proposal for the purchase of Drill for Coal Bed Methane (CBM) exploration and production 
by MECL at a cost of Rs.23.75 crore had been submitted to IF Division of this Deptt. for taking 
up the matter with the Planning Commission. 
 
Further, the Government had already taken a decision to disinvest its 100%  equity in MECL 
in favour of a strategic buyer with transfer of management control.  Further action for disinvestment 
being processed in Deptt. of Disinvestment. Perhap s, it would not be appropriate for the Deptt. of 
Mines going for its modernization programme at this stage. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.36 & 1.37 of the Chapter I of the Report) 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL A WAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 2.18) 
 
BGML 
 
The Committee are pained to note that grants -in-aid of Rs.79.59 crore provided to Bharat 
Gold Mines Ltd. during 2003-04 for VRS packages coul d not be utilized and had to be surrendered, 
as Cabinet could not give its approval to the proposal of granting VRS package in time. The 
Committee express serious concern over the inordina te delay on the part of the Government in 
taking a timely decision. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
An amount of Rs. 83.01 crore had made in th e BE 2003-04 as grants-in-aid for VRS package 
in Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. (BGML). It was expected that this amount would be fully utilized in 
2003-04 as a proposal for implementation of 6.11.2001. VRS package in BGML, was under 
consideration of the Government in pursuance of the recommendations  of High Court of Karnataka. 
A Cabinet Note in this regard had been submitted on 27.2.2004. However, due to declaration of 
General Elections, the said Cabinet Note could not  be considered by the Cabinet. The Cabinet 
Secretariat returned the Cabinet Note on 17.5.2004 requesting that the Cabinet Note may be brought 
before the Cabinet after formation of new G overnment and after obtaining fresh approval of 
Minister-in-charge and fresh inter-Ministerial cons ultations. In view of this, the budgetary provision 
made in BE 2003-04 as grants-in-aid for STBP in BGML could not be util ized in 2003-04 and an 
amount of Rs.79.59 crore has to be surrendered. 
 
The Cabinet considered the proposal, and referred it to the Committee Secretaries for detailed 
examination. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paras 1.19 & 1.20 of the Chapter I of the Report)  
 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 16, Para No. 4.20) 
 
NALCO 
 
The Committee note that the Government had in 2001 approved for open market sale of 30% 
of Government equity in NALCO, bringing down  Government equity to 26%. Thereafter, the 
Committee note that the disinvestments status of NALCO was being reviewed. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the present status of  disinvestments of NALCO which is reported to be 
temporarily put on hold. The Committee also reco mmend that the Government should give a fresh 
and serious look to the disinvestment decision of NALCO keeping in mind the various factors that 
NALCO has emerged as a star performer in produc tion and export in ore and has been conferred 
Mini Ratna status. The Committee also recommend  that the Government should commission a study 
to evaluate the working of NALCO. 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
Subsequent to the statement of the Prime Mi nister at Bhubaneswar on 15 July 2003, the 
disinvestment of NALCO has not been pursued. The policy of the Government as stated in the 
National Common Minimum Programme is that "it is pledged to devolve full managerial and 
commercial autonomy to successful profit-making companies operating in a competitive 
environment. Generally profit making companies w ill not be privatized".  The recommendation of 
the Committee to commission a study to evaluate the working of NALCO is being considered. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.26 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        ANANTH KUMAR, 
22 December, 2004                                                                                                        Chairman, 
1  Pausa, 1926 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Coal & Steel. 
 
  
  
 

ANNEXURE  I 
NATIONAL ALUMINIUM COMPANY LIMITED 
APPROVED PLAN OUTLAYS AND EXPENDITURE DURING FIRST 
THREE YEARS OF TENTH PLAN (FROM 2002-03 TO 2004-05) 
 
2002-03   2003-04 2004-05Sl.No. Name of the 
Scheme/ 
Project/Programme 
Approved 
Outlay 
Actual  
Expr. 
Approved 
Outlay 
Actual 
Expr. 
Approved 
Outlay 
A. Critical/Ongoing 
Schemes: 
 
1. Mines & Refinery 126.02 49.85 40.00 14.47 8.88 
2. Smelter & Power 
Plant 
502.72     391.65 300.00 101.87 63.82
3.       VIII Unit of CPP 180.04 99.38 145.00 91.56 50.87
4.       Special Grade
Alumina/Zeolite 
6.22 2.92 - 4.03 -
5.      Rolled Products
Units 
34.00 34.35 - 3.74 11.43
 Total      849.00 578.15 485.00 215.67 135.00
B. Schemes aimed at 
maximizing Benefits 
(AMRs) 
51.00     30.54 65.00 14.18 75.00
C. New Schemes:      
1.  Alumina 4th stream - - 20.00 - 20.00 
2. Aluminium 4th Pot 
Line 
- - 50.00 - 40.00 
3.  CPP (2x120 MW) - - 30.00 - 30.00 
4.       Equity Participation
in Qatar Project 
- - - - 10.00
5.  Coal Mines (One
Block) 
- - 100.00 - 100.00 
Total (C) 900.00     608.69 650.00 229.85 310.00
 

ANNEXURE II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2004-05) HELD ON 22 DECEMBER 2004 IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM ‘C', PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar-In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Bikash Chowdhury 
4. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
6. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
7. Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
8. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
9. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav 
10. Shri B.J. Panda 
11. Shri G.K. Vasan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Sapra    - Joint Sec etary  r
3. Shri A.K. Singh    - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following Draft Reports: 
 
(i) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 
the 1st Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the 
Ministry of Coal. 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 
the 2nd Report (14th Lok Sabha) on De mands for Grants (2004-05) of the 
Ministry of Mines. 
 
3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor 
additions/deletions/amendments. 
 

4. The Committee authorised the Chairman  to finalise these Reports after making 
consequential change arising out of factual verification by the concerned Ministries and 
to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE III  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF  
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made     
 25 
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government   
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,   
 18 
14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 24 and 25) 
 
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         
 72% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government's replies        
2 
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 13 and 18) 
 
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         
 8% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government  
have not been accepted by the Committee     
 3 
(vide recommendation at S1.Nos. 19, 20 and 21) 
 
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         
 12% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited       
 2 
(vide recommendation at S1.Nos. 5 and 16) 
 
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         
 8% 
 
 
 
 