19
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF MINES
PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL MINING
NINETEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 ( Saka)

NINETEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF MINES
PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL MINING
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.8.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 4.8.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)

CC&S No. 19
Price : Rs. 70.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2005-06) ........................................ (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE S UB-COMMITTEE ON M INES (2005-06) ................ (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2004-05) ........................................ (vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE S UB-COMMITTEE ON M INES (2004-05) ................ (ix)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (xi)
PART I
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Indian Bureau of Mines—Its Role and
Performance ................................................................ 4
CHAPTER III Prevention of Illegal Mining—Legal Frame
Work ............................................................................. 14
CHAPTER IV Mechanism for Prevention of Illegal Mining ...... 25
Statement of Observations/Recommendations
of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
contained in the Report ........................................... 35
PART II
ANNEXURES
I. State-wise breakup of number of cases referred to the
State Government and action taken thereon as on
1.7.2005 ....................................................................................... 48
II. Year-wise statement of pending mining lease cases as
on 31.3.2006 .............................................................................. 49
III. State-wise breakup of Illegal Mining cases pending
for the period from July 2005 to December 2005 ......... 50
IV . Cases of illegal mining detected by State Governments
& action taken during 3 years period of 2002-2005 ..... 51
V. Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee on Mines
of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2004-05)
held on 4.1.2005 ...................................................................... 53
VI. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2004-05) held on 19.7.2005 ..................... 55
VII. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2005-06) held on 3.8.2006 ....................... 57
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2005-06)
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
*5. Shri Bangsagopal Chowdhury
6. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey
7. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
10. Shri Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta
11. Shri Hemlal Murmu
12. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
13. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
14. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
15. Shri Tarachand Sahu
16. Smt. Karuna Shukla
17. Shri Prabhunath Singh
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
19. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
* Nominated w.e.f. 20.1.2006.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Devdas Apte
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
24. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
©25. Shri B.J. Panda
**26. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
@27. Shri Saman Pathak
@28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
$29. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
$30. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Madhu Tandon — Committee Assistant
(iv)
© Nominated w.e.f. 29.6.2006.
** Nominated  w.e.f. 29.4.2006.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 2.6.2006.
$ Nominated w.e.f. 7.7.2006.

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE
ON MINES (2005-06)
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Karuna Shukla — Convenor
3. Shri Prasanna Acharya
4. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
7. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
8. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
9. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
10. Shri Tarachand Sahu
11. Shri Prabhunath Singh
12. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
14. Shri Devdas Apte
15. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2004-05)
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
5. Shri Bikash Chowdhury
6. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey
7. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
9. Shri Nitish Kumar
10. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
11. Shri Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta
12. Shri Hemlal Murmu
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
14. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
16. Shri Tarachand Sahu
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla
18. Shri Prabhunath Singh
19. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
20. Shri Ramsewak Singh (Babuji)
21. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
(vii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Devdas Apte
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
24. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
25. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad
26. Shri B.J. panda
27. Shri Jibon Roy
28. Shri G.K. Vasan
(viii)

(ix)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE
ON MINES (2004-05)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Smt. Karuna Shukla — Convenor
3. Shri Prabhunath Singh
4. Shri G.K. Vasan
5. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
6. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam
7. Shri Prasanna Acharya
8. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
9. Shri B.J. Panda
10. Shri Bikash Chowdhury

(xi)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Prevention of Illegal Mining” relating to the Ministry of Mines.
2. Taking into consideration the significance of the subject, the
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel selected the above-mentioned
subject and entrusted the same to the Sub-Committee on Mines for
examination and report thereon.
3. The sub-Committee on Mines was briefed by the representatives
of the Ministry of Mines on 4.1.2005 on the subject. Thereafter the
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel took oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Mines on 19.7.2005 on the subject.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Mines for placing before them the detailed material/
information as desired by the Committee/Sub-Committee and sharing
with the Committee/Sub-Committee their frank views and perceptions
concerning the subject.
5. The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for
the work done by the Sub-Committee on Mines for their indepth study
and analysis of the subject, thereby helping in preparation of the Report.
6. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 3.8.2006.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
 N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
3 August, 2006 Chairman,
12 Sravana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

PART I
CHAPTER I
REPORT
Introductory
India is endowed with rich mineral resources. With a history of
mining activity dating back to the pre-Harappam period, it is today
gearing up to become a leading producer and exporter of a range
minerals. In recent years, India has emerged as a leading producer of
quite a few minerals, particularly industrial minerals. It is the world’s
largest producer of mica and ranks 3rd in the production of coal,
lignite and bartyes, 4th in iron-ore, 6th in bauxite and manganese ore,
10th in aluminium and 11th in crude sheet. It can take pride in
possessing in world’s oldest zinc technology.
1.2 Exploitation of the vast mineral resources to meet the growing
requirement has been a major economic activity contributing
significantly to the country’s industrial development and export trade.
India’s mineral export constitutes 16% of its total exports. Two States,
Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand account for 25 per cent of mineral
production and 10 States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal
and Karnataka account for slightly less than 50 per cent of production.
1.3 Ministry of Mines is responsible for the survey and exploration
of all minerals except natural gas, petroleum and atomic minerals and
for the mining and metallurgy of non-ferrous metals such as
aluminium, copper, zinc, lead, gold and nickel. It is also responsible
for the administration of the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957 in respect of all mines and minerals other than
coal, natural gas and petroleum. The Ministry has been carrying out
survey and exploration through Geological Survey of India (GSI) and
Minerals Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL). The IBM functioning
under the Ministry of Mines is carrying out promotion and conservation
of minerals other than natural gas, atomic minerals and minor minerals.
1.4 The Central Government can exercise powers for regulation of
mines and mineral development to the extent such regulation and
development is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the

2
public interest, as per Entry 54 of List-I of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution of India. The State Governments, on the other hand, have
been given powers under Entry-23 of List-II for regulation of mines
and mineral development subject to the provisions of List-I with respect
to regulation and development under the control of the Union.
Parliament has enacted the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation Act, 1957) (MMDR Act, 1957) under Entry 54 of List-I to
provide for the regulation of mines and development of minerals under
control of the Union.
1.5 In pursuance of the reforms initiated by the Government of
India in July, 1991 in fiscal, industrial and trade regimes, the National
Mineral Policy was announced in March, 1993. The National Mineral
Policy recognized the need for encouraging private investment,
including foreign direct investment and for attracting state-of-the-art
technology in the mineral sector. Further, the policy stressed that the
Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, shall
continue to formulate legal measures for the regulation of mines and
the development of mineral resources to ensure basic uniformity in
mineral administration so that the development of mineral resources
keeps pace, and is in consonance with the national policy goals.
1.6 Under the Indian Constitution while State is the owner of
mineral resources, the Union Government has power to make law
regulating exploration and mining. Though the Indian Bureau of Mines
has been mandated with the promotion and conservation of mineral
resources of the country but the rampant illegal mining has been
reported from various States. The menace of illegal mining has been
raising its ugly heads with impunity. This is amply clear from the fact
that there have been 14,504 odd cases of illegal mining detected in the
various parts of the country which is not only an indicative of illegal
business thriving in the mineral industry but an existence of unholy
nexus between the mineral mafia‘s and the law enforcement agencies.
1.7 Under the statutory provisions, no mining operation can be
undertaken without a mining lease duly granted, executed and
registered by the lessee with the State government. Any mining activity
undertaken outside the ambit of provision of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act (MMDR Act) 1957 and the rules
framed thereunder constitutes illegal mining.
1.8  Taking cognizance of illegal mining, the Ministry of Mines
constituted a ‘Tandon Committee in 1988’ for review of the existing
Act and Rules and suggestion for further delegation of powers to the

3
State Governments besides suggesting measures to prevent illegal
mining. The Tandon Committee recommended amendments to MMDR
Act and also recommended measures to prevent illegal mining.
Accordingly, a number of amendments were effected in MMDR Act
by the Government of India in 1999. However, the impact of these
amendment had failed to deter the illegal mining and continues to be
unabated.
1.9 The conservation as well as systematic and scientific
harnessing of mineral resources is bedrock of economic development
of a nation. However, unscientific and unlawful mining has been
thriving endlessly causing not only immense loss to the national
exchequer but destruction of natural environment. The Government
in its efforts to promote and develop mining sector had taken a
number of steps and commissioned studies from time to time under
National Mineral Policy, 1993. But, the  impact thereof has been far
from the satisfactory and the exploration and development of mineral
wealth of the country remained unproductive both economically and
socially.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should prepare
a revised National Mineral Policy in consultation with the State
Governments, concerned agencies/organizations and other
stakeholders with adequate investment proposals to harness the vast
mineral resources of the country and effectively meet the challenges
of future in our strides towards the status of a developed country.

4
CHAPTER II
INDIAN BUREAU OF MINES—ITS ROLE AND PERFORMANCE
The Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) is primarily responsible for the
promotion of conservation of minerals, protection of environment in
mines, systematic and scientific development of the mineral resources
of the country other than coal, petroleum and natural gas, atomic
minerals and minor minerals. towards this end, it performs regulatory
functions, namely enforcement of Mineral Conservation and
Development Rules, 1988, the relevant  provisions of the Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the Mineral
Concession Rules, 1960 and Environmental Protection Act, 1986 & Rules
made thereunder. It also undertakes scientific, techno-economic, research
oriented studies in various aspects of mining, geological studies, ore
beneficiation and environmental studies. It provides technical
consultancy services to the mining industry for geological appraisal of
mineral resources and for preparation of feasibility reports of mining
projects including beneficiation plants. It conducts market surveys to
assist the  mineral trade in the marketing of minerals. The IBM also
functions as a Data Bank on Mines and Minerals and publishes
periodically statistical information relating to mines and minerals. It
also brings out technical publications in the form of Monographs and
Bulletins. The IBM advises the Central and State Governments on all
aspects of mineral industry, trade, legislation, etc.
2.2 IBM imparts training to technical and non-technical officials of
IBM and also persons from the mineral industry and other agencies in
India and abroad. Functions/Main activities of the IBM are as follows:—
(i) Inspection and study of mines for enforcement of MCDR,
examination and approval of mining plans, schemes and
mine closure plans under MCR 1960 and MCDR 1988.
(ii) Pr oviding technical consultancy services in the field of
geology, mining, mine environment and mineral
beneficiation.
(iii) Research on beneficiation of low-grade ores and analysis of
ores and minerals.
(iv) Conducting research on special mining problems.
(v) Publication of monographs and bulletins.

5
(vi) Preparation of mineral maps.
(vii) Preparation of inventory of mineral resources of the country.
(viii)  Conducting market surveys of minerals and metals.
(ix) Collection and dissemination of statistics and information
on mines and minerals.
(x) Promoting and monitoring community development
activities in mining areas.
(xi) Advising the Central and State Governments on matters in
regard to mineral industry, relating to environmental
protection and pollution control, export and import policies,
trade, mineral legislation, fiscal incentives and related
matters.
(xii) Training of IBM personnel and persons from the mineral
industry and other agencies in India and abroad.
(xiii) Special studies on Development Programmes and
International Mineral Intelligence.
2.3 IBM has its headquarters at Nagpur and 12 Regional Offices
at Ajmer, Bangalore, Bhubaneswar, Chennai, Dehradun, Hyderabad,
Jabalpur, Kolkata, Margao, Nagpur, Ranchi and Udaipur and 2 sub-
regional offices at Guwahati and Nellore.
IBM has well equipped Ore Dressing Laboratories and Pilot Plants
at Nagpur, Ajmer and Bangalore.
2.4 The Ministry of Mines has informed the Committee that the
role of IBM is limited to development of minerals by enforcing Mineral
Conservation & Development Rules, 1988 within the mining lease area
and approving the mining plans under Section 5(2) of  MM(D&R)
1957 to systematize the mining operations, conservation of mineral
and environmental protection with the mining lease area only.
2.5 In the existing statutory provision IBM has got a limited role
of administering development of minerals in the mining lease area for
major minerals only and the responsibility of preventing the illegal
mining, transportation and storage of minerals rests with the State
Government.
2.6 As per present Charter of functions, IBM apart from other
functions is responsible for the following:—
(i) To promote systematic and scientific development of mineral
resources of the country (both on-shore & offshore)

6
(ii) To approve mining plans, schemes and mine closure plans
having regard to conservation of minerals and protection of
mines environment.
2.7 By different Gazette Notification, various officers of the Indian
Bureau of Mines (IBM) have been authorized to carry out the statutory
functions under Section 5(2)(b), 22 and 24(1) of the Act.
2.8  The following statement showing State-wise details of
1522 cases of illegal mining (where IBM has taken up the matter with
the State Governments for taking appropriate action including
determination of mining cases operating without mining plan):
S. Name of the State Number Important Minerals
No. of Mines
 1. Madhya Pradesh 128 Limestone & Bauxite
 2. Uttar Pradesh 05 Silica Sand
 3. Andhra Pradesh 308 Limestone, Quartz, Mica, Barite
& China Clay
 4. Karnataka 65 Limestone, China Clay,
Moulding Sand & Quartz
 5. Maharashtra 47 Silica Sand & Iron Ore
 6. Bihar 54 Mica
 7. Jharkhand 176 Mica, Fire Clay, Limestone, Iron
Ore & China Clay
 8. Chhattisgarh 10 Limestone
 9. Meghalaya 04 Limestone
10. Assam 12 Limestone
11. Manipur 02 Chromite
12. Sikkim 01 Copper
13. Orissa 68 Quartz & Graphite
14. Rajasthan 251 Steatite, Silica Sand, Feldspar &
Asbestos
15. Gujarat 391 Bauxite, Chalk, Limestone, Fire
Clay, Silica Sand & White Clay
Total 1522

7
2.9 When asked about the cases of illegal mining investigated and
what coordination between IBM and the State Governments exists in
this regard, the Ministry stated that :—
“During the course of inspection of major mineral mines for the
purpose of enforcement of provisions of Mineral Conservation and
Development Rules 1988[MCDR, 1988] viz. the Mining plan if any
illegal mining activities come to the notice of the inspecting officer
of IBM, it is reported to the concerned State Governments for
taking appropriate action. IBM has noticed 1522 cases of illegal
mining in September, 2002 and it referred the cases to the concerned
State Governments. IBM has reported that only 7 out of 1522 cases
are pending with  the State Governments and rest have been sorted
out. IBM has been asked to follow up action on cases of illegal
mining sent by them to the State Governments on quarterly basis
at every regional level.“
2.10 The State-wise break up of number of cases referred to the
State Government and Action taken thereon as on 1.7.2005 are given
at Annexure-I.
2.11 On being asked whether IBM detected illegal mining of
mineral in forest area, the ministry further stated that:—
“(i) Illegal mining was carried out in Bachaiya Red Ochre Mine
(8.97 ha) in Katni district (MP). On the basis of the
inspection carried out by an officer from IBM, it was
observed that red ochre was excavated from the forest land
which was further confirmed by conducting a survey on
26th and 27th December, 2003 in presence of village patwari.
the Regional Controller of Mines, Jabalpur referred the
matter to the District Mining Officer.
(ii) During a study conducted on illegal mining of iron ore in
Karnataka in September, 2004, it was found in Chitradurga
district of Karnataka that in K.K.K. Kaval forest area
extensive illegal float iron ore mining was spread over in
more than 2 sq.km.area. The ore was found to be transported
by tractor-trolley from the mining faces and stacked all over
the road.
(iii) In Bellary district of Ka rnataka, in Southern part of
Vibhutiguda hill and below the ML of Karnataka minerals,
extensive float ore mining over an area of 100 ha in forest
area was observed along the hill slows. Stacks of high grade
ore was seen laying in the area. These activities were

8
communicated to the Secretary, Government of Karnataka,
Commerce and Industry Department, Bangalore on
14/10/2004. Further, a meeting on the above illegal mining
activities was also held by IBM with the Secretary to
Government of Karnataka, Department of Commerce and
Industry on 27/12/2004 at Bangalore.”
2.12 When asked whether Ministry of Mines ever had any
discussions/meeting with the State Governments in preventing illegal
mining, the Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Mines
that:—
“The coordination between Ministry of Mines and State
Governments is through forums like Mineral Advisory Council,
Conference of State Ministers of Mining and Geology, etc. However,
no specific machinery currently exists for coordination regarding
illegal mining. It is now proposed that quarterly meetings be held
with the State Governments. Further it is also proposed to instruct
IBM to visit Directorate of Geology and Mining (DGMs) in States
for field coordination. On 17 January 2005, meeting  under the
chairmanship of Secretary (Mines) Government of India was held
with State Secretaries of major mining States. State Governments
were advised to frame rules expeditiously and to take strict
measures for prevention of illegal mining. The information
given by the State Governments was collated and is given at
Annexure-IV . Another meeting with the Secretaries of the major
mining States was held on 7 July 2005. In the  meeting, the Ministry
proposed furnishing of a quarterly Return by all the State
Governments on the action taken on illegal mining. It was also
proposed to hold Quarterly meeting with the State Governments
to sort out matters pertaining to mining and to institutionalize
regular monitoring of illegal mining. Ministry of Mines will now
closely monitor the issue of illegal mining with the State
Governments. Minister of Mines has recently written  to the Chief
Ministers of major minerals producing States about the concern of
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on illegal mining and asked
them to take effective measures for preventing illegal mining in
their States”.
2.13 On being enquired whether IBM is primarily responsible for
the promotion of conservation and scientific development of mineral
resources in the country. Whether failure to conserve and protect the
mines by IBM means abdication of its primary duty, the Ministry
elaborated that:—
“The activities of the Indian Bureau of Mines are in accordance
with its charter of functions notified by Government. IBM is

9
primarily responsible for the systematic and scientific development
of the mineral resources of the country, promotion of conservation
of minerals and for protection of environment in  mines, for mines
other than coal, petroleum and natural gas, atomic minerals and
minor minerals. Towards this end, it performs regulatory functions,
namely enforcement of Mineral Conservation and Development
Rules, 1988, the  relevant provisions of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the Mineral Concession
Rules, 1960 and Environmental Protection Act, 1986 and Rules made
thereunder. IBM carries out inspection and study of mines for
enforcement of MCDR, examination and approval of mining plans,
schemes and mine closure plans under MCR 1960 and MCDR
1988. Annually around 2500 mines are inspected by IBM officers.
Based on the inspections, follow up actions are taken up by IBM
in respect of systematic and scientific development of the mineral
resources, promotion of conservation of minerals and for protection
of environment in mines, whereever the deficiencies are observed.
Implementation of mining plans and schemes of mining is
another important aspect introduced for promotion of scientific
and systematic development of mineral resources, conservation of
mineral resources and for environmental protection. IBM approves
about 800 mining plans and scheme of mining in a year. Even
before the approval, spot inspections are being carried out so as to
ensure that mineral conservation and  systematic mining and also
environmental issues are taken due care of. Whereever necessary
modifications are suggested. After execution of the mining lease
regular inspections are being carried out by the IBM for proper
implementation of the approved mining plans”.
2.14 During the year 2004-05, 306 violations have been pointed
out by IBM for deviation from the approved mining plan. Detailed
compliance status is given below:
Total Violations pointed out 306
1. No. of violations complied 121
2. Show cause notices issued for non compliance 123
3. Violations complied/rectified after issuing show cause notice. 51
4. Total violations complied (1+3) 172
5. Prosecutions cases launched 31
6. Follow up action is in progress 103

10
During the year 2005-06 (upto Dec. 2005), 1,487 violations of MCDR,
1988 were pointed out in respect of 702 mines and 825 violations
were rectified. Twenty-five prosecution cases were launched in
various courts, 16 cases were decided and 18 cases were
compounded.
Presently progressive Mine Closure Plans are also introduced
as an integral part of the Mining Plan/Schemes, so that concrete
steps are taken by the mine owners for simultaneous reclamation
& rehabilitation of the worked out portions of the  mine. This
aspect is also being properly looked after by IBM during mine
inspections. Apart from the above inspections, wherever necessary
samples of low grade/sub-grade ores and minerals are collected
and analyzed in IBM‘s Laboratory for advising the mine owners
about its commercial viability.
To promote systematic and safe mining, IBM is also taking up
consultancy assignments to advise the mining industry for proper
development of the deposits and improvement of environmental
conditions prevailing within the mining areas. Thus, IBM acts as
Regulator and Facilitator, for Scientific and systematic development
of minerals, conservation of mineral resources and for
environmental protection of mines”.
2.15 Regarding illegal mining reported in the abandoned mines,
the Ministry of Mines stated that:
“No illegal mining activities in the abandoned mines have come
to the notice of IBM. The number of cases of illegal mining reported
by the State Governments does not indicate separately the cases
detected at abandoned mines site. Now the Central Government
has prescribed Mine Closure Plans for the purpose of
decommissioning, reclamation and rehabilitation in the mine or
part thereof after cessation of mining and  mineral processing
operations. these plans have to be  prepared in the manner specified
in the standard format and guidelines issued by the Indian Bureau
of Mines”.
2.16 The Minister of State for Coal while replying to a starred
question No. 306 in Lok Sabha on 14th December, 2005 on illegal
mining informed that illegal mining is carried out stealthily and
clandestinely from abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-working  part
of mine or from outcrop regions. As such it is not possible to have
full details of such instances. Similarly theft of coal is carried out
stealthily and clandestinely and as such it is not possible to exactly

11
specify the location from and quantity of coal that might have been
stolen.
2.17 The Committee note that Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), a
subordinate office under the Ministry of Mines has been entrusted
with the responsibilities for the promotion, conservation and scientific
development of minerals in the country other than coal petroleum,
natural gas, atomic minerals and minor minerals. IBM also performs
regulatory functions viz. enforcement of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the Mineral Concession
Rules, 1960 and the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules,
1988. The  Committee further note that as an executive arm of the
Ministry, IBM also regulates mining activities as per the provisions
of the Central Act and rules made thereunder.
The Committee further note that the IBM also provides technical
consultancy services to mining industry apart from advising the
Central and State governments on all aspects of mineral industry,
trade, legislation etc. The IBM undertakes inspection/studies for the
enforcement of provisions of MMDR Act, 1957 and rules made
thereunder for ensuring that mining operations are carried out in
accordance with the approved mining plans/schemes of mining. The
Committee therefore, feel that while ensuring that mining operations
are carried out as per approved plans and schemes, the IBM is duty
bound to point out the violations in this regard.
The Committee note that IBM with its 12 Regional Offices and
two Sub Regional Offices has also been implementing a scheme of
inspection of mines for scientific and systematic mining, mineral
conservation and mines environment. The Committee further note
that consequent  to inspections and studies during the year 2005-06
(upto December, 2005) 1487 violations of MCDR, 1988 were pointed
out in respect of 702 mines and 825 violations were rectified.
The Committee are, however, constrained to note that as
compared to 1487 cases of violations detected by IBM during
2005-06 (upto December, 2005), 14504 cases of illegal mining have
been reported from various States with the number of cases going
on unreported is likely to be much more. The Committee note that
in ten States namely Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Jharkhand and Orissa, the total illegal mining/illegal transportation
cases reported during 2002-2005 were 7536 and 44780 respectively.
This includes 3194 cases of major minerals and 4342 cases of minor
minerals. In the State of Karnataka alone, 1731 cases of illegal mining

12
of major minerals were reported during this period. The Committee
are deeply concerned that the IBM though vested with primary
responsibility for scientific development of mineral resources, has
failed to detect even a fraction of illegal mining activities.
The Committee are surprised that most of the State Governments
were unable to indicate the exact area under illegal mining and at
the same time, stating that there is no monetary loss in such cases.
The Committee consider the argument of the State governments
untenable that they recover more money by imposition of penalty,
etc. on defaulters than losses on account of illegal mining of minerals.
The Committee are disappointed at this state of affair wherein both
the Union Government and State Governments have been unable to
check the plague of illegal mining but are also oblivious of the
extent and implications thereof.
The Committee are constrained to observe that the magnitude of
illegal mining activities is not only detrimental to primary objectives
of National Mineral Policy but also causing immense loss to the
exchequer and the revenue realized through penalties imposed by
the State Governments can in no case compensate the huge resources
being drained away. The situation is too grim to be tackled by the
State Governments on their own and, therefore, their insistence for
not parting with their power in favour of IBM is not justifiable.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the State Governments join
hands with IBM to check the menace of illegal mining. The
Committee also desire the Ministry to regularly sensitize State
Governments about their role and responsibilities under the Act and
desirability of scientific exploration of mineral resources of the
country.
2.18 The Committee also note that in most of the cases, illegal
mining has been taking place stealthily and clandestinely from the
abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-working part of mine or from
outcrop region, as admitted by the Union Minister of State for Coal
in reply to a Starred Question No. 306 dated 14.12.2005 in Lok Sabha.
The Committee are anguished to note that Union as well as State
Governments have neither the details of abandoned/closed/disused
mines nor taken effective steps for prevention of illegal mining from
such mines. This gives credence to the fact that no mine closure
plans for the purpose of decommissioning, reclamation and
rehabilitation in the mine or part thereof after cessation of mining
and mineral processing operations are properly being prepared and
implemented.

13
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry/IBM to ensure that
the mine closure plans are prepared and executed immediately after
cessation of mining activities and also that no mine is left in an
abandoned state. The Committee would also like the Ministry to
keep the State Governments informed about the mine closure plans
in order to have a well coordinated approach for prevention of illegal
mining.

14
CHAPTER III
PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL MINING—LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Mining operation is required to be carried out after obtaining a
mining lease or in other areas after complying with the provisions
made in the Mines & Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957 and rules made thereunder. If mining activity is carried out
without complying with these provisions, it will fall under the category
of illegal mining. The mining activities carried out beyond the
permissible area and from abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-
working part of mine also constitute illegal mining.
3.2 Section 23(c) of MMDR Act empowers the State Government
to make rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage
of minerals which reads as under:
(1) The State Government may , by notification in the official
Gazette, make rules preventing illegal mining, transportation
and storage of minerals and for the purposes connected
therewith.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:
(a) Establishment of check-posts for checking of minerals
under transit;
(b) Establishment of weigh-bridges to measure the quantity
of mineral being transported;
(c) Regulation of mineral being transported from the area
granted under a prospecting licence or a mining lease
or a quarrying licence or a permit, in whatever name
the permission to excavate minerals, has been given;
(d) Inspection, checking and search of minerals at the place
of excavation or storage or during transit;
(e) Maintenance of registers and forms for the purposes
of these rules;
(f) The period within which and the authority to which
applications for revision of any order passed by any
authority be preferred under any rule made under this

15
section and the fees to be paid therefor and powers of
such authority for disposing of such applications; and
(g) Any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
prescribed for the purpose of prevention of illegal
mining, transportation and storage of minerals.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 30, the
Central Government shall have no power to revise any order
passed by a State Government or any of its authorized
officers or any authority under the rules made under
sub-sections (1) and (2).
3.3 On being enquired about the quantum of penalties being
imposed for indulging in illegal mining, the Ministry of Mines
furnished to Committee in written reply stated as under:
“As per section 21 of MMDR Act, 1957 penalty to be levied are as
follows:
(i) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or
sub-section (1A) of section 4 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine which may extend to twenty five thousand
rupees, or with both;
(ii) Any r ule made under any provision of this Act may provide
that any contravention thereof shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both and in the case of a continuing contravention,
with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day during which such contravention
continues after conviction for the first such contravention;
(iii) Where any person trespasses into any land in contravention
of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 4, such
trespasser may be served with an order of eviction by the
State  Government or any authority authorized in this behalf
by that Government and the State Government or such
authorized authority may, if necessary, obtain the help of
the police to evict the trespasser from the land;
(iv) Whenever any person raises, transports or causes to be
raised or transported, without any lawful authority, any
mineral from any land, and, for that purpose, uses any
tool, equipment, vehicle or any other thing, such mineral,

16
tool, equipment, vehicle or any other thing shall be liable
to be seized by an officer or authority specially empowered
in this behalf;
(v) Any mineral, tool, equipment, vehicle or any other things
seized under sub-section (4), shall be liable to be confiscated
by an order of the court competent to take cognizance of
the offence under sub-section (1) and shall be disposed of
an accordance with the directions of such court;
(vi) Whenever any person raises, without any lawful authority ,
any mineral from any land, the State Government may
recover from such person the mineral so raised for, where
such mineral has already been disposed of, the price thereof,
and may also recover from such person, rent, royalty or
tax, as the case may be, for the period during which the
land was occupied by such person without any lawful
authority; and
(vii) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, an offence under sub-section (1) shall be
cognizable.”
3.4 When asked whether mining activities beyond the permissible
area constitute illegal mining and any such case has been detected,
the Ministry has replied as under:
“Mining activities continued beyond the permissible lease area
constitute illegal mining unless & until the approval of Central
Government is obtained under Section 6(1) (b) of the MMDR Act,
for relaxing the limit in the interest of mineral development.
Majority of the State Governments including Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh have
reported that no such cases have been detected in their State.
However, Government of Madhya Pradesh has reported that two
cases of mining in the prospecting licence area were detected in
District Satna wherein the prospecting licence holders were found
to be indulged in illegal extraction of mineral sand to the tune of
2950 cubic metre and 350 cubic metre respectively. The Government
of Madhya Pradesh has cancelled his PL and proceeded against
him under the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code for illegal
extraction of mineral and the case is being tried in the court of
Collector. Government of Karnataka has informed that boundary
dispute between the lessee exist in certain cases and in some cases
resurvey has been conducted. Rest of the State Governments have
not furnished the information”.

17
3.5 On being asked whether Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) found
any deficiency/lacunae in the Acts and Rules while implementing them
to curb illegal mining, the Ministry has stated that:
“The Tandon Committee had suggested certain amendments in
MMDR Act for prevention of illegal mining. Section 4(1A) was
introduced and Section 21(4) of the Act was amended to bring
transport and storage of illegally raised mineral within the purview
of law. Further, a new Section 23 C was introduced on 20 December
1999 under MMDR Act, giving powers to State Governments to
make rules for prevention of illegal mining, transportation and
storage. As per this amendment, the Central Government shall
have no power to revise any order passed by the State
Governments or it’s authorized officers. Section 24(1) as also
amended delegates the powers of entry and inspection to the State
Governments enabling them to authorize any person to undertake
entry and inspection of any mine or abandoned mine or for any
other purpose connected therewith. These amendments have made
the State Governments better equipped to handle the problem of
illegal mining.
Since the nature and magnitude of the problem of illegal mining
activity varies from State to State, the full powers have been
delegated to the State Governments to form their own rules for
curbing illegal mining under Section 23C of MMDR Act. If the
power to frame the rules is fully vested with the State
Governments, then it will be possible for each of them to address
the problems of illegal mining by suitably listing out the target
areas depending upon the strengths of its law and order machinery
and revenue implications for the States.
The issue of further delegation of powers to IBM to effectively
control illegal mining was discussed in the meeting of the State
Governments on 17 January 2005 under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (Mines). The State Governments were unanimous that
the provisions for prevention of illegal mining should continue to
be under the administrative authority of the State Governments,
as the mineral rights and collection of revenue also vests with the
State Government and police and law and order machinery is with
the respective States”.
3.6 When Committee enquired about the terms and conditions
presently offered to the private sector regarding mining, the Ministry
of Mines stated that:
“There are no separate terms and conditions presently being offered
to the private sector regarding mining. Both the public and private

18
sectors are considered at par. Every mining lease granted is subject
to the conditions mentioned in Rule 27 of Mineral Concession
Rules, 1960 (MCR)”.
3.7 When enquired about Section 23C of MMDR Act, which requires
State Governments to frame rules for preventing illegal mining, the
Ministry stated that:
“As per available information, 9 State Governments namely,
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Maharashtra, West-Bengal, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal have
framed and notified the rules for preventing illegal mining/
transportation/storage of minerals under section 23C of MMDR
Act, 1957. In case of Tamil Nadu, Orissa, Rajasthan, Karnataka,
Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana and Jharkhand the rules
are in the process of being framed/approved by the respective
State Governments. Other ten States & six Union Territories are
yet to frame these Rules. Government of Madhya Pradesh is of
the view that there are suitable provisions for taking action against
illegal mining within the existing provisions of law. State
Government of Andhra Pradesh has framed Andhra Pradesh
Mineral Dealers Rules, 2000, Bihar has framed Bihar Mineral
(Prevention of Illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage) Rule,
2003 and Maharashtra has framed Maharashtra Minerals (Prevention
of Illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage) Rule, 2001 under
Section 23C of the MMDR Act, 1957. Government of Chhattisgarh
has “The Minerals Transit Pass Regulation, 1996” for the purpose
of checking of illegal mining. Government of Orissa has framed
Orissa Minerals (Prevention of Theft, Smuggling and other
Unlawful Activities) Act, 1999.”
3.8 When asked to furnish a list of individuals/companies to whom
the mining lease has been granted during the last three years and as
to whether any application for grant of mining lease or renewal is
pending with the Government, the Ministry stated that mining leases
are granted by the State Governments under section 5(1) of the MMDR
Act, 1957. Only in case of minerals specified in the First Schedule to
the MMDR Act, prior approval of the Central Government is taken by
the State  Governments. A statement showing pending mining lease
cases as on 31.3.2006 is given at Annexure-II.
3.9 The Ministry has informed that there were about 14,504 (from
July, 2005 to December, 2005 given at Annexure-III) illegal mining cases
reported from different States. The information in respect of  illegal

19
mining have been compiled and updated based on the information
furnished by major mineral producing States. The State-wise break-up
of all the minor and major illegal mining cases are given at
Annexure-IV .
3.10 As regards, the action taken by the States against illegal
mining, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:
“State Governments have taken various action against illegal mining
in their respective States. Government of Tamil Nadu has stated
that the raids by the officials of Department of Geology and Mining
and Revenue Department are conducted frequently. The team
conduct raids, detect illegal quarrying and seize vehicles
transporting illicitly quarried minerals. Chance of personal hearing
is given and if accepted by the delinquent, compounding of offence
is ordered. If not, FIR is lodged for arresting and filing of criminal
case under Section 21 of MMDR Act, 1957 and Cr. PC, 1973.
Government of Chhattisgarh has informed that District Collector/
Addl. Collectors are empowered to take action and impose penalty
in the case of illegal mining within their respective jurisdiction
under Sec. 247 of the Chhattisgarh State Land Revenue Code.
Officers of the Mining Department up to the level of Assistant
Mining Officers have been given powers to seize mineral, tool,
equipment vehicle which causes to be raised or transported without
lawful authority under section 21(4) of MMDR, Act, 1957. They
have also been delegated powers of compounding of offences under
section 23A of MMDR, Act, 1957. Government of Gujarat has
intimated that Flying Squad has been created in Commissioner of
Geology & Mining specially for preventing illegal mining,
transportation & storage of minerals in the State. Special team
under Flying Squad are also entrusted the job of surprise checking
across the State. District officers functioning under District
Collectors are also working to prevent the illegal mining in their
respective districts. The Head Quarters officers, district officers and
revenue officers are empowered under provisions of MMDR Act,
1957 and GMMR, 1966. State Government have imposed penalties
and raised demand against illegal mining. The demand raised and
demand realized by various State Governments is also given at
Annexure-IV”.
3.11 On being enquired about the jurisdiction of Central
Government and the State Governments is so far as detection and
prevention of illegal mining is concerned, the Ministry of Mines stated
that:
“Central Government’s Jurisdiction: Regulation of Mines and
Minerals is the responsibility of the Central Government and the

20
State Governments in terms of Entry 54 of the Union List (List 1)
and Entry 23 of State List (List II) of the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution of India. Accordingly, the Central Government has
framed Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR)
Act, 1957, laying down the legal framework for the regulation of
mines and development of all minerals other than petroleum and
natural gas. The Central Government have framed Mineral
Concession Rules, 1960 (MCR) for regulating grant of mineral
concession in respect of all minerals other than minor minerals.
The Central Government has also framed the Mineral Conservation
and Development Rules—1988 (MCDR) for Scientific & systematic
development and Conservation of minerals and for the protection
of environment. These are applicable to all minerals except coal,
atomic minerals and minor minerals. Hence, framing of laws for
prevention of illegal mining is in the jurisdiction of Central
Government.
State  Government’s Jurisdiction: As per section 23C of MMDR
Act, 1957, the State Governments have been empowered to make
Rules to prevent illegal mining, transportation and storage of
minerals.
Further, with respect to minor minerals, as per the section 15 of
the MMDR Act, the State Governments are empowered to make
rules for regulating the grant of quarry leases, mining leases or
other mineral concessions in respect of Minor Minerals, Separate
Minor Mineral Concession Rules are framed by each State for minor
minerals.
Therefore, under the federal framework as police and law & order
machinery is with the State Governments all the powers for
checking/prevention of illegal mining activities have been delegated
to the State Governments”.
3.12 A Committee which was constituted to consider necessary
measures to check illegal possession and transportation of minerals
had identified, in its Report April, 1988 (a) cumbersome procedure for
grant of mining lease; (b) delay in grant of mining lease; and
(c) ignorance of rules and procedures on the part of local villagers
were the basic reasons for proliferation of illegal mining. On being
asked what pro-active steps have been taken to overcome the problems,
the Ministry stated as follows:
“The following amendments have been made in the MMDR Act,
1957 and Rules framed thereunder to simplify the mining laws

21
and procedures and delegation of more powers to the State
Governments to curb delays:
(i) “The area restrictions of Reconnaissance Permits, Prospecting
Licenses and Mining Leases will apply only State-wise.
(ii) No case of renewal of prospecting license/mining lease even
for the 10 minerals mentioned in Part C of the First Schedule
to MMDR Act, 1957, need reference to the Central
Government.
(iii) Similarly, transfer of mining leases even for these 10 minerals
do not require reference to the Central Government.
(iv) State Governments have been delegated powers to grant
mineral concessions even for areas which are not compact
or contiguous.
(v) State Governments have been empowered to permit
amalgamation of two or more adjoining mining leases.
(vi) State Governments have been delegated powers to approve
mining plans for certain category of mines.
(vii) Level playing field between Government owned Companies
and others have been provided, e.g. prematurely terminated
lease areas is available for re-grant for both public and
private sector, and Government owned companies can not
charge premium in case of transfer of mining lease.
(viii) Time limits have been prescribed for conveying a decision
on applications for grant of mineral concessions, and for
approval of mining plans”.
3.13 When enquired about how far the rules made by State
Governments under Section 23C has been able to curb illegal mining,
the Ministry of Mines elaborated that the powers for prevention of
illegal mining, transportation and storage rest with State Governments.
A number of State Governments have framed Rules under Section
23C of the Act and some are in the process of formulating the Rules.
The number of cases of illegal mining, transportation and storage of
minerals detected during 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 were 296,
942 and 1490 respectively in major minerals producing States.
3.14 As regards Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act and powers delegated to the State Governments and to IBM, the
Secretary, Ministry of Mines has stated during oral evidence stated as
under:
“From the legal point of view, two major actions need be taken.
Under Section 26(1), we have authorized the IBM to act against

22
mines, which are covered under the Mining Plan. We have not
authorized them to act against other offences. We have to delegate
the powers. Section 23(B) empowers various Gazetted Officers of
the Central and State Governments to search for checking illegal
mining.”
“Section 26(1) delegates powers in respect of the Mining Plan. If
we want them to take action in other aspects also where illegal
mining is going on, then we have to give them authority. There
are couple of other Sections under which we will take different
types of action. We have to look at them very seriously. We have
started doing the homework. Our interactions with the States show
that the Governments do not show the kind of results which we
expect them to show. The second thing which I would like to
submit before the Hon. Committee is this. There are some other
points, which are very important but not in the Mining Plan. They
are related to mining areas which are outside the lease and which
are not part of the lease.”
3.15 The Committee note that Mines & Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1957, Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, Mines
and Minerals Development Rules, 1988 provide the legal framework
for prevention of illegal mining. In pursuance to the
recommendations of Tandon Committee, MMDR Act was amended
in 1999 by inserting new Section 23C empowering the State
Governments to frame rules for preventing illegal mining,
transportation and storage of minerals. The State Governments are
also required to regulate and provide for establishment of check
posts, regulation of mineral transport, inspection, checking and search
of minerals at the place of excavation, storage or during transit.
The Committee feel that Section 23C of MMDR Act is immensely
crucial provision for managing the mineral wealth of the country
and its exploitation for the welfare of the people. The Committee
are dismayed that even after the lapse of more than seven years,
only 9 State Governments have framed the necessary rules under
Section 23C of MMDR Act. The Committee are deeply concerned
that several States with high incidence of illegal mining are still
blissfully unaware of their responsibilities as well as ground realities
which is eating into their vital source of revenue.
The Committee cannot  but deprecate the lackadaisical attitude
of the State Governments as well as the failure of the Ministry to
convince them to frame such rules resulting in rampant illegal
mining.

23
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of mines to
seriously look into the matter and issue directions to recalcitrant
States to immediately frame the rules for prevention of illegal mining,
transportation and storage of minerals.
3.16 The Committee also note that under section 23C(3), the
Central Government shall have no power to revise any order passed
by a State  Government or any of its authorized officer or any
authority under the rules made under sub-section (1) and (2). The
Committee consider this an anomalous situation as in the absence
of powers to revise any order passed by the State Governments,
there may be conflicting provisions and deviations, inconsistent with
the spirit of the Central Act.
The Committee feel that the Central Government should retain
its moderating role and therefore desire that the MMDR Act should
be suitably amended to provide powers to the Central Government
to review/revise inconsistent orders passed by the State Governments.
3.17 The Committee observe that the MMDR Act, 1957 is silent
whether mining activities beyond the permissible lease constitutes
illegal mining. The Act is also silent whether any mining activity in
the abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-working part of mine or
from out crop regions constitutes illegal mining. The representatives
of the Ministry during the course of evidence, had, however,
informed the Committee that mining activity beyond the permissible
lease constitutes illegal mining until the approval of the Central
Government is obtained for relaxing the limit in the interest of
mineral development. The Committee consider it as a glaring lacunae
in the Act as definition of illegal mining does not find place in it.
The Committee view with concern the manipulation of existing
mining plans and the violations in mining of major minerals in
various States. As is evident from large scale transportation activities
visible in the area, the mining companies are indulging in excessive
exavation of minerals beyond the permissible limits under the
approved plans. The Committee are also anguished to note that
whereas mining plans are approved for a particular area, mining
activities are clandestinely being carried out much below the ground
level and beyond the approved area sometimes jeopardizing the
historical and ancient monuments.
The Committee are also perturbed to find a large number of
casualties taking place on account of dubious means adopted for

24
carrying out illegal mining particularly in coal bearing areas of
several States. The Committee also believe that such activities
necessarily involve large scale exploitation of the labours.
The Committee desire the Ministry to immediately come out
with short term measures to contain such unlawful mining activities.
The Committee also desire the Ministry to expeditiously frame the
clear and unambiguous definition of illegal mining and also prepare
a schedule of types of illegal mining for the information of concerned
agencies/individuals and the State Governments.
3.18 The Committee are anguished to note that as on 31.3.2006,
204 cases for grant of mining lease have been pending with the
State  Governments of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh and this figure may increase further
with the availability of information from other States. The Committee
further note that the cumbersome procedure for grant of mining
lease has been identified as one of the reasons for the problem of
illegal mining by the Ministry. The Committee have serious
apprehensions that the malaise of the illegal mining will continue
to raise its ugly head and the very purpose of streamlining the
procedure for grant of mining leases would be defeated if the cases
of grant of mining lease are not disposed of quickly.
The Committee desire the Ministry/IBM to seriously look at the
problem and to ensure that the cases of grant of mining leases are
disposed of as early as possible. The Committee would like to be
apprised in this regard.

25
CHAPTER IV
MECHANISM FOR PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL MINING
The Ministry has informed that it is felt that in order to make the
present law effective, all the State Governments need to complete the
framing of the rules under Sec. 23C of the Act as per the provisions
given under MMDR Act and to intensify their activity to strictly control
illegal mining activities. Further amendments can be contemplated as
and when such requirement is felt in consultation with the
State Governments. The Ministry feels that greater focus and attention
should be given by the States and IBM towards the problem of illegal
mining. Several steps have been taken in this regard which are as
follows:
(i) Two meeting have been conveyed by Secretary (Mines),
Government of India with Mining Secretaries of major
mineral producing States on 17 January 2005 and 7 July
2005.
(ii) The Minister of Mines has written to Chief Ministers of
major mineral producing States highlighting the fact that
illegal mining needs to be tackled strongly and effectively
in view of the concern expressed by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
(iii) IBM has been asked to monitor detection and follow up
action on cases of illegal mining on quarterly basis with
State Governments at every regional level.
(iv) State have been advised to set up Special Task Force/Flying
Squads to check illegal mining.
4.2 Under the statutory provisions, no mining operations can be
undertaken without a ML duly granted, executed and registered by
the lessee with the State Government. Complaints were, however, being
received by the Central Government from various State Governments
regarding illegal mining.
4.3 In this context, the then Ministry of Steel and Mines,
Department of Mines, had constituted a Committee to consider
necessary measures to check illegal possession and transportation of
minerals. That Committee submitted its report in April, 1988.

26
4.4 Under the MMDR Act, the main provisions regarding illegal
mining are contained in Section 4 and Section 21. Sub-section 1 of
Section 4 precludes any person from undertaking prospecting or mining,
operations, except in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
prospecting licence/mining lease granted under the provisions of the
Act and the rules made thereunder. Section 21 has 6 sub-sections and
these mainly deal with penalties pertaining to contravention of sub-
section 1 of Section 4 of the Act; imposition of punishment/fine under
any rule framed under the provisions of the Act for breach of such
rule; the eviction of trespassers in contravention of sub-section 1 of
Section 4, seizure of equipments, tools, etc. used for illegal mining
from such mining site; recovery of minerals raised illegally and in
case such illegal mineral has been disposed of, the price thereof, etc.;
and stipulating such offence relating to contravention of sub-section 1
of Section 4 as a cognizable offence.
4.5 It was felt even in 1988 that the legal provisions need be made
more stringent as regards the stage of transportation of the minerals
from mining site and the stage of their storage. The lacunae in the
existing provisions of Sections 4 and 21 which only relate to illegal
mining at the site of illegal mining were taken note of. The need for
checking transportation, possession and storage of illegally mined
minerals was felt acutely. Various recommendations were made to
restrict possession and sale of minerals only to lessees or holders of
dealer’s licences and at designated sites, impose prohibition on
transport or engaging transport contractors for transport of minerals
from the site of mining or location of sale to other places without
valid permits and for seizure or minerals stocked at places other than
designated sites of mining or various sale points and seizure of
equipments, vehicles, etc. used for transportation of minerals in the
violation of the restrictions.
4.6 The changes in the Act that were affected as a sequel to the
recommendations in 1988 mainly relate to Section 23B in the Act
empowering various gazetted officers of the Central and State
Governments to search for checking illegal mining.
4.7 Ministry of Mines further stated that:
“Secretary (Mines) had reviewed the position with State
Governments on 17 January 2005 and 7 July 2005 State
Governments have been asked to constitute Task Force for
preventing Illegal Mining and furnish Return in the prescribed
form to be reviewed in the Ministry on quarterly basis.

27
Minister of Mines has written to Chief Ministers of major mineral
producing States to take necessary preventive measures for checking
the menace of illegal mining”.
4.8 The representative of the Ministry has also informed the
Committee as under:
“We have had several internal meetings and also several meetings
with the State Governments. We would chalk out the action plan.
Based on the questionnaire which we had received, we have
attempted to give an answer from the point of view of direction
which we felt we should take on the basis of the guidance and
advice which we have received from the Committee. There are
two types of efforts—one is short term and second is long term.
The Committee has advised something in short term which is
required to be taken seriously. We have to intensify our efforts for
monitoring and ensuring that illegal mining comes to control. We
have tried to take some steps from the short-term point of view.
We have also started some home work from the long-term point
of view. If we feel that short-term measures do not yield the desired
result, then we will have to take serious review of the entire thing
and go for the long-term approach. In the short-term, we have
taken a few steps. Hon’ble Minister of Mines has written to all the
Chief Ministers bringing to their notice that this is an important
matter. We have not been able to pursue this matter as it should
be. We have sought the cooperation of the State  Governments for
ensuring that serious efforts are made in this regard. We have also
felt that we should have two kinds of mechanisms. We should
make a regular meeting and institutionalize the monitoring
mechanism. We will have a meeting with the Secretaries of the
States every quarter and review the things on an on-going basis
about the work which the States have done and the extent of
assistance that is required from the IBM. This is one part on which
we will have a regular meeting. We have worked out a format.
We have distributed it to the States and we will view it. We will
take it on a slightly ad hoc basis. State Governments will be sending
regular returns and quarterly meetings will be held. We will be
reviewing it thereafter. A suggestion, which we have made is that
we will have at the State level. We will have a task force. This
task force will be having a particular charter. We have said that in
each State, at district level, our IBM representative will have
participation in the task force meeting.
Then, we will get feedback from both sides. States will get
assistance from our side. The technic which is required that will

28
get from IBM and we will be able to see as to how our task force
is working and we will also see as to what extent the task force
has been able to implement the seriousness of our intent.
Then as regards IBM, while they are doing their normal work of
checking out mining plan, we have told them separately that
instead of finding out illegal detection cases and sending them to
the State Governments and forgetting about it, they should also
do follow up and see whatever cases that have been sent, what is
the action that has happened in respect of those cases. This is the
short-term plan which we have thought”.
4.9 Regarding remedial measures proposed to be taken by the
Ministry, the Committee have been informed that:
• “Earlier, the State Government was giving temporary permits
for mining, collection of iron ore and sale. The State
Government has cancelled these permits but some permit
holders went to the court. The court directed them to stop
illegal mining.
• The Government of Karnataka is being persuaded to notify
Rules under Sec. 23C of the MMDR, Act, 1957 as soon as
possible”.
4.10 Regarding long term and short term plan, the Secretary,
Ministry of Mines during oral evidence stated as under:
“I would like to make two submissions. Firstly, as far as the short-
term plan or long-term plan is concerned, we have said that our
main thrust is going to be on the creation of task forces. We want
a task force at each State level. IBM will associate with the task
forces. We have given them a schedule of inspections and
prescribed the return and we would monitor it. As per the present
situation States have been given all the powers and they are doing
it. IBM is not detecting the illegal mining. Here illegal mining
means those mining works which have not been leased out. This
is being done by the State Governments as they have the entire
machinery, directorates and the Police. Now, we would monitor it
and follow it up vigorously. This is our short-term plan. We hope
States will be covered”.
“So far the States were doing it and not we. Now we have prepared
a format and now we are going to ask the States to send all this
information to us regularly . After receiving the information from

29
the States, we will organize quarterly meeting regularly and review
the progress made in this regard and if something is not done, we
would identify the problems”.
“The Second point is that we have envisaged setting up a taskforce
for this work in the Stateswhich has been accepted by the States.
We will try to set up the taskforce. An IBM representative will
also be there in the taskforce to help them in this work. These are
the two types of actions”.
“I will just read out the proposed thinking, which is going on. In
constitution of the State level task force, the Director of the
Department of Geology and mines (DGM) will act as the Chairman.
The Deputy Directors, Department of Geology and Mines, and
District Mining Officers of the districts of major mining activities
will be members. An official from the State Forest Department,
Regional Controller of the mines of the Indian Bureau of Mines, a
representative of the State Pollution Board, representatives of Mine
Owners Association, Federation of Indian Minerals (FIMI) and any
other suitable representative of Central or State Government as
may be required by the State  Government will be there. They
will discuss in this subject and include two-three others. Then the
Member Secretary will be from the office of the Director of the
Department of Geology and Mines”.
4.11 The Secretary further informed the Committee as under:
“In short-term plan this is what we are trying to do. We will try
to gear up in this. We have extensively discussed it with the State
Governments. They are all of the opinion that the powers which
are currently with the State Governments should not be duplicated
and kept with the Central Government. This is their initial response.
That is why we have chalked out this short-term plan. In the long
run if we find, over a period of time, that despite doing all this
there is really no action and illegal mining does continue, then we
will have to seriously think of keeping some powers with the
Central Government also. This has got some significant implications
because today the Central Government does not really have proper
machinery for acting against illegal miners in a very serious way.
We really do not have the machinery we will have to create that
machinery. The magnitude of the problem will have to be taken
into account. We will have to see how much machinery we will
have to create and to what extent of coverage that machinery
should have. So, firstly, the problem of duplicate parallel authorities

30
and secondly the implications of setting up of a machinery with
the IBM. If it does not come under control then we have to
seriously look at that part. We have started doing the homework
on that, what is the kind of machinery that we will need. We
have identified something like 280 mineral importance districts in
the States, categorized into three parts—main minerals importance
districts, medium mineral importance districts and low minerals
importance districts. If we have to set up a full-scale machinery in
all the 280 districts, the expenses are going to be very significant.
So, all these financial implications, physical implications, staffing
implications, all these matters will have to be examined”.
4.12 When asked about strengthening the machinery of IBM to
give more teeth to curb illegal mining like quarterly review of its
performance and setting up of special task force, the representatives of
the Ministry during oral evidence, stated as under:
“It will take about a year. We have to get proper feedback of three
or four quarters. Then we have to delegate powers to IBM. It is
very important to create a machinery. Today, there is no machinery.
We have to give them inspectors and security guards. Eventually,
we will still have to work along with the States because it is the
States which are going to perform that job today. We will be trying
to create a parallel authority. At the ground level, it does not play
an effective role”.
4.13 The Secretary, Ministry of mines, during the course of evidence
informed the Committee that as a result of constitution of Task Force
8469 cases of illegal mining spreading over 46 hectares land were
detected during the quarter ending September, 2005. Out of these cases,
131  FIRs were lodged and 351 cases were filed in the court. A sum
of Rs. 6.17 crore was released as fine. Similarly, 6035 cases of illegal
mining spreading over 106 hectares land were detected during the
quarter ending December, 2005. 371 FIRs were lodged, 1198, court
cases were filed and in 1010 cases, the Court has delivered the
judgement. During the quarter Rs. 3.84 crore were realized as fine.
The details are mainly from Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and
Jharkhand.
4.14 The Secretary, Ministry of Mines further informed the
Committee that where the cases of illegal mining are reported, action
is immediately taken. The Task Force set up in this regard has been
showing satisfactory results.
4.15 The Ministry has also informed the Committee that the last
Conference of State Ministers of Mining & Geology was held on

31
22.1.2003. Some the major recommendations and action taken thereon
are outlined below:
1. Appropriate amendment in the Mineral Concession Rules,
1960 (MCR) and Mineral Conservation and Development
Rules 1988 (MCDR) providing for scheme of mine closure
were decided and accordingly required amendment in MCR,
1960 and MCDR, 1988 were carried out.
2. It was decided to prescribe a minimum size of mining lease
for systematic and scientific mining and accordingly a new
rule 22D has been introduced in MCR, 1960.
3. The issue regarding empowering local bodies in the matter
of granting mineral concessions was also discussed. Some
State Governments had strict reservation in delegation of
powers to local bodies and were of the view that States
should retain the rights and responsibility for deciding
matters of mineral concessions for minor minerals in non-
scheduled areas and for major minerals and it was suggested
to constitute a committee of ministers of Mining & Geology
of State Governments to give its considered suggestions in
the matter to the Central Govt. The matter was discussed
by the committee so constituted and the matter will be
further discussed in the meeting of the Mineral Advisory
Council to be held a later.
4. It was also decided to adopt United Nations Framework
Classification (UNFC) for mineral reserves and resources of
the country so that National Mineral Inventory could be
recast in the UNFC formats. Accordingly relevant forms
under the Rule have been modified.
5. The issue of de-reserving the areas reserved for public sector
exploitation was discussed and State Governments agreed
to review the areas kept idle for possible de-notification.
6. Revision of guidelines for computing royalty on minerals
on ad valorem basis under rule 64D of MCR, 1960 were
discussed. Accordingly Rule 64D has been amended.
7. There was a general consensus that the State Governments
could voluntarily earmark a portion of the mineral revenues
for providing infrastructure facilities in the mining area by
framing appropriate State legislation.

32
4.16 The Committee note that under the Constitution of India,
as provided by Entry 54 of the Union List in the Seventh Schedule,
the Ministry of Mines has been entrusted with the responsibility
for regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to
which such regulation and development under the control of the
Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public
interest. The State Governments have also been entrusted with the
responsibility for regulation of mines and mineral development under
Entry 23 of the State List, subject to the provision of Entry 54 of the
Union List. The Committee are, therefore, inclined to draw inference
that the primary responsibility for regulation of mines and mineral
development, which undoubtedly includes prevention of illegal
mining, rests with the Central Government, even though under
Section 23C of MMDR Act, 1957, State Governments have been
empowered to make rules to prevent illegal mining, transportation
and storage of minerals. The Committee are convinced that the said
delegation of powers to the State  Governments in no case absolve
the Central Government from their inalienable responsibilities.
In this backdrop, the Committee are extremely constrained to
note that no mechanism whatsoever existed in the Ministry till
recently for effective prevention of illegal mining. The Committee
are also surprised that though the State Governments were
empowered to take action for prevention of illegal mining, there
was no semblance of coordination between the Ministry of Mines
and the State Governments though forums like Mineral Advisory
Council, Conference of State Ministers of Mining & Geology existed.
The lack of seriousness was evident from the fact that the last
conference of State Ministers of Mining & Geology was held in
January, 2003. During all these years, the illegal mining continued
unabated with unscrupulous miners playing havoc with scientific
mineral exploration and environmental concerns. The Committee are,
therefore, of the view that Ministry of Mines has performed
miserably to discharge their constitutional responsibility of regulation,
scientific development and exploration of mines and minerals in the
country.
The Committee note that on their initiative, the Ministry is in
the process of setting up of some sort of monitoring machinery. The
Committee now hope that the Ministry will hold regular/quarterly
meetings with the State Governments and the Conference of State
Ministers which was last held more than three years back will be
held at regular intervals. The Committee expect that the Conference
of State Ministers of Mining & Geology besides deliberating on
various issues concerning mineral industry would also focus on vital
issue of prevention of illegal mining.

33
The Committee note that while the Ministry/IBM has taken some
proactive steps to curb the proliferation of illegal mining in
pursuance of the Tandon Committee recommendations, nothing seems
to have been done to educate the villagers regarding the rules and
procedures. The Committee feel that the ignorance on the part of
the villagers in this regard has been one of the reasons for illegal
mining.
The Committee recommend that adequate measures should be
taken to educate and sensitize the villagers about the rules and
procedures to rein unintended illegal mining.
4.17 The Committee note that earlier no separate cell existed in
the Ministry to exclusively deal with the problem of illegal mining.
A cell for reviewing/monitoring the returns to be filed by State
Governments has since been set up in the Ministry. The Committee
observe that the cell which has recently came into being has a limited
role of reviewing/monitoring the returns filed by the State
Governments.
The Committee desire the Ministry to clearly demarcate the
powers and the responsibilities of this cell to not only review the
returns filed by the State Governments but to also play a greater
role in the direction of prevention of illegal mining.  The Committee
also desire that cell should be headed by a senior officer with
adequate supporting staff.
4.18 The Committee feel that the amendments made in MMDR
Act in pursuance of Tandon Committee recommendations have not
brought about desired results as the cases of illegal mining continue
to take place unabated. The Committee note that 8469 cases of illegal
mining spreading over 46 hectares land were reported during the
quarter ending September, 2005 and 6035 such cases spreading over
106 hectares land were reported during the quarter ending December,
2005 as deposed by Secretary, Ministry of Mines before the
Committee. The Committee strongly feel that if more inspections
are carried out, the possibility of a large number of cases of illegal
mining being detected cannot be ruled out particularly in Orissa,
Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take
initiative to suggest periodicity of routine and regular inspections
by the State Governments and IBM for detecting and preventing
such cases.

34
4.19 The Committee appreciate that the constitution of Task Force
by the State Governments and consider it a step in the right direction.
The Committee desire the Ministry to direct all State Governments
to set up Task Forces at State level at the earliest.
4.20 The Committee also desire that the composition of the Task
Forces apart from Director of the Department of Geology & Mines
of the concerned State, Deputy Directors, Department of Geology &
Mines and District Mining Officers, and Officials of the State Forest
Department, Regional Controller of Mines of IBM, Representatives
of State Pollution Board, Representatives of the Mine Owners
Association and Federation of Indian Minerals should also include
officials concerned with police and public order with clear mandate,
guidelines and adequate powers for enforcement of rules. The Task
Forces should also carry out frequent random/regular inspections to
detect and prevent illegal mining to achieve their objectives.
4.21 The Committee also expect the IBM to play a major and
decisive role in the functioning of Task Forces in consonance with
the primary function of the Ministry of Mines for balanced and
scientific development and exploration of mines and minerals in the
country. The Committee desire the Ministry of Mines to adequately
strengthen IBM both in terms of manpower and finances to enable
it to shoulder the greater responsibilities.
4.22 The Committee would like the Ministry to review the
performance of Task Forces at quarterly intervals and conduct a
detailed study and assessment about the efficacy of the new
mechanism revolving around the Task Forces constituted in various
States. In the event of menace of illegal mining continuing unabated
despite the efforts of the new mechanism, the Committee would
like the Ministry to entrust more powers to the IBM by suitable
amendments in the central legislation and also consider taking back
the delegated powers from the State Governments. The Committee
would also like the Ministry to take the assistance to recent
advancement in science and technology including satellite mapping
to assess the extent and impact of illegal mining and prepare a
detailed data bank thereon for the use of State Governments.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
3 August, 2006 Chairman,
12 Sravana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

35
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
CONTAINED IN THE REPORT
Sl.No. Reference Observations/Recommendations
Para No. of
the Report
12 3
1. 1.9 The conservation as well as systematic and
scientific harnessing of mineral resources is
bedrock of economic development of a
nation. However, unscientific and unlawful
mining has been thriving endlessly causing
not only immense loss to the national
exchequer but destruction of natural
environment. The Government in its efforts
to promote and develop mining sector had
taken a number of steps and commissioned
studies from time to time under National
Mineral Policy, 1993. But, the  impact
thereof has been far from the satisfactory
and the exploration and development of
mineral wealth of the country remained
unproductive both economically and
socially.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry should prepare a revised National
Mineral Policy in consultation with the
State Governments, concerned agencies/
organizations and other stakeholders with
adequate investment proposals to harness
the vast mineral resources of the country
and effectively meet the challenges of future
in our strides towards the status of a
developed country.
2. 2.17 The Committee note that Indian Bureau of
Mines (IBM), a subordinate office under the

36
12 3
Ministry of Mines has been entrusted with
the responsibilities for the promotion,
conservation and scientific development of
minerals in the country other than coal
petroleum, natural gas, atomic minerals and
minor minerals. IBM also performs
regulatory functions viz. enforcement of the
Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957, the Mineral
Concession Rules, 1960 and the Mineral
Conservation and Development Rules, 1988.
The  Committee further note that as an
executive arm of the Ministry, IBM also
regulates mining activities as per the
provisions of the Central Act and rules
made thereunder.
The Committee further note that the IBM
also provides technical consultancy services
to mining industry apart from advising the
Central and State governments on all
aspects of mineral industry, trade,
legislation etc. The IBM undertakes
inspection/studies for the enforcement of
provisions of MMDR Act, 1957 and rules
made thereunder for ensuring that mining
operations are carried out in accordance
with the approved mining plans/schemes
of mining. The Committee therefore, feel
that while ensuring that mining operations
are carried out as per approved plans and
schemes, the IBM is duty bound to point
out the violations in this regard.
The Committee note that IBM with its 12
Regional Offices and two Sub Regional
Offices has also been implementing a
scheme of inspection of mines for scientific
and systematic mining, mineral
conservation and mines environment. The
Committee further note that consequent  to

37
12 3
inspections and studies during the year
2005-06 (upto December, 2005) 1487
violations of MCDR, 1988 were pointed out
in respect of 702 mines and 825 violations
were rectified.
The Committee are, however, constrained
to note that as compared to 1487 cases of
violations detected by IBM during 2005-06
(upto December, 2005), 14504 cases of illegal
mining have been reported from various
States with the number of cases going on
unreported is likely to be much more. The
Committee note that in ten States namely
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand and
Orissa, the total illegal mining/illegal
transportation cases reported during 2002-
2005 were 7536 and 44780 respectively. This
includes 3194 cases of major minerals and
4342 cases of minor minerals. In the State
of Karnataka alone, 1731 cases of illegal
mining of major minerals were reported
during this period. The Committee are
deeply concerned that the IBM though
vested with primary responsibility for
scientific development of mineral resources,
has failed to detect even a fraction of illegal
mining activities.
The Committee are surprised that most of
the State Governments were unable to
indicate the exact area under illegal mining
and at the same time, stating that there is
no monetary loss in such cases. The
Committee consider the argument of the
State governments untenable that they
recover more money by imposition of
penalty, etc. on defaulters than losses on
account of illegal mining of minerals. The

38
12 3
Committee are disappointed at this state of
affair wherein both the Union Government
and State Governments have been unable
to check the plague of illegal mining but
are also oblivious of the extent and
implications thereof.
The Committee are constrained to observe
that the magnitude of illegal mining
activities is not only detrimental to primary
objectives of National Mineral Policy but
also causing immense loss to the exchequer
and the revenue realized through penalties
imposed by the State Governments can in
no case compensate the huge resources
being drained away. The situation is too
grim to be tackled by the State
Governments on their own and, therefore,
their insistence for not parting with their
power in favour of IBM is not justifiable.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the
State Governments join hands with IBM to
check the menace of illegal mining. The
Committee also desire the Ministry to
regularly sensitize State Governments about
their role and responsibilities under the Act
and desirability of scientific exploration of
mineral resources of the country.
3. 2.18 The Committee also note that in most of
the cases, illegal mining has been taking
place stealthily and clandestinely from the
abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-
working part of mine or from outcrop
region, as admitted by the Union Minister
of State for Coal in reply to a Starred
Question No. 306 dated 14.12.2005 in Lok
Sabha. The Committee are anguished to
note that Union as well as State
Governments have neither the details of

39
12 3
abandoned/closed/disused mines nor taken
effective steps for prevention of illegal
mining from such mines. This gives
credence to the fact that no mine closure
plans for the purpose of decommissioning,
reclamation and rehabilitation in the mine
or part thereof after cessation of mining and
mineral processing operations are properly
being prepared and implemented.
The Committee, therefore, desire the
Ministry/IBM to ensure that the mine
closure plans are prepared and executed
immediately after cessation of mining
activities and also that no mine is left in
an abandoned state. The Committee would
also like the Ministry to keep the State
Governments informed about the mine
closure plans in order to have a well
coordinated approach for prevention of
illegal mining.
4. 3.15 The Committee note that Mines & Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, Mines and
Minerals Development Rules, 1988 provide
the legal framework for prevention of illegal
mining. In pursuance to the
recommendations of Tandon Committee,
MMDR Act was amended in 1999 by
inserting new Section 23C empowering the
State Governments to frame rules for
preventing illegal mining, transportation
and storage of minerals. The State
Governments are also required to regulate
and provide for establishment of check
posts, regulation of mineral transport,
inspection, checking and search of minerals
at the place of excavation, storage or during
transit.

40
12 3
The Committee feel that Section 23C of
MMDR Act is immensely crucial provision
for managing the mineral wealth of the
country and its exploitation for the welfare
of the people. The Committee are dismayed
that even after the lapse of more than seven
years, only 9 State Governments have
framed the necessary rules under Section
23C of MMDR Act. The Committee are
deeply concerned that several States with
high incidence of illegal mining are still
blissfully unaware of their responsibilities
as well as ground realities which is eating
into their vital source of revenue.
The Committee cannot  but deprecate the
lackadaisical attitude of the State
Governments as well as the failure of the
Ministry to convince them to frame such
rules resulting in rampant illegal mining.
The Committee, therefore, desire the
Ministry of mines to seriously look into the
matter and issue directions to recalcitrant
States to immediately frame the rules for
prevention of illegal mining, transportation
and storage of minerals.
5. 3.16 The Committee also note that under section
23C(3), the Central Government shall have
no power to revise any order passed by a
State  Government or any of its authorized
officer or any authority under the rules
made under sub-section (1) and (2). The
Committee consider this an anomalous
situation as in the absence of powers to
revise any order passed by the State
Governments, there may be conflicting
provisions and deviations, inconsistent with
the spirit of the Central Act.

41
12 3
The Committee feel that the Central
Government should retain its moderating
role and therefore desire that the MMDR
Act should be suitably amended to provide
powers to the Central Government to
review/revise inconsistent orders passed by
the State Governments.
6. 3.17 The Committee observe that the MMDR
Act, 1957 is silent whether mining activities
beyond the permissible lease constitutes
illegal mining. The Act is also silent
whether any mining activity in the
abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-
working part of mine or from out crop
regions constitutes illegal mining. The
representatives of the Ministry during the
course of evidence, had, however, informed
the Committee that mining activity beyond
the permissible lease constitutes illegal
mining until the approval of the Central
Government is obtained for relaxing the
limit in the interest of mineral development.
The Committee consider it as a glaring
lacunae in the Act as definition of illegal
mining does not find place in it.
The Committee view with concern the
manipulation of existing mining plans and
the violations in mining of major minerals
in various States. As is evident from large
scale transportation activities visible in the
area, the mining companies are indulging
in excessive exavation of minerals beyond
the permissible limits under the approved
plans. The Committee are also anguished
to note that whereas mining plans are
approved for a particular area, mining
activities are clandestinely being carried out
much below the ground level and beyond
the approved area sometimes jeopardizing
the historical and ancient monuments.

42
12 3
The Committee are also perturbed to find
a large number of casualties taking place
on account of dubious means adopted for
carrying out illegal mining particularly in
coal bearing areas of several States. The
Committee also believe that such activities
necessarily involve large scale exploitation
of the labours.
The Committee desire the Ministry to
immediately come out with short term
measures to contain such unlawful mining
activities. The Committee also desire the
Ministry to expeditiously frame the clear
and unambiguous definition of illegal
mining and also prepare a schedule of
types of illegal mining for the information
of concerned agencies/individuals and the
State Governments.
7. 3.18 The Committee are anguished to note that
as on 31.3.2006, 204 cases for grant of
mining lease have been pending with the
State  Governments of Maharashtra, Andhra
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka and Madhya
Pradesh and this figure may increase
further with the availability of information
from other States. The Committee further
note that the cumbersome procedure for
grant of mining lease has been identified
as one of the reasons for the problem of
illegal mining by the Ministry . The
Committee have serious apprehensions that
the malaise of the illegal mining will
continue to raise its ugly head and the very
purpose of streamlining the procedure for
grant of mining leases would be defeated
if the cases of grant of mining lease are
not disposed of quickly.
The Committee desire the Ministry/IBM to
seriously look at the problem and to ensure

43
12 3
that the cases of grant of mining leases are
disposed of as early as possible. The
Committee would like to be apprised in
this regard.
8. 4.16 The Committee note that under the
Constitution of India, as provided by Entry
54 of the Union List in the Seventh
Schedule, the Ministry of Mines has been
entrusted with the responsibility for
regulation of mines and mineral
development to the extent to which such
regulation and development under the
control of the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the
public interest. The State Governments have
also been entrusted with the responsibility
for regulation of mines and mineral
development under Entry 23 of the State
List, subject to the provision of Entry 54 of
the Union List. The Committee are,
therefore, inclined to draw inference that
the primary responsibility for regulation of
mines and mineral development, which
undoubtedly includes prevention of illegal
mining, rests with the Central Government,
even though under Section 23C of MMDR
Act, 1957, State Governments have been
empowered to make rules to prevent illegal
mining, transportation and storage of
minerals. The Committee are convinced that
the said delegation of powers to the State
Governments in no case absolve the Central
Government from their inalienable
responsibilities.
In this backdrop, the Committee are
extremely constrained to note that no
mechanism whatsoever existed in the
Ministry till recently for effective prevention
of illegal mining. The Committee are also

44
12 3
surprised that though the State
Governments were empowered to take
action for prevention of illegal mining, there
was no semblance of coordination between
the Ministry of Mines and the State
Governments though forums like Mineral
Advisory Council, Conference of State
Ministers of Mining & Geology existed. The
lack of seriousness was evident from the
fact that the last conference of State
Ministers of Mining & Geology was held
in January, 2003. During all these years, the
illegal mining continued unabated with
unscrupulous miners playing havoc with
scientific mineral exploration and
environmental concerns. The Committee
are, therefore, of the view that Ministry of
Mines has performed miserably to
discharge their constitutional responsibility
of regulation, scientific development and
exploration of mines and minerals in the
country.
The Committee note that on their initiative,
the Ministry is in the process of setting up
of some sort of monitoring machinery. The
Committee now hope that the Ministry will
hold regular/quarterly meetings with the
State Governments and the Conference of
State Ministers which was last held more
than three years back will be held at
regular intervals. The Committee expect
that the Conference of State Ministers of
Mining & Geology besides deliberating on
various issues concerning mineral industry
would also focus on vital issue of
prevention of illegal mining.
The Committee note that while the
Ministry/IBM has taken some proactive
steps to curb the proliferation of illegal

45
12 3
mining in pursuance of the Tandon
Committee recommendations, nothing
seems to have been done to educate the
villagers regarding the rules and
procedures. The Committee feel that the
ignorance on the part of the villagers in
this regard has been one of the reasons for
illegal mining.
The Committee recommend that adequate
measures should be taken to educate and
sensitize the villagers about the rules and
procedures to rein unintended illegal
mining.
9. 4.17 The Committee note that earlier no separate
cell existed in the Ministry to exclusively
deal with the problem of illegal mining. A
cell for reviewing/monitoring the returns
to be filed by State Governments has since
been set up in the Ministry. The Committee
observe that the cell which has recently
came into being has a limited role of
reviewing/monitoring the returns filed by
the State Governments.
The Committee desire the Ministry to
clearly demarcate the powers and the
responsibilities of this cell to not only
review the returns filed by the State
Governments but to also play a greater role
in the direction of prevention of illegal
mining.  The Committee also desire that
cell should be headed by a senior officer
with adequate supporting staff.
10. 4.18 The Committee feel that the amendments
made in MMDR Act in pursuance of
Tandon Committee recommendations have
not brought about desired results as the
cases of illegal mining continue to take

46
12 3
place unabated. The Committee note that
8469 cases of illegal mining spreading over
46 hectares land were reported during the
quarter ending September, 2005 and 6035
such cases spreading over 106 hectares land
were reported during the quarter ending
December, 2005 as deposed by Secretary,
Ministry of Mines before the Committee.
The Committee strongly feel that if more
inspections are carried out, the possibility
of a large number of cases of illegal mining
being detected cannot be ruled out
particularly in Orissa, Chhattisgarh,
Karnataka, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and
Madhya Pradesh.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry should take initiative to suggest
periodicity of routine and regular
inspections by the State Governments and
IBM for detecting and preventing such
cases.
11. 4.19 The Committee appreciate that the
constitution of Task Force by the State
Governments and consider it a step in the
right direction. The Committee desire the
Ministry to direct all State Governments to
set up Task Forces at State level at the
earliest.
12. 4.20 The Committee also desire that the
composition of the Task Forces apart from
Director of the Department of Geology &
Mines of the concerned State, Deputy
Directors, Department of Geology & Mines
and District Mining Officers, and Officials
of the State Forest Department, Regional
Controller of Mines of IBM, Representatives
of State Pollution Board, Representatives of
the Mine Owners Association and

47
12 3
Federation of Indian Minerals should also
include officials concerned with police and
public order with clear mandate, guidelines
and adequate powers for enforcement of
rules. The Task Forces should also carry out
frequent random/regular inspections to
detect and prevent illegal mining to achieve
their objectives.
13. 4.21 The Committee also expect the IBM to play
a major and decisive role in the functioning
of Task Forces in consonance with the
primary function of the Ministry of Mines
for balanced and scientific development and
exploration of mines and minerals in the
country. The Committee desire the Ministry
of Mines to adequately strengthen IBM both
in terms of manpower and finances to
enable it to shoulder the greater
responsibilities.
14. 4.22 The Committee would like the Ministry to
review the performance of Task Forces at
quarterly intervals and conduct a detailed
study and assessment about the efficacy of
the new mechanism revolving around the
Task Forces constituted in various States.
In the event of menace of illegal mining
continuing unabated despite the efforts of
the new mechanism, the Committee would
like the Ministry to entrust more powers
to the IBM by suitable amendments in the
central legislation and also consider taking
back the delegated powers from the State
Governments. The Committee would also
like the Ministry to take the assistance to
recent advancement in science and
technology including satellite mapping to
assess the extent and impact of illegal
mining and prepare a detailed data bank
thereon for the use of State Governments.

48
ANNEXURE I
STATE-WISE BREAK-UP OF NUMBER OF CASES REFERRED TO
THE STATE GOVERNMENT AND ACTION TAKEN
THEREON AS ON 1.7.2005
Sl. No. Name of the State No. of cases Cases Mining Plan Action in
referred to resolved by approved progress in
State Govt. the State State Govt.
Govt. (*)
1. Madhya Pradesh 128 122 6 —
2. Uttar Pradesh 5 5 — —
3. Andhra Pradesh 308 283 25 —
4. Karnataka 65 53 12 —
5. Maharashtra 47 45 2 —
6. Bihar 54 51 3 —
7. Jharkhand 176 143 29 4
8. Chhattisgarh 10 2 8 —
9. Meghalaya 4 1 1 2
10. Assam 12 10 1 1
11. Manipur 2 2 — —
12. Sikkim 1 — 1 —
13. Orissa 68 13 55 —
14. Rajasthan 494 397 97 —
15. Gujarat 148 109 39 —
Total 1522 1236 279 7
(*)Various actions taken by State Government: issuing termination letters, closed due to
forest notification, closed due to Supreme Court order, lease expired but not applied
for renewable, lease surrendered, rejected renewal application, deleted from the record,
etc.

49
ANNEXURE II
YEAR-WISE STATEMENT OF PENDING MINING LEASE
CASES RECEIVED AS ON 31.3.2006
State 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-2005 2005-2006 Total
Andhra Pradesh — 03 09 37 49
Chhattisgarh — 06 02 02 10
Gujarat — — 02 05 07
Jharkhand — — 06 — 06
Karnataka — 05 — 08 13
Kerala — — — 08 08
Madhya Pradesh — 01 06 27 34
Maharashtra 02 — 17 15 34
Manipur — — — 01 01
Orissa — — — 03 03
Rajasthan — — 02 11 13
Tamil Nadu 07 05 03 11 26
Total 09 20 47 128 204

50
ANNEXURE III
STATE-WISE BREAK-UP OF ILLEGAL MINING CASES (FROM
JULY, 2005 TO DECEMBER, 2005)
Sl.No.      State No. of Cases
1. Gujarat 5769
2. Haryana 107
3. Himachal Pradesh 483
4. Jharkhand 820
5. Karnataka 1064
6. kerala 608
7. Maharashtra 1726
8. Orissa 127
9. Punjab (Chandigarh) 79
10. Rajasthan 345
11.T amil Nadu 333
12. Uttar Pradesh 1912
13. Jammu & Kashmir 02
14. Madhya Pradesh 1129
Total 14504

51
ANNEXURE IV
CASES OF ILLEGAL MINING DETECTED BY STATE
GOVERNMENTS & ACTION TAKEN DURING
3 YEARS PERIOD OF 2002-2005
(Rupees in lakhs)
State No. of cases detected No. of Demand created Total Demand realized Total
vehicles
seized
Illegal Illegal Illegal Illegal Illegal Illegal
mining transportation mining transportation mining transportation
1 234 5 67 8 9 1 0
Andhra Pradesh
Major Mineral 3 — — 1.22 — 1.22 1.22 — 1.22
Minor Mineral 1 — — 2.88 — 2.88 2.88 — 2.88
Maharashtra
Major Mineral 1 11 11 — — 6.38 — — 6.38
Minor Mineral — 12242 12242 373.00 — 373.00 373.00 — 373.00
Karnataka
Major Mineral 1731 — 1676 — — 570.32 — — 570.32
Minor Mineral — 10989 10752 — — 211.56 — — 211.56
Madhya Pradesh
Major Mineral 88 200 200 — — — 0.38 28.89 29.27
Minor Mineral 1071 8409 8409 — — — 31.84 284.42 316.26
Tamil Nadu
Major Mineral 496 — — 168.32 — 168.32 13.06 — 13.06
Minor Mineral 949 — — 7355.36 — 7355.36 124.92 — 124.92
Rajasthan
Major Mineral 152 — 1120 56.50 — 56.50 55.45 — 55.45
Minor Mineral 1575 — 2598 384.91 — 384.91 88.51 — 88.51
Chhattisgarh 782 3296 Nil 736.17 100.86 837.03 118.84 100.86 219.70

52
1 234 5 67 8 9 1 0
Gujarat
Major Mineral 24 335 — — ———— 41.84
Minor Mineral 76 12408 — — ———— 554.46
Jharkhand
Major Mineral 60 — 9 68.25 — 68.25 0.24 — 0.24
Minor Mineral 670 — 176 154.33 — 154.33 14.46 — 14.46
Orissa
Major Mineral 639 160 130 91.32 102.41 193.73 90.32 100.65 190.97
Minor Mineral Nil 26 2 — 2.09 2.09 — 2.09 2.09
Total
Major Mineral 3194 706 3146 385.61 102.41 1064.72 160.67 129.54 908.75
Minor Mineral 4342 44074 34179 8270.48 2.09 8484.13 635.61 286.51 1688.14
Grand Total 7536 44780 37325 8656.09 104.50 9548.85 796.28 416.05 2596.89
Note: The State of Chhattisgarh has not reported separate figure for major and minor
minerals.
‘—’ Indicate no information furnished by State Government under the head.

53
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON MINES
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2004-05)
HELD ON 4TH JANUARY, 2005 IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘E’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI.
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Smt. Karuna Shukla—Convenor
3. Shri Dalpat Singh Parste
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
5. Shri Bikash Chowdhury
6. Shri B.J. Panda
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Shri C.D. Arha — Secretary, Ministry of Mines
(MoM)
2. Shri R.K. Bhargava — Additional Secretary, MoM
3. Shri Prashant Mehta — Joint Secretary, MoM
4. Shri V .K. Thakral — Joint Secretary, MoM
5. Shri Harbhajan Singh — JS&FA, MoM
6. Shri Sunil Barthwal — Director, MoM
7. Shri A.K. Singh — Director, MoM
8. Shri S.S. Das — Controller General, Indian
Bureau of Mines (IBM)

54
9. Shri Meerul Hasan — Controller of Mines, IBM
10. Shri Ranjan Sahay — Regional Controller of Mines,
IBM
11. Shri G. Upadhyaya — CMD, NALCO
12. Shri S.C. Chatwal — Director (Finance), NALCO
13. Shri C.R. Pradhan — Director (Project), NALCO
14. Shri S. Nanda — Regional Manager, NALCO
2. At the outset, the Convenor of Sub-Committee on Mines of the
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel welcomed the Members and
the Officers of Ministry of Mines to the sitting of the Sub-Committee.
Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Mines briefed the Sub-Committee
on the subject “Prevention of Illegal Mining and Modernisation of
Expansion of Aluminium Industry with special reference to National
Aluminium Company Ltd. (NALCO)”, selected by the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel for detailed examination during the year
2004-2005.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been
kept.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

55
ANNEXURE VI
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2004-05) HELD ON
19.7.2005 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI.
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bikash Chowdhury
4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey
5. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
6. Shri Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
8. Shri Ramsevak Singh (Babuji)
9. Shri Devdas Apte
10. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap
11. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
12. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad
13. Shri B.J. Panda
14. Shri G.K. Vasan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Shri A.K.D. Jadhav, Secretary Ministry of Mines
2. Shri R.K. Bhargava, Addl. Secretary -do-

56
3. Shri Prashant Mehta, Joint Secretary Ministry of Mines
4. Shri V .K. Thakral, Joint Secretary -do-
5. Shri A.K. Singh, Director -do-
6. Shri Sunil Barthwal, Director -do-
7. Shri Bhupal Nanda, Deputy Secretary -do-
8. Shri C.P . Ambesh, Acting Controller General Indian Bureau
of Mines (IBM)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Mines briefed the Committee
on the subject “Prevention of Illegal Mining”. The following important
points were discussed by the Committee:
(i) Long term and short term measures to identify and curb
illegal mining;
(ii) Need to amend MMDR Act to prevent illegal mining;
(iii) Empowering the IBM to function more effectively in
prevention of illegal mining;
(iv) Need to curb manipulation of mining plan; and
(v) Measures to prevent mining of abandoned mines.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

57
ANNEXURE VII
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STADING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2005-06) HELD ON 3RD AUGUST, 2006 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘A’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW  DELHI.
The Committee met from 1530 hrs. to 1620 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Anant Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
4. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey
5. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
6. Smt. Karuna Shukla
7. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
8. Shri B.J. Panda
9. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose
10. Shri Saman Pathak
11. Shri Jesudas Seelam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri Shiv Singh — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted
the following Draft Reports:
(i) ** ** ** ** **
(ii) Report on “Prevention of Illegal Mining” relating to the
Ministry of Mines.
**Does not pertain to this Report.

58
3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor
additions/deletions/amendments.
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports
after making consequential change arising out of factual verification
by the concerned Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses
of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.