 
 20 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2006-2007) 
 
 
ABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2006-07) 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Fifteenth  Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)] 
TWENTIET
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006 /Agrahayana 1928 (Saka) 
FOURTEENTH  LOK S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON COAL AND STEEL 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2006-07) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  
(Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2006 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

CC&S. No.20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. 57.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by National Printers,  
New Delhi. 

CONTENTS 
  
 
              
PAGE 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………………………….
 
 
(iii)
 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………... …………………………………………. (v) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report   …………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations that have been 
accepted by the Government …………………………… 
 
 
15
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
29
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which 
final replies of the Government  have not been accepted 
by the Committee…………………………………………… 
 
 
 
31
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited…………. 38
 ANNEXURES 
 
I. The details of the status of all projects of CIL identified and 
approved for the 10th Plan Period…………………………….. 
 
 
39 
 
 II. Action Taken Report on the rec ommendations contained in 
the 11th Report…………………………………………………...
 
43 
 
III. Minutes of the sitting of  the Standing Com mittee on Coal 
and Steel (2006-07) held on 14th December, 2006…………. 
 
 
48 
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2005-06)…………. 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON COAL AND STEEL (2006-07)  
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  - Chairman  
 
 MEMBERS 
 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
 3. Shri D.K.Audikesavulu  
 4. Shri Hiten Barman 
 5. Shri Bansagopal Choudhury  
 6. Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey   
 7. Shri Chandrakant B.Khaire  
 8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
 9. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
10. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon  
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
12. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
13. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
14. Shri Tarachand Sahu  
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
16. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
17. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
19. Shri Sugrib Singh 
20. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
21. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav 
 Rajya Sabha 
22. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
24. Shri Surendra Lath  
25. Shri Ajay Maroo   
26. Shri B.J. Panda 
27. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
28. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh  
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K.Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Bhandari  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri B.D.Dhyani  - Senior Committee Assistant  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and St eel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present th e Report on their behalf, present this 
Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel  on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  the Ministry 
of Coal.  
 
2.  The Fifteenth Report of the St anding Committee on Coal and Steel was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 23 rd May, 2006. Replies of t he Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 21st August 2006.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on  14th December, 2006.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Re port of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-III.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                            ANANTH KUMAR, 
18 December, 2006_____                                                  Chairman, 
27 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 
 

REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with  Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in th e Fifteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal  and Steel on   Demands for Grants 
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Coal which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
23.5.2006.    
 
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorised as follows:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
   
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Sl.No. 11. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Sl. Nos. 6 and 12. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:     
 
   Sl. No. Nil.   
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations  accepted by the Government. In 
case, where it is not possible for the Government to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit fo r any reasons, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation.  
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their Recommendations/Observations made in the Fifteenth Report. 
 
 

A. Under-Utilization of Funds 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 3.16) 
 
1.5 The Committee were fully conscious  of the significant role the coal 
companies perform in meeting the energy requirement of the country. It was, 
however, not possible to meet the ever  growing needs of  the energy without 
corresponding increase in production of coal . In this context, the role of coal 
companies to implement the various schem es/projects on time and increase the 
production of coal to achieve the target  assumed significance. The Committee, 
however, were surprised to find a cont radictory situation wherein production 
targets were being achieved though the expenditure being incurred is much less 
than the allocations. During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Coal admitted that although the expenditu re incurred during the preceding years 
had been between 60 to 70 pe r cent, the targets of coal production had been 
achieved. The Committee believed that since the coal production targets were 
being achieved with lesser utiliz ation of funds, an inference could be drawn that 
either the budgetary projections were unrealistic or targets were fixed much 
below the attainable capacity. The Committee were nevertheless convinced that 
this scenario would not continue for long and as soon as the existing mines dry 
up without new projects yieldi ng results, the production of coal would dip to an 
alarming extent. The Committee, therefore, felt that it was extremely essential for 
the coal companies to ensure timely co mpletion of new projects/schemes for 
increasing the coal production and desired t hat the Ministry should chalk out a 
detailed monitoring and acti on plan to obviate any dela ys in implementing of the 
projects/schemes.  
 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the  Mi nistry of Coal has stated that the 
recommendations of the committee have been noted.  For monitoring of the 
implementation of the projects for augmenti ng coal production a well laid project  
monitoring mechanism is in place in the ministry  which is furnished below : 
 
1.7 Projects are taken up for implement ation after detailed examination of the 
availability of land, state of preparedness and assured flow of funds. There is a 2 
tier system for appraisal and sanction of  projects. Advance Action Proposals 
(AAP) are implemented to get possession  of land, EMP clearance, arrange 
essential infrastructure facilities etc. bef ore sanction of actual Project Report. 
This action is being taken to cut down delays in project implementation. 
 
1.8 Separate Project officers are pos ted for each project to coordinate & 
implement project related activities. In coal producing subsidiary companies  
Director (Technical)(Projects& Planning ) is overall in charge of implementation 
of projects   and under whom    project monitoring di vision headed  by senior 
officers of the rank Chief General Manager/ General Manager is functioning. 
 

1.9 Projects are monitored on day to day  basis at the Area Level by General 
Manager/Chief General Manager of th e area and by Director (Projects& 
Planning) at HQ le vel, CMD of concerned subsidia ry on monthly basis or at 
shorter interval for implementation. Issues  are sorted out at appropriate level to 
ensure smooth implementation of projects. 
 
1.10 Status of Projects is  also reviewed at every Company Board meeting of 
the Subsidiaries by exceptions.  
 
1.11 Mandatory Review of the Projects are carried out at Company Level when 
the expenditure of t he Project exceeds 50% of the Sanctioned Capital to initiate 
appropriate action. 
 
1.12 Yearly Cost-Updating is taken up for all Projects and action for preparation 
of RCE and subsequent approval from Concerned Authority is taken accordingly. 
 
1.13 Projects, costing Rs.100 crores & above, are also  reviewed in CIL Board 
by exception. Physical & Fi nancial performance of all Projects costing more than 
Rs.50 Crs. are also reviewed periodically  by CIL Board for taking corrective 
actions. 
 
1.14 Status of Implementat ion of Major Ongoing Projects as well as Future 
Projects (Costing Rs.100 crores & ab ove) are monitored quarterly by 
Secretary(Coal). In case of Ongoing  Projects both Physical and Financial 
progress are taken into consideration. 
 
1.15 Status of Implementat ion of Major Ongoing Projects as well as Future 
Projects (Costing Rs.100 crores & above)  are also monitored every month / 
fortnight through a flash report. 
 
1.16 For projects costing Rs.100 cror es & above, a proper MIS system using 
MS Project Software has be en introduced. This is being strengthened with the 
introduction of on-line com puterized monitoring system. All major projects are 
now equipped with computers and Project Management software. 
 
1.17 In addition to above, a Dedica ted Group has been constituted by the 
Ministry of Coal comprising of Secretary(Coal), Joint Secretary & Financial 
Adviser(JS&FA) and Adviser(Project s) to monitor and expedite the 
implementation of the investment plans of Coal India Limited in respect of 15 new 
10th Plan Projects. 
 
1.18 Progress reports in respect of Projec ts costing Rs.100 crores & above are 
also submitted to Department of Progr amme Implementation regularly by the 
concerned coal companies for monitoring purpose. 
 

1.19 Physical and Financial progress are also monitored quarterly/half-yearly 
by Planning Commission through Qty. Performance Review Meeting. 
 
1.20 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants(2006-07) of 
the Ministry of Coal had observed  that though the coal producing 
subsidiaries of Coal India Ltd. had been  able to achieve the targets of coal 
production, the financial achievement had remained less than 70 per cent 
during the previous years including financial year 2005-06.  The Committee 
believed that since the coal producti on targets were being achieved with 
lesser utilization of funds, an infere nce could be drawn that either the 
budgetary projections were unrealistic or production targets were fixed 
much below the attainable capacity.  The Committee took  strong exception 
to this anomalous situation and, th erefore, recommended that it was 
extremely essential for the coal compani es to ensure timely completion of 
new projects/schemes for sustaining the increase in coal production and 
desired that the Ministry of Coal should chalk-out a detailed monitoring and 
action plan to obviate any delays in implementing the projects/schemes.  
The  Ministry in its reply has stated  that an elaborate and comprehensive 
monitoring mechanism has been laid down for the implementation of 
projects.   
 
The Committee note that notwithst anding this, the utilisation of 
funds continues to be far from satisfa ctory and feel that this paradoxical 
problem between utilization of funds and coal production targets needs to 
be resolved. The Committee would like to  stress that this scenario would 
not continue for long and as soon as the existing mines dry-up without new 
projects yielding results, the production of coal woul d dip to an alarming 
level.   The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Coal to ensure that 
the coal companies not only fix re asonably higher targets for coal 
production but also ensure fullest utilization of funds.  
 
B. Compress Time in  Project formulation 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5, Para No. 4.9) 
 
1.21 The Committee observed that 8 new projects were under formulation by 
NLC. Out of 8 projects, 2 projects vi z Mine III (8 MTPA) and TPS (1000 MW), 
which were sanctioned by the Ministry of Coal in Marc h, 1999 were still in the 
initial stages of formulati on. The Committee expressed their grave concern over 
the inordinate delay on the part of NLC in  formulating these projects and felt that 
waste of precious time would have far-r eaching impact on the fi nancial health of 
NLC. The Committee, therefor e, impressed upon the Minist ry/NLC to tone up its 
machinery and shorten the time lag in the formulation of these schemes to 
enable NLC to boost its production and profitability. 
 

1.22 In its Action Taken Reply, the  Mini stry of Coal has stated that for Mine III, 
the Draft Feasibility Report (FR) was prepared by NLC with Specialized Mining 
Equipment (SME) technology. Draft Envi ronment Report (EIA-EMP) has already 
been prepared. 
 
1.23 Due to various geological and mining conditions , requirement of Main 
Mining Equipments and other Auxiliary equi pments were found to be large in  
number and hence the cost of production of lignite vis-a-vis power tariff appear to 
be prohibitive. Govt of Tamil Nadu has also not granted adm inistrative consent 
for land acquisition for Mine III so far.  
 
1.24 In view of the higher cost of pr oduction associated with SME technology, a 
study on Alternative Mining Technology (AMT) for lignite mine was taken up from 
different sources. A Grant agreem ent was entered wit h US Trade and 
Development Agency (USTDA) in March, 2006 to prepare feasibility report using 
different technology, as US Mines seem  to operate economically using different 
equipments.  
 
1.25 NLC is primarily engaged in the expl oitation of lignite deposits in Tamil 
Nadu and generation of power from lignite  based power projects. At present, 
NLC operates three Mines with a total c apacity of 24 MTPA and Thermal Power 
Plants with a total capacity of 2490 MW. 
 
1.26 Both Lignite mining and Power gener ation are complex and these projects 
have long gestation periods. These pr ojects require many statutory and 
administrative clearances from various St ate and Central Agencie s. Approval of 
State Govt. is essential for land acquisition.  Besides, viability of the project is to 
be established. Cost of producti on of fuel (lignite) and power tariff will have to be 
competitive. If the lignite  cost and power tariff are found to be prohibitive, 
alternative technologies are to be explored so that co st becomes competitive. 
Only after establishing the cost compet itiveness, beneficiaries come forward to 
sign the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA).   
 
1.27 SME technology alone is found to  be a proven technology for the Neyveli 
conditions. SME technology is capital in tensive in nature with higher initial 
investment and hence tariff is loaded upfron t. As power tariff with other fuels is 
found to be cheaper than SME based lignite, NLC endeav ours to find alternative 
technologies. 
 
1.28 NLC is also planning to  diversify from lignite to  other fuels so that the 
company’s growth rate is sustained. 
 
1.29 In view of the above said reasons,  there are some delays in the project 
formulations. 
 

1.30 In order to strengthen and expedite  the project formulation process, 
Advance Action Plan (AAP) proposals ar e implemented to get possession of 
land, EMP clearance, establish infrastructu re facilities. GOI also stipulates that 
AAP is to be completed within 30 months from the date of sanction. Further, 
dedicated multi discipline Officers have bee n entrusted to process the proposals 
and also to get clearances from various statutory authorities. 
 
Status of AAP is given below:- 
 
Project Present Status 
Coal Based Power 
Plant at Tuticorin 
This is a Joint Venture Project with TNEB. Project Report 
(PR) has been sent to TNEB for clearance. After TNEB 
approval, PR will be submitted to GOI. Power Purchase 
Agreement (PPA) is under discussion with beneficiaries. 
Coal based Power 
Plant at Orissa 
Certain issues between Orissa State and NLC could not be 
resolved. Orissa Govt. has also informed that a new power 
policy is under formulation. 
For coal linkage, MOC has directed that a Joint Venture 
Company (JVC) be to be formed to exploit coal reserves in 
Talabira field. JVC formation is under process. 
Mine III & TPS III Alternative mining technology options are being explored to 
bring down the price of lignite. MOU for availing an US Grant 
of US $ 360000 for the preparation of Feasibility Report (FR) 
was signed on 13.3.2006. 
 
Refinery residue 
based Power Plant 
at Chennai 
Revised Tender for Consultancy services for the preparation 
of Detailed FR has been floated and the same is in process. 
Jayankondam Mine 
cum Power Project 
Action has been taken to prepare the Project FR (Feasibility 
Report). State Govt. Notification for implementing the Project 
by NLC independently is awaited. 
Extension of 
Barsingsar Projects 
(Rajasthan) 
Action has been taken to prepare the Project FR. Detailed 
exploration is to be done. Action is being initiated to take up 
geo technical investigation studies. 
Riri Mine cum Power  
Plant (Rajasthan) 
Action has been taken to prepare the Project FR. Detailed 
exploration is to be done. Action is being initiated to take up 
geo technical investigation studies 
 
1.31 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had expressed their 
grave concern over the inordinate delay on the part of Neyveli Lignite 
Corporation(NLC) in formulating 8 ne w projects and impact thereof on the 
financial health of the Company.  K eeping this in view, the Committee had 
impressed upon the Ministry of Coal/NLC to tone up its machinery and 
shorten the time lag in the formulation of these schemes for increased 
production and profitability of NLC.   The Ministry in it s reply has stated 
that for Mine-III, the Dra ft Feasibility Report was prepared with Specialized 

Mining Equipment(SME) technology.  The Ministry has further stated that 
SME technology, though capital intensive and costly, has been found to be 
a proven technology for the Neyveli co nditions.  However, in view of the 
higher cost of production associated wi th SME technology, an agreement 
on Alternative Mining Technology for lignite mine w as entered into with US 
Trade and Development Agency in March,  2006 to prepare feasibility report 
using different technology.   
 
  The Committee are extremely unhappy that NLC despite the 
sanction being accorded in Marc h 1999, has failed to prepare an 
appropriate Feasibility Report and id entify suitable technology. The 
Committee desire that responsibility in this regard should be fixed as loss 
of precious years in  selecting an appropriate technology which will 
ultimately lead to time and cost ove rrun and unjustifiable waste of scarce 
resources.  The Committee, therefore, desire that immediate measures be 
taken so that the ongoing/new projects of NLC do not suffer for want of 
appropriate  technology and other procedural requirements and that the 
projects should be completed within a time bound manner. 
 
C. Implement Projects in a time bound manner 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6, Para No. 5.19) 
 
1.32 The Committee noted that 100 projects  were  identified  to be taken up 
during  10 th Plan period. Out of this,  a total of 67  projects  had already been 
sanctioned and were in different  stages of implementation including 
Makaradhokra-II OC  of Western Coalfields Limited(WCL) which stood completed 
in March  2005. Out of balance 33 projects , only 6 projects were likely to be 
completed  during 10 th Plan. The reasons  adduced fo r the  delays involved  in 
the  projects and  rescheduling  the comp letion time were not convincing. The 
Committee had taken note of the existence  of an elaborate, cumbersome and 
time consuming monitoring  and appraisal  system  right from project level to 
Ministry level for the implementation of the projects. The Committee felt that 
monitoring  of projects  had  remained a mere monotonous exercise  without any 
tangible results forthcoming   there fr om. Consequently, inspite of all these  
measures,  the projects were  getting delayed considerably, a sad  augury for  
the coal sector. The  Committee  were c onvinced  that the projects  were not 
being managed  on sound profe ssional lines, and the Minist ry of Coal had failed  
miserably in  its duty to act as a  vigilant   facilitator in overcoming the  root cause 
of delays in the projects. 
      
1.33 The Committee were well aware about  the major problems viz. acquisition 
of land  and obtaining of various clearances  which were adversely  affecting  the 
progress  of coal projects . Keeping this in view, the Committee  would like to  
emphasize  that there  should be a close  liaison  and  coordination between  the 

Central and various State Government  agencies  and they should work in 
tandem  to identify  and rectify the  nagging bottlenecks. 
 
1.34 The Committee, therefore, recomm ended  the  Ministry to explore the 
possibility of setting up of a single-window clearances  syst em for the projects in 
order to remove  the hurdles  impeding  the advancements in coal sector. The 
Committee  also desired to  be apprised  of  the status  of all the projects  
identified  and sanctioned/approved  during the 10 th Plan period within three 
months.    
 
1.35 In its Action Taken Reply, the  Mi nistry of Coal has stated that the 
recommendation of the Committ ee has been noted  and it is submitted that to 
facilitate various clearances and coordination with the State Governments regular 
interactions at highest level are taking pl ace between the senior officers of the 
subsidiary companies concerned and the St ate Government officials. However, 
regarding exploring the possi bility of setting up of a single window clearance 
system for approval of projects it is to be ment ioned that there are various 
statutory and regulatory appr ovals that have to be obtained for R&R, forestry, 
environmental aspect etc. from differ ent agencies of the State Government 
concerned and Central Government.  As  such the proposed  single window 
clearance system is not feasible.   
 
1.36 The details of the stat us of all projects of CIL identified and approved for 
the 10th Plan Period are shown at Annexure –I. 
 
1.37 Keeping in view the cumbersome  procedures in obtaining various 
clearances for taking up new coal  projects, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry should explore the possibilities of setting 
up of a single-window clearance system fo r the projects in order to remove 
the hurdles impeding the advancements in coal sector.  The Ministry of 
Coal has informed that to facilitate various clearances and coordination 
with the State Governments, regular inte ractions at highest level are taking 
place between the senior officers of th e subsidiary companies concerned 
and the State Government officials.  The Ministry has  further stated that 
setting up of a single window clearance system for appr oval of projects is 
not feasible for the reasons that various statutory and regulatory approvals 
have to be obtained for R&R, forestry, environmental aspect, etc. from 
different agencies of the State Government concerned and Central 
Government.   
 
The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry as it 
has failed to come out with an al ternative mechanism to cut down 
cumbersome procedure and the time involved.    The Committee stress that 
the bottlenecks coming in the speedy im plementation of coal projects are 
required to be removed in order to boost coal production.  The Committee 
are conscious that a number of agenci es both at Centre a nd State level are 

involved in various clearances but are of the view that a High Level 
Empowered Committee could be an al ternative of single-window system 
considering that several agencies of the State and Central Government are 
involved.  The Committee, therefore, like the Ministry to examine the setting 
up of a High Level Empowered Committee to facilitate various clearances.  
 
D. Minimise Outsourcing in  Coal India Ltd.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No. 9.6) 
 
1.38 The Committee observed that the operations which CIL  conducted  
departmentally had been  found to be relatively  much  more expensive  than the 
operations  conducted  through  outsourci ng. The Committee also observed that 
CIL had relatively over availability of  equipment and when high cost equipment 
were not available to the optimum le vel, the cost of production goes up 
substantially. Further  due to poor work cu lture, departmental equipments  do not  
work for the number of hours which was expected to be done and,  therefore, the 
output in terms of individ ual  manpower was substantia lly  less than what was  
obtained  through outsourcing. 
 
1.39 The Committee felt that the reasons ad duced by the Ministry for resorting  
to outsourcing  were grossly unjustifiable.  It was a matter  of serious  concern 
that CIL  instead   of putting its own house in order   by making  optimum  use of 
excess equipments  and developing  work culture  of hi gh order  to enhance  the 
productivity had taken recourse  to outsourcing. 
 
1.40 The  Committee, therefor e,  desired the Ministry to institute  an inquiry to 
go into the depth  for the causes of t he lesser utilization  of equipments and 
deteriorating work  culture in CIL  resu lting  in higher  cost of production and 
apprise  the Committee about the break up of cost  of production, item-wise  as  
compared to the cost of production  thr ough  outsourcing. The  Committee also 
reiterated that an Action Plan  to minimize   outsourcing  and remove  corruption  
be prepared by Ministry/CIL  on uniform ba sis. The Committee also desired that 
they might be apprised of the action taken in this regard within one month.     
 
1.41 In its Action Taken Reply, the  Minist ry of Coal has stat ed that with a view 
to improve efficiency & ut ilization of depar tmental equipment, HEMM monitoring 
cells for continuous monitoring of t he performance of the equipment each for 
each subsidiary is in place.  This  cell/department plans the preventive 
maintenance and rehabilitation programme. 
 
1.42 Ministry of Coal, through an expe rt committee has reviewed the norms of 
HEMM utilization and availability and a dec ision has been made to plan all the 
open cast mines on 330 days working a year  basis instead of 300 days working.  
Accordingly all the new opencast mines are being planned for 330 days working 
with revised norms of utilization of HEMM.   In addition to this coal companies are 

entering into Annual Maint enance Contracts (AMCs) with Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs).  For regular  supply of spare parts depot supply 
agreements are also being enter ed into by the coal com panies with the OEMs.   
To avoid loss of time, measures like hot seat change is also being adopted in 
various projects for HEMM operators.  GPS based truck despatch system have 
also been commissioned in major opencast mines for efficien t monitoring of 
movement of HEMM.  As a result of these measures, there has been 
improvement in utilization and availability of HEMM as  furnished in the table 
below : 
Major HEMM – Performance of Coal India Ltd. 
 
 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
HEMM % 
Availability 
% 
utilization
% 
Availability
% 
utilization
% 
Availability 
% 
utilization
Shovel 70 44 70 46 72 48 
Dumper 63 33 62 35 64 36 
Dozer 60 26 60 27 63 27 
Drill 69 25 69 27 73 30 
Dragline 86 80 87 81 85 78 
 
1.43 Regarding outsourci ng, it is to mention that certain activities of coal 
production in some of the coal mines of CIL subsidiary companies are being 
undertaken by hiring of equipments.  Outsourcing of operations is aimed at 
achieving better economics, creating quick additional capacity of coal production, 
avoiding initial investment, reducing cost  of operations and developing isolated 
patches which are not otherwise economical.  Going by the trend of the day 
Government has been sancti oning new projects with out sourcing option mainly 
from economic and operational consideration.  Thus, the scope of outsourcing is 
increasing and there is no programme to minimize outsourcing.    
 
1.44 Item-wise Break up of estimated unit cost of production for 3 recently 
approved OC Mines with Departmental variant as well as with outsourcing variant 
(both Coal & OB Removal outsourced)  is as below: 
Bhubaneshwari OC 
Sl,No.  Particulars Departmental 
Variant (Rs/t) 
Both Coal & OB 
outsourced variant 
(Rs/t) 
1. Salaries,Wages & Benefits 25.60 14.48 
2.  Stores 58.30 17.76 
3. Power 15.03 11.04 
4.  Misc.exp. incl. W/s debits 17.06 12.37 
5. Admn. Charges 31.40 31.40 
6. Int. on working cap  @   15.50% 7.62 4.50 
7. Int. on loan cap @ 12.50% 0.00 0.00 
8. Depreciation 46.37 20.87 
9. Impact on land reclamation 4.02 4.02 

10. OB cost Rs/cum./ OB contr. @ Rs. 
51.00/cum 
 34.27 
11,  Interest. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50%  1.77 
12. Transportation cost (face- 3-4 Km)  24.80 
13. Interest on working capital  1.28 
 All inclusive cost 205.40 178.55 
 
Kaniah OCP 
Sl,No.  Particulars Departmental 
Variant 
(Rs/t) 
Both Coal & OB 
outsourced variant 
(Rs/t) 
1. Salaries,Wages & Benefits 38.16 22.44 
2.  Stores 77.41 21.69 
3. Power 14.81 9.26 
4.  Misc.exp. incl. W/s debits 17.91 10.91 
5. Admn. Charges 31.40 31.40 
6. Int. on working cap  @   15.50% 9.28 4.94 
7. Int. on loan cap @ 12.50%  0.00 
8. Depreciation 47.22 15.80 
9. Impact on land reclamation 8.10 8.10 
10. OB contr. @ Rs. 51.00/cum  43.25 
11  Int. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50%  2.23 
12. Transportation cost (face- 2-3 Km)  23.47 
13. Int. on wkg. Capital 15.50%  1.21 
 All inclusive cost 244.29 194.70 
 
Kulda OC 
Sl,No.  Particulars Departmental 
Variant 
(Rs/t) 
Both Coal & OB 
outsourced variant 
(Rs/t) 
1. Salaries,Wages & Benefits 27.57 13.47 
2.  Stores 72.30 20.10 
3. Power 13.80 6.58 
4.  Misc.exp. incl. W/s debits 20.43 12.24 
5. Admn. Charges 31.40 31.40 
6. Int. on working cap  @   15.50% 8.55 4.33 
7. Int. on loan cap @ 12.50% 0.00 0.00 
8. Depreciation 54.11 21.11 
9. Impact on land reclamation 3.74 3.74 
10  Int. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50% - 1.36 
11 OB loading & transportation 
contractual 
- 49.55 
12 Transportation cost (surface- 3-4 
KMs) 
12.50 12.50 
13 Transportation cost (face – 2-4 KMs. - 26.29 

14 Int. on wkg. Capital 15.50% 0.65 2.56 
15 Wagon loading cost 4.02 4.02 
16 Int. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50% 0.21 0.65 
17 Int. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50% - 0.21 
 All inclusive cost 249.28 210.09 
 
1.45 To bring transparency in the procedure, t he Award  of  such  work is either 
done through tendering proce ss or by nomination basis  through DGR sponsored 
Ex-servicemen companies based on normative rates .  
 
1.46 Regarding  impr oving the work culture, t he following steps have been 
taken by Coal India Limited : - 
 
1.47 The issue of  improvem ent in work culture, pr oduction, productivity and 
profitability is regularly discussed in t he meeting of Apex Joint Consultative 
Committee. The suggestion on which c onsensus reached are communicated to 
the subsidiaries for implementation. 
 
1.48 Apart from the Apex JCC meetings the Hon’ble MOS (Coal) also held a 
meeting with the trade union leaders and the management on 4 th August, 2005. 
After detailed deliberation the following points were identified for implementation:-  
 
• Adherence to punctuality/timings  of work ;  
• Limited tiffin break to half an hour and not beyond; 
• In case of tiffin-break, the shift should last 8 ½  hours; 
• Better work culture/equipment utilization; 
• Permitting available surplus workm en/operator to operate m/c during 
tiffin breaks / hot seat exchange; 
• In case of absence of an operator, even if an operator of other idle 
machine is available who can handle it, should operate. This should be 
implemented. 
• Multi-skilled operation 
• No wild cat strike 
• No stoppage of work due to accidents etc; 
• Online attendance 
• Reduction in number of breaks in a day 
• Closure of mines / redeployment / VRS 
• Drillers to drill more holes/norms of work to be occasionally revised as 
per IED studies; 
• Attendance – improvement therein.  
 
1.49 The subsidiary companies were r equested to discuss the above points in 
their local Joint Consultative Committee fo r facilitating effective implementation. 
The subsidiary companies have taken necessary steps for implementation. 

However, it is continuous process and regular  efforts are made by management 
on continuing basis to bring improvements in the above areas .  
 
1.50 The efforts made have yielded fruitfu l results and Coal India registered 
improvement in production, productivity and profitability during 2005-06. 
 
1.51 The issues like introduction of stagger ed day of rest, multi-skilled working , 
revised scheme for employment of dependant on compassionat e ground etc.  
though discussed in all the six meetings  of Standardization Committee of JBCCI-
VII held during the period from  Septem ber, 2005 to May, 2006, so far could not 
be finalized. Efforts are being made for early finalization. 
 
1.52 Keeping in view the increasing tr end of outsourcing in Coal India 
Ltd.(CIL), the Committee had desired the Ministry of Coal to institute an 
Inquiry to go into the depth for the causes of lesser utilization of 
equipments and deteriorating work culture in CIL resulting in higher cost of 
production and apprise the Committee about the break up of cost of 
production, item-wise as compared to the cost of production through 
outsourcing.   In its reply, the Minist ry has informed that with a view to 
improve efficiency and utilization of departmental equipment, HEMM 
Monitoring Cell for continuous moni toring of the performance of the 
equipments for each subsidiary is in place.  This Cell/Department plans the 
preventive maintenance and rehabilitat ion programme.  Further under a  
decision taken by an Expert Committe e, all the new open cast mines are 
being planned for 330 days working a year basis instead of 300 days 
working. In respect of outsourcing, the Ministry informed that outsourcing 
of operations is aimed at achi eving better economics creating quick 
additional capacity of coal producti on, avoiding initial investments, 
reducing cost of operations and development of isolated patches which are 
not other-wise economical.  It has furt her been stated that going by the 
trend of the day, Government has been sanctioning new projects with 
outsourcing option mainly from economic  and operational considerations.  
Thus, the scope of outsourcing is increasing and there is no programme to 
minimize outsourcing.   
 
The Committee are deeply anguished that despite their categorical 
recommendation, the Ministry has not in stituted an inquiry to go into the 
causes of lesser utilization of the equipments and deteriorating work 
culture in CIL.   The Committee are of the view that the malaise is too deep 
to be tackled by routine expert bodies and Apex Joint Consultative 
Committee  set-up by CIL.  The Commi ttee are of the fi rm view that the 
outsourcing is increasing not due to economical and operational 
considerations but mismanagemen t and under-utilization of HEMMs 
coupled with lack of commitment and dete riorating work culture.  The view 
point of the Committee has strengthened by the facts submitted by the 
Ministry in its reply which clearly show s that despite efforts made by CIL, 

there is negligible improvement in utilization of HEMMs  since 2003-04.  The 
utilization of Showel and Dumper  which was 44 and 33 per cent in 2003-04, 
rose by merely 4 and 3 per cent respectively in 2005-06.  The item-wise 
break up of estimated unit cost of production for Bhubaneswari opencast 
mine with departmental variant  and outsourcing variant makes it 
abundantly clear that departmental mines are suffering mainly on account 
of stores and depreciation thereof which alone accounts for more than 50 
per cent production cost of the coal.   As regards Kulda opencast mine, in 
case it is presumed that the expenditure on stores and depreciation thereof 
from departmental variant and outsour cing variant are in the same region, 
the cost of production of coal per t onne departmentally would be Rs. 167 
as compared to Rs. 210 from outsourcing.  Similarly in other mines i.e. 
Bhubaneshwari OC and Kania OC, the cost of pr oduction would have been 
Rs. 139.73 per tonne and Rs. 158.29 per t onne with departmental variant as 
compared to the cost of producti on through outsourcing which is Rs. 
178.55 and Rs. 199.70 per tonne respectively.  
 
The Committee are, therefore, not c onvinced that  the outsourcing is 
a better option from the economical and operational point of view but feel 
that only in rare cases of shortage of men and machinery, outsourcing 
could be considered for a short period of time.  
 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and  
desire that the Government should minimize outsourcing in CIL and tone 
up its entire system for the optimum utilization of men and machinery to 
increase the production in a more cost effective manner.  The Committee 
would also like the Ministry to immedi ately commission an Inquiry  into the 
reasons for lesser utilization of equipment and deteriorating work culture in 
Coal India Ltd., subsidiary-wise, and apprise them about the outcome 
thereof within a period of three months.                                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED  BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. NO.1, Para No.  2.2) 
 
The Committee hope that the Minist ry of Coal will implement the 
recommendations in a time bound mann er which the Committee commented 
upon in their Action Taken Report .The Committee desire that the Ministry of 
Coal should furnish final replies  to the recommendations (Nos. 11 and 22) which 
were categorized as of interim nature.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the Action Taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
In Chapter II of this Report, it has  been pointed out that Reply of the 
Government in respect of Recommendation No. 10 and 14 of the 8 th Report was 
not accepted by the Committee and in re spect of Recommendation No. 11 and 
22 of the said Report, replies of the Government were of interim nature.  
 
It may be noted that t he aforesaid recommendations of the 8 th Report 
were re-iterated in the 11th Report of the Committee as detailed below: 
 
Recommendation No.   of 8th Report   Recommendation No. 11th Report 
 
10 1.28 
11 1.34 
14 1.39 
22 1.50 
 
Action Taken Report on the aforesaid recommendations contained in the 
11th Report have been sent to the Comm ittee on 29.05.2006. Copies of the 
Action Taken Report are placed at Annexure-II. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF       dated  21.08.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. NO.2, Para No.  3.15) 
 
The Committee note that t he budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Coal 
for the year 2006-07 is Rs. 4799.50 crore as compared to Rs. 4001.40 crore for 
the year 2005-06 which was later drastically  reduced to Rs. 2987.00 crore at RE 
stage. The Committee are distressed to note t hat the Ministry has failed to utilize 
even the revised allocation and could barely utilize less  than 50% of the BE. The 
performance of Neyveli Lignite Corporat ion has been more deplorable which 

could utilize only 28% of the BE. This trend of under util ization has been 
continuing for more than a decade as during 9 th Plan, the Ministry utilized an 
amount of Rs. 13,120.84 crore as against the allocated amount of Rs. 19,383.74 
crore. In the 10th Five Year Plan, the performance of the Ministry was even more 
unsatisfactory as an amount of Rs. 6,961.52 crore has bee n utilized, so far, as 
against the allocated funds of Rs. 18, 652.20 crore. The Committee, however, 
note with satisfaction that Singareni Collieries Com pany Ltd. continues to 
perform well and has been consist ently utilizing more than  80% of the allocated 
funds. The Committee are deeply anguished to  note that the Ministry has made 
mockery of budget mechanism process by citing exactly the same reasons year 
after year just like a ritual without making and tangible efforts to come out of this 
cyclic malaise.  
 
The Committee, in their 8 th Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Coal for the year 2005-06 had, therefore, reco mmended the Ministry to 
revamp and strengthen its budget division to ensure preparation of realistic 
budgetary proposals and to set up a high level monitori ng committee to review 
the monthly progress of t he utilization of funds. The Ministry had informed the 
Committee that the budget making proced ure in PSUs passes through several 
stages and rigorous follow-up action is done by the Senior Officers of the PSUs. 
A separate Project Monitoring Wing cons tantly monitors the progress on day to 
day basis. It was further stated that Ministry  of Coal also reviews the progress of 
on-going projects of Rs. 100 crore and above on quarterly basis under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal). Since the Committee were not convinced with 
the reply of the Ministry  and the existing monitoring mechanism has not been 
able to bring about any significant improvement, they in their 11
th Report on 
Action Taken had reiterated for setting up of  a High Level Monitoring Committee. 
The Committee hardly need to emphasize that coal production in the country has 
suffered immensely due to the trend of un der-utilization of funds for more than 
decade. The Committee are astonished to note the magnitude of under utilization 
of funds during the last 10 years wh ich exceeds Rs. 15,000/- crore by a 
conservative estimate. The Committee ar e sanguine that this huge amount was 
enough to transform and change the face of the entire coal sector in the country. 
The Committee are, therefore, extrem ely unhappy that  though the existing 
monitoring mechanism of the Ministry  faltered and fumbled, no High Level 
Monitoring Committee, as recommended, was set up.  
 
The Committee, therefore, would again desire the Ministry to put in place 
a High Level Monitoring Committee for effe ctively improving an d overseeing the 
fund utilization.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Recommendation  of the Committee has  been noted and action has been 
initiated to  formulate a high level monito ring  committee for effectively improving 
and overseeing the fund utiliz ation under the chairmanship of Secretary (Coal)  
with Joint Secretary & Financia l Adviser, Ministry of C oal, Adviser (Projects) , 

Ministry of Coal and CMDs of Coal India Limited, Si ngareni Collieries Company 
Limited  and Neyveli Lignite Corporation as Members. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF       dated  21.08.2006] 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 3.16) 
 
The Committee are fully conscious of  the significant role the coal 
companies perform in meeting the energy requirement of the country. It is, 
however, not possible to meet the ever  growing needs of  the energy without 
corresponding increase in production of coal . In this context, the role of coal 
companies to implement the various schemes / projects on time and increase the 
production of coal to achieve the target  assumes significance. The Committee, 
however, are surprised to find a cont radictory situation wherein production 
targets are being achieved though the ex penditure being incurred is much less 
than the allocations. During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Coal admitted that although the expenditu re incurred during the preceding years 
had been between 60 to 70 pe r cent, the targets of coal production had been 
achieved. The Committee believe that since the coal production targets are being 
achieved with lesser utilizat ion of funds, an inference can be drawn that either 
the budgetary projections are unrealistic or  targets were fixed much below the 
attainable capacity. The Committee are nevertheless convinced that this scenario 
would not continue for long and as soon as the existing mines dry up without new 
projects yielding results, the production of coal will dip to an alarming extent. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that it is extremely essentia l for the coal companies to 
ensure timely completion of new projec ts / schemes for increasing the coal 
production and desire that the Ministry should chalk out a detailed monitoring and 
action plan to obviate any delays in implementing of the projects / schemes.  
 
The recommendations of the committee have been noted.  For monitoring 
of the implementation of t he projects for augmenting coal production a well laid 
project  monitoring mechanism is in plac e in the ministry  which is furnished 
below : 
 
Projects are taken up for implementat ion after detailed ex amination of the 
availability of land, state of preparedness and assured flow of funds. There is a 2 
tier system for appraisal and sanction of  projects. Advance Action Proposals 
(AAP) are implemented to get possession  of land, EMP clearance, arrange 
essential infrastructure facilities etc. bef ore sanction of actual Project Report. 
This action is being taken to cut down delays in project implementation. 
 
Separate Project officers are posted for each project to coordinate & 
implement project related activities. In coal producing subsidiary companies  
Director (Technical)(Projects& Planning ) is overall in charge of implementation 
of projects   and under whom    project monitoring di vision headed  by senior 
officers of the rank Chief General Manager/  General Manager is functioning. 

 
Projects are monitored on day to day basis at the Area Level by General 
Manager / Chief General Manager of t he area and by Director (Projects& 
Planning) at HQ le vel, CMD of concerned subsidia ry on monthly basis or at 
shorter interval for implementation. Issues  are sorted out at appropriate level to 
ensure smooth implementation of projects. 
 
Status of Projects is also review ed at every Company Board meeting of 
the Subsidiaries by exceptions.  
 
Mandatory Review of the Projects ar e carried out at Company Level when 
the expenditure of t he Project exceeds 50% of the Sanctioned Capital to initiate 
appropriate action. 
 
Yearly Cost-Updating is taken up for all Projects and action for preparation 
of RCE and subsequent approval from Concerned Authority is taken accordingly. 
 
Projects, costing Rs. 100 crores & abov e, are also reviewed in CIL Board 
by exception. Physical & Fi nancial performance of all Projects costing more than 
Rs.50 crores. are also reviewed periodi cally by CIL Board for taking corrective 
actions. 
 
Status of Implementation of Major Ongoing Projects as well as Future 
Projects (Costing Rs.100 crores. & above)  are monitored quarterly by Secretary 
(Coal). In case of Ongoing Projects both Physical and Fi nancial progress are 
taken into consideration. 
 
Status of Implementation of Major Ongoing Projects as well as Future 
Projects (Costing Rs.100 crores. & above)  are also monitored every month / 
fortnight through a flash report. 
 
For projects costing Rs. 100 crores & above, a proper MIS system using 
MS Project Software has be en introduced. This is be ing strengthened with the 
introduction of on-line com puterized monitoring system. All major projects are 
now equipped with computers and Project Management software. 
 
In addition to above. 
 
A Dedicated Group has been consti tuted by the Ministry of coal 
comprising of Secretary (Coal), Joint Se cretary & Financial Adviser (JS&FA) and 
Adviser (Projects) to moni tor and expedite the implement ation of the investment 
plans of Coal India Limited in respect of 15 new 10th Plan Projects. 
 
Progress reports in respect of Projects costing Rs.100 crores. & above are 
also submitted to Department of Progr amme Implementation regularly by the 
concerned coal companies for monitoring purpose. 

 
Physical and Financial progress are also  monitored quarterly / half-yearly 
by Planning Commission through Qty. Performance Review Meeting. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF  dated  21.08.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.20 of Chapter-1 of the Report) 
           
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No. 4.8) 
 
The Committee note that Neyveli Li gnite Corporation (NLC) under the 
administrative control of Ministry of C oal is primarily engaged in production of 
lignite and power generation. In the year  2005-06, the NLC pr oduced 151.01 LT 
of Lignite and gener ated 12396.68 MU of electric ity upto December 2005. The 
Committee however note that NLC has bee n implementing 4 projects costing Rs 
5560.31 crores for augment ing its production base. The Committee are 
extremely unhappy to note t hat whereas the completion schedule of these 
projects ranges from 45 to 57 months, these have initially been delayed due to 
one reason or other resulting in non-utiliz ation of funds as well as time and cost 
overrun. The Committee express their st rong displeasure ov er the delays in 
completion of the projects, being avoi dable squandering of scarce resources and 
would like that the responsibility shou ld be fixed for not visualizing and 
overcoming the bottlenecks in implementation of the projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The following projects are under implementation: 
 
Mine II Expansion and linked TPS II Expansion at Neyveli 
Barsingsar Mine cum Power Project at Rajasthan 
Project Sanctioned 
Cost 
(Cr.Rs) 
Date of 
Sanction 
Commissioning Schedule 
Mine II Expansion 
(4.5 MTPA) 
2161.28 18.10.2004 June 2009 
TPS II Expansion 
(500 MW) 
2030.78 18.10.2004 Unit 1 Feb,2009 
Unit 2 June,2009 
Barsingsar Mine 
(2.1 MTPA) 
254.07 15.12.2004 June,2009 
Barsingsar Thermal 
(250 MW) 
1114.18 15.12.2004 Unit 1 Dec,2008 
Unit 2 June,2009 
 5,560.31   
 
All the major contracts for the above projects were already finalized and 
supplies have also commenced. There was delay in the early   stages due to 
several round of negotiations for price reduction and subsequent hurdles in 

releasing the down payment  especially for Main Plant Package for Thermal 
Projects. All such issues were resolved and the projects will be commissioned as 
per the schedule. NLC does not envisage de lay in commissioning the project as 
supplies have already commenced and site activities has also gained 
momentum. 
 
The projects are funded out of In ternal Resources (IR) and market 
borrowings. NLC does not draw any budgetary support from GOI. NLC has 
already tied up the borrowing programme to fund the above projects.  
 
Separate Project Officers have been pos ted to co-ordinate and monitor all 
the project related activities. Issues are sorted out at appropriate levels to ensure 
smooth implementation of the projects. 
  
All the Project Officers have been advis ed to closely monitor the progress 
of the projects and are also advised to increase the pace of expenditure. 
 
A separate Project Monitoring Wing cons tantly monitors the progress on 
day-to-day basis.  
 
• Monitoring has been strengthened at all levels viz: 
• each package is being monitored by respective Officer on day to day 
basis.  
• Project is being monitored by Unit Head on weekly basis.   
• Periodical meetings are held with supp liers to monitor the progress of the 
supplies, erection.  
• Physical progress and financial progress in the projects are regularly 
monitored. Mismatch, if any, in this regard is sorted out. 
• Site visit/inspection are being made by the Project Monitoring Group on 
weekly basis.  
• Corporate Level Monitoring is being done on monthly basis. 
• NLC Board also reviews the progress in the Board Meetings. 
  
By close monitoring, the projects will  be completed without any time over 
run. As the Projects are under implementat ion, closer achievable forecast will be 
made in future years. 
 
The actual plan expenditure details for the Year 2005-06 is tabulated 
below: 
 
 Amount (Cr.Rs) 
BE 2005-06 640.00 
RE 2005-06 368.00 
Actual 2005-06 379.68 
% of actual over BE 59 
% of actual over RE 103 

 
Normally, Plan Outlay at BE stage is firmed up sometime in September, 6 
months ahead of the commencement of t he financial year. Outlay at BE stage 
will be based on some premises viz likely issue of Letter of Award (LOA) for 
some packages, likely release of down payment, anticipated commencement of 
supplies etc. Any slippage in the above said premises, which are beyond the 
control of the company, vitiates the pac e of expenditure. After factoring all the 
events, Outlay at RE stage is reduced. and all out efforts are made to achieve 
RE outlay:   
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF dated  21.08.2006] 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.5 (Para No. 4.9) 
 
The Committee further observe that 8 new projects are under formulation 
by NLC. Out of 8 projects, 2 projects  viz Mine III (8 MTPA) and TPS (1000 MW), 
which were sanctioned by the Ministry of Coal in March, 1999 are still in the initial 
stages of formulation. The Committee ex press their grave concern over the 
inordinate delay on the part of NLC in formulating these proj ects and feel that 
waste of precious time will have far-r eaching impact on the financial health of 
NLC. The Committee theref ore impress upon the Minist ry/NLC to tone up its 
machinery and shorten the time lag in the formulation of these schemes to 
enable NLC to boost its production and profitability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For Mine III, the Draft Feasibility Report (FR) was prepared by NLC with 
Specialized Mining Equipment (SME) technology. Draft Environment Report 
(EIA-EMP) has already been prepared. 
 
Due to various geological and mining  conditions, requirement of Main 
Mining Equipments and other Auxiliary equi pments were found to be large in  
number and hence the cost of production of lignite vis-a-vis power tariff appear to 
be prohibitive. Govt of Tamil Nadu has also not granted adm inistrative consent 
for land acquisition for Mine III so far.  
 
In view of the higher cost of production associated with SME technology, a 
study on Alternative Mining Technology (AMT) for lignite mine was taken up from 
different sources. A Grant agreem ent was entered wit h US Trade and 
Development Agency (USTDA) in Mar, 200 6 to prepare feasibility report using 
different technology, as US Mines seem  to operate economically using different 
equipments.  
 
NLC is primarily engaged in the exploi tation of lignite deposits in Tamil 
Nadu and generation of power from lignite  based power projects. At present, 

NLC operates three Mines with a total capacity of 24 MTPA and Thermal Power 
Plants with a total capacity of 2490 MW. 
 
Both Lignite mining and Power generation are complex and these projects 
have long gestation periods. These pr ojects require many statutory and 
administrative clearances from various St ate and Central Agencie s. Approval of 
State Govt. is essential for land acquisition.  Besides, viability of the project is to 
be established. Cost of producti on of fuel (lignite) and power tariff will have to be 
competitive. If the lignite  cost and power tariff are found to be prohibitive, 
alternative technologies are to be explored so that co st becomes competitive. 
Only after establishing the cost compet itiveness, beneficiaries come forward to 
sign the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA).   
 
SME technology alone is found to be a proven technology for the Neyveli 
conditions. SME technology is capital in tensive in nature with higher initial 
investment and hence tariff is loaded upfron t. As power tariff with other fuels is 
found to be cheaper than SME based lignite, NLC endeav ours to find alternative 
technologies. 
 
NLC is also planning to di versify from lignite to other fuels so that the 
company’s growth rate is sustained. 
 
In view of the above said reasons, there are some delays in the project 
formulations. 
 
In order to strengthen and expedite the project formulation process, 
Advance Action Plan (AAP) proposals ar e implemented to get possession of 
land, EMP clearance, establish infrastructu re facilities. GOI also stipulates that 
AAP is to be completed within 30 months from the date of sanction. Further, 
dedicated multi discipline Officers have bee n entrusted to process the proposals 
and also to get clearances from various statutory authorities. 
Status of AAP is given below:  
Project Present Status 
Coal Based Power 
Plant at Tuticorin 
This is a Joint Venture Proj ect with TNEB. Project Report 
(PR) has been sent to TNEB for clearance. After TNEB 
approval, PR will be submitt ed to GOI. Power Purchase 
Agreement (PPA) is under discussion with beneficiaries 
Coal based Power 
Plant at Orissa 
Certain issues between Orissa  State and NLC could not be 
resolved. Orissa Govt has al so informed that a new power 
policy is under formulation. 
For coal linkage, MOC has dire cted that a Joint Venture 
Company (JVC) be to be formed to  exploit coal reserves in 
Talabira field. JVC formation is under process 

Mine III & TPS III Alternative mining tec hnology options are being explored to 
bring down the price of lignite. MOU for availing an US Grant 
of US $ 360000 for the preparation of Feasibility Report (FR) 
was signed on 13.3.2006 
 
 
Refinery residue 
based Power Plant 
at Chennai 
Revised Tender for Consultancy services for the preparation 
of Detailed FR has been floated and the same is in process. 
Jayankondam Mine 
cum Power Project 
Action has been taken to prepare the Project FR (Feasibility 
Report). State Govt Notificati on for implementing the Project 
by NLC independently is awaited. 
Extension of 
Barsingsar Projects 
(Rajasthan) 
Action has been taken to prepare the Project FR. 
Detailed exploration is to be done.  Action is being initiated to 
take up geo technical investigation studies. 
Riri Mine cum Power  
Plant (Rajasthan) 
Action has been taken to prepare the Project FR. 
Detailed exploration is to be done 
Action is being initiated to take up geo technical investigation 
studies 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF  Dated 21.08.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.31 of Chapter-1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7, Para No. 6.10) 
 
  The Committee find that Coal India Ltd.(CIL) has been operating its coal 
washeries in the country since 1958. In  the back drop of growing awareness 
against environment pollution, the Ministry of Environment and Forest issued a 
notification  for use of specified quality of coal in the Thermal Power Stations and 
steel plants located in the identified areas necessitating mandatory use of 
washed coal. 
 
 The Committee further note that at present, CIL operate 17 coal washeries 
(11 coking coal and 6 non-coking coal), ma ny of which have outlived their useful 
life long back. The Committee also note  that almost all these washeries  are 
operating at barely 50% of  their capacity and, ther efore, CMPDIL has now 
prepared an action plan for moderniza tion/renovation of washeries for 
implementation in stages by the subsidiary companies of CIL as per the 
recommendations of ‘Altekar Committee’ . The Committee  are unhappy to note 
that the Ministry neglected the modernization/renovation aspect of the washeries 

even though these are  more than 30 to 40 years old and operating at much 
below  the optimum capacity level. The Acquisition, Modernization and 
Replacement (AMR) is a continuing exercise  in any industrial or ganization for its 
sustainable  development. The Committee regret to note that CIL has neither 
renovation/modernized its existing coal  washeries since their commissioning nor 
set up any new coal washeries of its own leaving no option but to largely depend  
on private washeries or usi ng the existing old coal wa sheries. One of the major 
constraints for not modernizing the washeries was fund crunch. The Committee 
do not find this argument convincing as C entral Coalfields Limited (CCL), had 
already taken a turn around and started posting profits for the last four years. 
 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Coal should expedite 
implementation of the Acti on Plan as per the CMPDIL 
suggestions/recommendations to modernize/r enovate them, in a time frame, for 
their optimum utilization. Committee would like to be apprised of  the action in 
this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The action taken with regard to modernization / renovation of the 
Washeries for their optimum utilizatio n and performance improvement is as 
under: 
 
BCCL 
The existing washeries (excluding Madhuban) are very old, varying 
between 20 to 44 years.  It is a fact that BCCL was facing fund constraint for 
modernization / renovation of washeries in  ‘90s. However pres ently there is no 
fund constraint.  Revival plan of BCCL includes a provision of Rs.125.00 crores 
for renovation / modernization of the washeries.   
 
CMPDI was entrusted wit h the job of study and preparation of detailed 
proposals for modernization / renovation of  the existing washeris.  As per the 
study reports submitted by CMPDI, det ailed revival schemes have been drawn 
by BCCL to implement renovation / moder nisation of washeries. In the first 
phase, various schemes for six washer ies i.e. Dugda-I, Dugda-II, Bhujudih, 
Sudamdih, Moonidih and Mahuda at a total cost of Rs.54.81 crores have been 
approved in principle by BCCL Board in Nov’05.  Action for implementation of the 
approved schemes is already in hand.  I ndents for procurement of material / 
replacement of equipment are in different  stages of processi ng.  Also detailed 
estimate for tendering and award for work for execution of job is in progress. 
 
Preparation for tender document to enha nce the bunkerage capacity of 
Middlings for Sudamdih and Moonidih washeries for tendering and award of work 
on turn-key basis is in the final stage. 
 
All the approved schemes as considered in the first phase are expected to 
be completed within a time frame of 2 years.  

 
CCL 
 
(i)  Kedla Washery : 
Installation of Froth Floatation Section is in progress so as to commission 
by March’07.  
(ii)  Rajrappa Washery : 
Updating of Jig Control System is in process of implementation with 
indigenous know how.  Work is  programmed to be commissioned by 
October’06. 
 
In addition, following action have also bee n taken to improve the quality of 
washed coal - 
 
Kedla Washery:  
 
(i) 7 Hydro Cyclones have been commissi oned to produce low ash clean coal 
 from the fines to sweeten the washed coal product. 
       
 ii) Pre-screening of raw c oal at 40 mm before crusher has been introduced 
for greater liberation of impurities in the raw coal. 
 
Crusher rolls have been modified to crush coal near 40 mm size instead of 
80 mm to achieve greater liberation of impurities in the raw coal. 
 
To achieve stipulated quality para meters, Yield has been lowered from 
48.4% of last year to 45% during April’06 and May, 2006. 
 
Strict watch is maintai ned on operating param eters to attain washed coal 
quality parameters. 
 
Rajrappa Washery 
 
To maintain the quality, Yield of washed coal has been lowered by 3% 
during 2005-06 and further lowering of Yield is being affected. 
 
Close attention is being paid towards obtaining low ash clean coal from 
raw coal fines by Froth Flotation Plant. 
 
Status of Action taken to upgrade CCL washeries: 
 
Washery  Job Status 
Piparwar i) Effluent Control by installing close  
circuit system 
 
ii) Washing of Rejects. 
i) CMPDI has submitted 
design, estimate etc. and is 
under process of approval in 
CCL.. 

ii) Proposal is under 
consideration of CCL Board. 
Rajrappa Install Tailings / Effluent treatment 
plant 
Completed. 
Sawang Installation of Modular 
Demonstration Plant with Column 
Floatation to upgrade fines and 
Horizontal Travelling Belt Filter. 
Tender has been cancelled on 
technical ground by CMPDI. 
Tenders are being floated 
again. 
Kargali Safe and efficient working of the 
washery 
Work is in progress. 
 
 
WCL 
With a view to improve the performance of Nandan washery, WCL has 
initiated action to renovate / modify Koma g Jigs and installa tion of PLC based 
Automation System in the washery.  The status with regard to the action plan is 
as follows:  
 
Washery  Job  Status  
Nandan Renovation / Modification of 
Komag Jigs and installation 
of PLC based Automation 
System 
Preparation of tender documents 
and its approval, tender floating, 
finalization of tender and issue 
work order, renovation / modify 
Jigs, install automation system 
and commissioning is expected to 
be completed by May, 2007. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF  dated  21.08.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8, Para No. 6.11) 
 
 The Committee observe that CIL has t entatively identified few locations to 
set up medium coking coal and non-coking coal washeries in CCL command 
area under Built-Own-Operate (BOO) schem e for which reports/documents are 
under preparation. CIL is also encouraging its consum ers as well as private 
entrepreneurs to set up coal washeries for supply of washed coal to the linked 
consumers by providing infrastructu ral facilities, as available, on 
lease/chargeable basis. The Committee are deeply anguished that due to lack of 
foresight and inaction on the part of the Ministry, a situation has arisen wherein 
its own washeries and manpower are ly ing idle/under utilized and private 
participation is being permitted. The Co mmittee, therefore, desire that the 
possibility of setting up new coal washer ies by CIL should also be examined 
apart from coal washeries being set up by private entrepreneurs.  
 

The Committee expect that while encouraging setting up of the coal 
washeries under BOO/BOOT system, CI L would encourage linked consumers 
particularly State Electricity Boards instead of relying on private entrepreneurs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The action taken on setting up washeries by CIL is as follows: 
 
1) CIL had initiated action to set up  non coking coal washeries under BOO 
scheme for supply of washed coal to the thermal power stations. But the 
efforts did not fructify since no consumer could be found to accept the cost 
of washed coal from the proposed Kalinga and Ananta-Bharatpur washery 
in Orissa. The draft agreement to supply washed coal to MSEB from 
proposed Dipika washery (6.0 Mty) of  SECL, to be set up by M/s R&S 
Engineering (India) Pvt. Ltd. under BOO scheme, has not been finalized 
by MSEB so far. 
  
2) CIL, as a facilitator, invited Expression of Interest (E OI) to set up non 
coking coal washeries under BOO scheme for the linked consumers and 
the response received in this regar d was very high. Intending washery 
investors were advised to have tie-up with the linked coal consumers and 
come up with firm linkages for setti ng up washeries and avail the 
infrastructural facilities offered by CI L. The major power sector consumers 
i.e. central power sectors and state el ectricity boards were also informed 
about the EOIs to facilitate in select ing the appropriate washery operators 
for washing their linked coal. But, as  per information av ailable, no tie-up 
between utility and washery operator did materialize for construction of the 
washeries to supply washed coal.   
 
3) CIL has initiated action to set up a 2.5 Mty washery at Dhori, CCL on turn-
key basis for supply of washed meta llurgical coal to steel plants and 
washed power coal to thermal power plants. 
 
4) 6 more washeries (coking coal –10 Mty. & non coking c oal – 10 Mty.) are 
also proposed  to be set up by CI L under BOO scheme in CCL command 
area.   
 
CIL has provided land on lease to APGENCO for construction of its 11.0 
Mty washery in Orissa.   
 
CIL is also providing land to PSEB for its propos ed 3.5 Mty washery in 
Jharkhand.  The land lease deed with PSEB  , approved by CCL Board, will be 
signed shortly.       
  
CIL is also exploring the possibilit y to provide land to NTPC for its 
proposed 6.0 MTY washery in Orissa.  
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF dated  21.08.2006] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9, Para No. 7.8) 
 
The Committee note that North-eastern Coalfields Ltd. is responsible for 
production of coal and development in North-Eastern region. The Ministry of Coal 
provides a lump sum amount  of 10% of the capital outlay of its departmental 
schemes every year for development of North-Eastern Region. It is surprising 
that no development work was undertaken under this head out of the lump sum 
amount earmarked by the Ministry of Coal during the preceding years as CIL had 
no scheme for implementation in North-Ea stern region. The entire funds during 
these years were transferred to non-laps able pool of central resources. The 
Committee do not see any rationale in not utilizing the funds earmarked for 
North-Eastern Region year after year. 
 
The Committee feel that ways and means should be explored to formulate 
bankable development schemes in consultation with the Ministry of Development 
of North-Eastern Region so that the region as a whole is benefited by such plans/ 
programmes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For development of North Eastern Regi on, CIL’s jurisdiction is confined to 
the mining  areas of North Eastern coalfields (NEC).  The surface area in Makum 
Coalfields has hilly terrain and major par t of the coal deposits are covered under 
thick forest.  As such, exploration in this region is a very difficult and  time 
consuming task.  Total coal reserve in  NE Region has been estimated at about 
909  MT, which is only 0.38 % of the total c oal reserve of the Country. Due to the 
difficulties of the mining oper ation, the cost of operati on in NEC is very high. 
Presently three underground mines and two open cast mines are in operation 
there.  Due to various constraints for starting new projects, NEC did not have any 
new scheme for implementation and thus th e amount remained unutilized during 
the previous years.   CIL Board has approved two schemes in March, 
2006,namely Ledo (OCP) and Tikak Extension (O CP) at estimated investment of 
Rs. 7.14 crore and Rs. 2.85 crore respectively during 2006-2007 subject to forest 
and environmental clearance. Activities for implementation of these schemes 
have  started. Rehabilitati on Plan of NEC which is under preparation includes 
these two schemes.  
 
Regarding exploration in NEC, CMPDI and MECL are exploring the region 
for coal resources and target of drilling in  2006-07 in NEC is 3725 M. Investment 
envisaged during the year 2006-07 for promot ional exploration is Rs. 9.8 crore 
(provisional). 
 
[Ministry of Coal   O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF       dated  21.08.2006] 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10, Para No. 7.9) 
 
The Committee observe that rehabili tation/revival plan of NEC was 
formulated and was placed before the CIL Board. However, CIL Board had asked 
for some modifications in the plan and accordingly, CMPDIL was requested to 
submit the revised revival plan. The Committee are dismayed to note that the 
long pending revival of NE C has not been finalized by the CIL as yet. The 
Committee, therefore,  desire the Ministry of Coal/CIL to finalize the revival plan 
without further loss of time.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Steps have been taken to finalize R ehabilitation Plan of NEC at the 
earliest. However, two schemes, namel y Ledo OCP and Tikak Extension OCP  
for enhancement  of coal production in NEC,  which are part of the Rehabilitation 
Plan, have been approved by CIL Board in March, 2006. Action has been 
initiated for obtaining Environmental and forestry clearance a nd   to implement 
the schemes.  
 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF       dated  21.08.2006] 
 
 

CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE  
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.11, Para No. 8.6) 
 
The Committee note that Coal Indi a Limited (CIL) has been facing 
difficulties in the implementation of Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) Policy 
as different provisions for employment  under R&R schemes  are in vogue in 
different states.  The Committee feel that unless this anomalous situation is 
corrected, CIL will not be abl e to implement R & R to the satisfaction of the 
affected people in all regions. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to 
hold consultations with the concerned State Governments and other agencies 
and come out with a central legislative measures to address the issue  evolving a 
uniform and consistent R & R policy for t he entire country. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within one month 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India  Limited ( CIL) has a  Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) 
Policy which is uniformly  applied in all subsidiaries. However, the policy has a 
provision that in  the matter of employment,  where there is State Policy  stipulating 
norms for  employment, the same  shall be  applied. With a view  to evolve a more 
liberal policy which sustains income to Project Affected Persons (PAPs), CIL has 
prepared a revised R&R Policy which  was deliberated by Committee of 
Secretaries in a meeting chaired by t he Cabinet Secretary where  the following 
decisions were taken: 
 
(i) The existing National Poli cy on R&R should be adopted by all 
Ministries/ Departments and there is  no need to have a separate 
policy by any Ministry in this regard; 
 
(ii) CIL should negotiate and effectiv ely engage the State Governments 
to evolve a working arrangement  to  resolve the demands for 
providing employment to PAPs; 
 
(iii) In view of the great demand fo r jobs the companies can offer some 
jobs depending on the availability of vacancies. However, this would 
be additionality and would not form part  of the mandatory obligation 
of the  Government in the policy; 
 
(iv) The proposal for entering into a long-term lease with landowners 
instead of transfer the title woul d be examined by CIL and may be 
implemented with  appropr iate safeguards. 

 
The  Ministry of Rural Development, D epartment of Land Resources is also  
undertaking review  of  National Policy  on Resettlement and Rehabilitation – 2003( 
NPRR –2003 ). Hence  further action  on the issue of R & R Policy would  be taken 
in the light of revised National Policy on R & R once it is in place. 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF   dated  21.08.2006] 
 

CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT  
OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE  
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation Sl. No.6 (Para No. 5.19) 
  
The Committee note that 100 projects  were  identified  to be taken up 
during  10 th Plan period. Out of this,  a total of 67  projects  have already been 
sanctioned and are in different  stages of implementation including 
Makaradhokra-II OC  of Western Coal fields Limited(WCL) which stands 
completed in March  2005. Out of balances 33 projects, only 6 projects are likely 
to be completed  during 10th Plan. The reasons  adduced for the  delays involved  
in the  projects and  rescheduling  the completion time are not convincing . The 
Committee have taken note of the existenc e  of an elaborate, cumbersome and 
time consuming monitoring  and appraisal  system  right from project level to 
Ministry level for he implementation of the projects. The committee  feel that 
monitoring  of projects  has  remained  a mere monotonous exercise  without any 
tangible results forthcoming   there fr om. Consequently, inspite of all these  
measures,  the projects are  getting dela yed considerably, a sad  augury for  the 
coal sector. The  Committee  are convin ced  that the projects  are not being 
managed  on sound professional lines, and the Ministry of coal has failed  
miserably in  its duty to act as a  vigilant   facilitator in overcoming the  root cause 
of delays in the projects. 
      
The Committee are well aware about t he major problems viz. acquisition 
of land  and obtaining of various clearances  which are adversely  affecting  the 
progress  of coal projects . Keeping this in view, the Committee  would like to  
emphasize  that there  should be a close  liaison  and  coordination between  the 
Central and various State Government  agencies  and they should work in 
tandem  to identify  and rectify the  nagging bottlenecks. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend  the  Ministry to explore the 
possibility of setting up of a single-window clearances  syst em for the projects in 
order to remove  the hurdles  impending  the advancem ents in coal sector. The 
Committee  would also like to  be apprised  of the status  of all the projects  
identified  and sanctioned / approved  during the 10 th Plan period within three 
months.    
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the committee has been noted  and it is submitted 
that to facilitate various clearances and coordination with the state governments 
regular interactions at highest level are taking place between the senior officers 
of the subsidiary companies concerned and the state government officials. 
However, regarding exploring the possibi lity of setting up of  a single window 
clearance system for approval of  projects it is to be mentioned that there are 

various statutory and regulatory approvals that have to be obtained for R&R, 
forestry, environmental aspect etc. from different agenc ies of the state 
government concerned and central governm ent.  As such the proposed  single 
window clearance system is not feasible.   
 
The details of the status of all projects of CI L identified and approved for 
the X  plan period are shown at Annexure-I. 
 
 
    Status of Other X Plan projects of CIL (CIL/ Subsidiary level Approval) 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF Dated 21.08.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.37 of Chapter-1 of the  Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No. 9.6) 
 
The Committee observe that the operations which CIL conducts  
departmentally have been  found to be relatively  much  more expensive  than 
the operations  conducted  through  outsourcing. T he committee also observes 
that CIL has relatively over avail ability of equipment and when high cost 
equipment are not available to the optimum level, the cost of production goes up 
substantially. Further  due to poor work cu lture, departmental equipments  do not  
work for the number of hours which is ex pected to be done and,  therefore, the 
output in terms of individual  manpower is substantially  le ss than what is  
obtained  through outsourcing. 
 
The Committee feel that the reasons adduced by the Ministry for resorting     
to outsourcing  are grossly unjustifiable. It is a matter  of serious  concern that 
CIL  instead   of putting its own house in order   by making  optimum  use of 
excess equipments  and developing  work culture  of hi gh order  to enhance  the 
productivity has taken recourse  to outsourcing. 
 
The  Committee, therefore,  desire the Ministry to institute  an inquiry to go 
into the depth  for the causes of t he lesser utilization  of equipments and 
deteriorating work  culture in CIL  resu lting  in higher  cost of production and 
apprise  the Committee about the break up of cost  of production, item-wise  as  
compared to the cost of production  thr ough  outsourcing . The  Committee also 
reiterate that an Action Plan  to minimize   outsourcing  and remove  corruption  
be prepared by Ministry / CIL  on unifo rm basis. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard within one month.     
 

Reply of the Government 
 
With a view to improve efficiency & utilization of depar tmental equipment, 
HEMM monitoring cells for continuous mo nitoring of the performance of the 
equipment each for each subsidiary is in place.   This cell/department plans the 
preventive maintenance and rehabilitation programme. 
 
  Ministry of coal, thro ugh an expert committee has  reviewed the norms of 
HEMM utilization and availability and a dec ision has been made to plan all the 
open cast mines on 330 days working a year  basis instead of 300 days working.  
Accordingly all the new opencast mines are being planned for 330 days working 
with revised norms of utilization of HEMM.   In addition to this coal companies are 
entering into Annual Maint enance Contracts (AMCs) with Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs).  For regular  supply of spare parts depot supply 
agreements are also being enter ed into by the coal com panies with the OEMs.   
To avoid loss of time, measures like hot seat change is also being adopted in 
various projects for HEMM operators.  GPS based truck despatch system have 
also been commissioned in major opencast mines for efficient monitoring of 
movement of HEMM.  As a result of these measures there has been 
improvement in utilization and availability of HEMM as  furnished in the table 
below: 
 
Major HEMM – Performance of CIL 
 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
HEMM % 
Availability 
% 
utilization
% 
Availability
% 
utilization
% 
Availability 
% 
utilization
Shovel 70 44 70 46 72 48 
Dumper 63 33 62 35 64 36 
Dozer 60 26 60 27 63 27 
Drill 69 25 69 27 73 30 
Dragline 86 80 87 81 85 78 
 
Regarding outsourcing, it is to mention that certain activities of coal 
production in some of the coal mines of CIL subsidiary companies are being 
undertaken by hiring of equipments.  Outsourcing of operations is aimed at 
achieving better economics creating quick a dditional capacity of coal production, 
avoiding initial investment, reducing cost  of operations and developing isolated 
patches which are not otherwise economical.  Going by the trend of the day 
government has been sancti oning new projects with outsourcing option mainly 
from economic and operational consideration.  Thus, the scope of outsourcing is 
increasing and there is no programme to minimize outsourcing.    
 
Item-wise Break up of estimated unit co st of production for 3 recently 
approved OC Mines with Departmental variant as well as with outsourcing variant 
(both Coal & OB Removal outsourced)  is as below: 
 

Bhubaneshwari OC 
Sl,No.  Particulars Departmental 
Variant (Rs/t) 
Both Coal & OB 
outsourced variant 
(Rs/t) 
1. Salaries,Wages & Benefits 25.60 14.48 
2.  Stores 58.30 17.76 
3. Power 15.03 11.04 
4.  Misc.exp. incl. W/s debits 17.06 12.37 
5. Admn. Charges 31.40 31.40 
6. Int. on working cap  @   15.50% 7.62 4.50 
7. Int. on loan cap @ 12.50% 0.00 0.00 
8. Depreciation 46.37 20.87 
9. Impact on land reclamation 4.02 4.02 
10. OB cost Rs/cum./ OB contr. @ Rs. 
51.00/cum 
 34.27 
11,  Interest. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50%  1.77 
12. Transportation cost (face- 3-4 Km)  24.80 
13. Interest on working capital  1.28 
 All inclusive cost 205.40 178.55 
 
Kaniah OCP 
Sl,No.  Particulars Departmental 
Variant 
(Rs/t) 
Both Coal & OB 
outsourced variant 
(Rs/t) 
1. Salaries,Wages & Benefits 38.16 22.44 
2.  Stores 77.41 21.69 
3. Power 14.81 9.26 
4.  Misc.exp. incl. W/s debits 17.91 10.91 
5. Admn. Charges 31.40 31.40 
6. Int. on working cap  @   15.50% 9.28 4.94 
7. Int. on loan cap @ 12.50%  0.00 
8. Depreciation 47.22 15.80 
9. Impact on land reclamation 8.10 8.10 
10. OB contr. @ Rs. 51.00/cum  43.25 
11  Int. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50%  2.23 
12. Transportation cost (face- 2-3 Km)  23.47 
13. Int. on wkg. Capital 15.50%  1.21 
 All inclusive cost 244.29 194.70 
 

Kulda OC 
Sl,No.  Particulars Departmental 
Variant 
(Rs/t) 
Both Coal & OB 
outsourced variant 
(Rs/t) 
1. Salaries,Wages & Benefits 27.57 13.47 
2.  Stores 72.30 20.10 
3. Power 13.80 6.58 
4.  Misc.exp. incl. W/s debits 20.43 12.24 
5. Admn. Charges 31.40 31.40 
6. Int. on working cap  @   15.50% 8.55 4.33 
7. Int. on loan cap @ 12.50% 0.00 0.00 
8. Depreciation 54.11 21.11 
9. Impact on land reclamation 3.74 3.74 
10.  Int. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50% - 1.36 
11. OB loading & transportation 
contractual 
- 49.55 
12. Transportation cost (surface- 3-4 
KMs) 
12.50 12.50 
13. Transportation cost (face – 2-4 KMs. - 26.29 
14. Int. on wkg. Capital 15.50% 0.65 2.56 
15. Wagon loading cost 4.02 4.02 
16. Int. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50% 0.21 0.65 
17. Int. on wkg. Cap @ 15.50% - 0.21 
 All inclusive cost 249.28 210.09 
 
To bring transparency in the procedure, the Award  of  such  work is either 
done through tendering process or by nomination basis through DGR sponsored                 
Ex-servicemen companies based on normative rates.  
 
Regarding  improving the work culture the following steps have been 
taken by Coal India Limited : - 
 
The issue of  improvement in work culture , production, productivity and 
profitability is regularly discussed in t he meeting of Apex Joint Consultative 
Committee. The suggestion on which c onsensus reached are communicated to 
the subsidiaries for implementation. 
 
Apart from the Apex JCC meetings the Hon’ble MOS (Coal) also held a 
meeting with the trade union leaders and the management on 4 th August, 2005. 
After detailed deliberation the following points were identified for implementation.  
 
1. Adherence to punctuality/timings  of work ;  
2. Limited tiffin break to  half an hour and not beyond; 
3. In case of tiffin-break, t he shift should last 8 ½  hours; 
4. Better work culture/ equipment utilization; 

5. Permitting available surplus workmen/ operator to operate m/c during tiffin 
breaks / hot seat exchange; 
6. In case of absence of an operator, even if an operator of other idle 
machine is available who can handle it, should operate. This should be 
implemented. 
7. Multi-skilled operation 
8. No wild cat strike 
9. No stoppage of work due to accidents etc; 
10. Online attendance 
11. Reduction in number of breaks in a day 
12. Closure of mines / redeployment / VRS 
13.  Drillers to drill more holes/norms of work to be occasionally revised as per 
IED studies; 
14.  Attendance – improvement therein.  
 
The subsidiary companies were requested to discuss the above points in 
their local Joint Consultative Committee fo r facilitating effective implementation. 
The subsidiary companies have taken necessary steps for implementation. 
However, it is continuous process and regular  efforts are made by management 
on continuing basis to bring improvements in the above areas.  
 
The efforts made have yielded fruitful results and Coal India registered 
improvement in production, productivity & profitability during 2005-06. 
 
The issues like introduction of staggered day of rest, multi-skilled working , 
revised scheme for employment of dependant  on compassionate ground etc.  
though discussed in all the six meetings  of Standardization Committee of JBCCI-
VII held during the period from  Sept.’05 to  May’06, so far could not be finalized. 
Efforts are being made for early finalization. 
 
 [Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/11/2006-IF   dated  21.08.2006] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.52 of Chapter-1 of the Report)

 CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
- NIL-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  ANANTH KUMAR 
18 December, 2006                                        Chairman 
27 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)         Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
 
 

 ANNEXURE-I 
 
The details of the status of all projects of CIL identified and approved 
for the X  plan period is as below : 
 
    Status of Other X Plan projects of CIL (CIL/ Subsidiary level Approval) 
 
SL SUB NAME OF 
PROJECT 
  CAPACITY
(MTY) 
CAPITAL 
(RS.CRS) 
PRODN. 
TARGET
06-07 
       
PROJECTS APPROVED BY GOVT. 
       
1 ECL RAJMAHAL EXP OC 6.5 50.08 0.00 
2 CCL ASHOK EXP OC 5.0 471.66 6.05 
3 CCL MAGADH OC 12.0 469.78 0.00 
4 SECL GEVRA EXP OC 13.0 1339.69 13.00 
5 SECL DIPKA EXP OC 10.0 856.59 8.80 
6 MCL BHUBANESWARI OC 10.0 336.68 0.00 
7 MCL KULDA OC 10.0 302.96 0.00 
8 MCL BASUNDHARA 
WEST 
OC 2.4 176.55 2.40 
9 MCL KANIHA OC 3.5 96.18 0.00 
10 NCL AMLOHRI EXP OC 6.0 1352.04 0.00 
11 NCL KRISHNASHILA OC 4.0 789.88 0.00 
12 NCL BLOCK B  OC 3.5 746.04 0.00 
13 SECL KUSMUNDA OC 4.0 360.25 2.80 
13 SUB TOTAL 89.9 7348.380 33.050 
PROJECTS TO BE APPROVED BY GOVT. 
SL SUB NAME OF 
PROJECT 
  CAPACITY
(MTY) 
CAPITAL 
(RS.CRS) 
PRODN. 
TARGET
06-07 
1 NCL KHADIA EXP OC 6.0 1488.57 0.00 
2 ECL JHANJRA LW R-
VI 
UG 1.7 274.26 0.00 
3 ECL CHUPERVITA1 OC 4.0 541.18 0.00 
4 NCL BINA EXT OC 6.0 593.32 0.00 
5 MCL GARJANBAHAL OC 10.0 600.59 0.00 
6 CCL NORTH URIMARI OC 3.0 415.70 1.55 
7 CCL AMRAPALI OC 12.0 1204.94 0.00 
8 ECL HURA OC 3.0 405.29 0.00 
9 MCL TALABERA II&III OC 10.5 786.11 0.00 
10 MCL GOPALPRASAD OC 10.0 697.18 0.00 
       
10   SUB TOTAL 66.2 7007.140 1.550 

 
 
 
  PROJECTS APPROVED BY CIL  
SL SUB NAME OF PROJECT   CAPACITY 
(MTY) 
CAPITAL 
(RS.CRS)
PRODN. 
TARGET
06-07 
1 ECL SARPI AUG UG 0.420 74.07 0.00 
2 ECL JHANJRA AUG UG 0.420 69.28 0.00 
3 ECL KHOTTADIH AUG UG 0.420 60.57 0.00 
4 BCCL DAHIBARI 
BASANTIMATA 
OC 1.300 81.25 0.85 
5 CCL TOPA RO OC 1.200 65.25 0.75 
6 WCL GOURI DEEP OC 0.400 86.22 0.00 
7 WCL KOLGAON OC 0.400 74.97 0.35 
8 WCL DHURWASA OC 0.550 62.74 1.13 
9 WCL MAKARDHOKRA I OC 1.000 39.98 0.00 
10 SECL KHAIRAHA UG 0.585 88.33 0.00 
11 SECL AMADAND OC 1.150 83.39 0.90 
12 SECL VIJAY WEST UG 0.500 63.56 0.00 
13 MCL LINGARAJ EXP OC 5.000 98.89 7.40 
14 MCL LAKHANPUR EXP OC 5.000 98.74 6.00 
15 MCL BHARATPUR EXP II OC 6.000 95.87 8.60 
16 MCL HINGULA EXP II OC 2.000 89.78 5.80 
17 MCL TALCHER WEST UG 0.520 85.08 0.00 
18 MCL JAGANNATH UG 0.670 80.75 0.00 
19 ECL KUMARDIHI B UG 0.420 79.23 0.03 
19   SUB TOTAL 27.955 1477.95 31.81 
       
  PROJECTS APPROVED BY SUBSIDIARY  
 
 
1 ECL BANKOLA R-VI UG 0.240 19.14 0.00 
2 ECL KHANDRA NKJ UG 0.285 18.81 0.00 
3 ECL BANSRA R UG 0.135 13.47 0.12 
4 ECL PARASEA DOBRANA UG 0.160 11.89 0.00 
5 ECL SHANKARPUR UG 0.120 8.13 0.12 
6 ECL SONEPUR BAZARI B OC 1.000 7.12 0.00 
7 ECL NAKRAKONDA B OC 1.000 1.78 0.20 
8 ECL HURA C (PATCH) OC 0.500 0.91 0.00 
9 BCCL SATABDIH OC 0.800 16.83 0.75 
10 BCCL GOLUKDIH NC OC 1.200 12.27 0.05 
11 BCCL DAMODA BJ SECTION OC 0.600 7.78 0.20 
12 BCCL CHAPTORIA OC 0.550 7.12 0.20 
13 NCL AMLOHRI SCHEME OC 0.400 46.93 0.00 
14 NCL JAYANT SUMP OC 0.500 44.85 0.00 

DRIVAGE 
15 NCL KHADIA SCHEME OC 1.000 35.40 0.00 
16 NCL BINA SCHEME OC 1.100 33.01 0.00 
17 WCL SINGHORI OC 0.800 48.72 0.00 
18 WCL YEKONA II OC 0.600 48.05 0.00 
19 WCL MAKARDHOKRA II 
UGTOOC 
OC 0.500 44.62 1.00 
20 WCL URDHAN OC 0.500 43.50 0.04 
21 WCL INDER UGTOOC OC 0.600 38.23 0.34 
22 WCL TAWA II UG 0.390 36.43 0.08 
23 WCL BHANEGAON OC 0.600 30.44 0.00 
24 WCL PAUNI II OC 0.600 28.11 0.00 
25 WCL GONDEGAON EXP. OC 0.750 27.54 0.24 
26 WCL JUNAKUNDA OC 0.600 23.76 0.05 
27 WCL YEKONA I OC 0.400 46.07 0.00 
28 WCL SASTI EXP OC 1.400 16.80 0.00 
 
29 WCL GHONSA OC 0.300 6.99 0.05 
30 WCL NAVINKUNDA EXP OC 0.600 4.24 0.86 
31 SECL HALDI BADI UG 0.420 47.92 0.00 
32 SECL KETKI UG 0.420 46.24 0.00 
33 SECL BINKARA UG 0.360 41.98 0.00 
34 SECL AMERA OC 1.000 41.69 0.60 
35 SECL AMGAON OC 1.000 39.28 0.00 
36 SECL BAROUD EXP OC 1.000 28.02 2.00 
37 SECL SARAIPALY OC 1.400 22.82 0.12 
38 SECL CHHAL OC 1.000 19.99 0.75 
39 SECL MAHAN II OC 1.000 37.45 0.00 
40 MCL BELPAHAR EXP OC 1.500 35.47 1.50 
41 MCL JAGANNATH EXT OC 4.000 4.71 4.50 
       
41   SUB TOTAL 31.330 1094.510 13.770 
       
  X PLAN PROJECTS - YET TO BE APPROVED - STATUS AS ON 
JUNE-06 
  PROJECTS TO BE APPROVED BY CIL  
1 ECL NABAKAJORA UG 0.300 50.70 0.00 
2 ECL SIDULI UG 0.300 51.30 0.00 
3 BCCL YAMUNA OC 1.500 22.02 0.00 
4 BCCL CONT.MINER BLOCK II UG 0.450 71.71 0.00 
5 BCCL CONT.MINER SM-IV 
DHANSAR 
UG 0.450 62.77 0.00 
6 BCCL BLOCK III (NC) OC 1.000 25.00 0.00 
6   SUB TOTAL 4.000 283.500 0.000 
  PROJECTS TO BE APPROVED BY COMPANY 

1 CCL KARO OC 3.500 96.53 1.40 
2 CCL KONAR OC 3.500 74.53 0.25 
3 WCL BHATADIH EXP OC 0.500 74.29 0.33 
4 WCL WAGHODA UG 0.390 55.15 0.00 
5 WCL KOLARPIMPRI DEEP OC 1.500 97.83 0.00 
6 WCL DURGAPUR DEEP EXT OC 2.000 59.00 0.00 
7 WCL JUNAD DEEP OC 0.600 51.62 0.00 
8 MCL JAGANNATH WEST UG 0.520 81.38 0.00 
8   SUB TOTAL 12.510 590.330 1.980 
     
97 
Projects 
Grand Total CIL : 231.895 17801.81 82.16 
 

ANNEXURE-II 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE 11TH REPORT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 10,   Para No. 5.7) 
 
 The Committee had recommended that since the existing system of 
linkage to non-core medium and small consumers had not been functioning 
satisfactorily, it was needed to be re viewed thoroughly. The Ministry has 
reiterated its stand that besides sale of coal through e-auction to non-core sector, 
coal is also being distributed to sma ll and tiny consumer s through National 
Cooperative Consumers Federation( NCCF) and State Government 
Undertakings. The Committee are distressed to note that the share of coal to 
non-core sector in total dispatch of Co al India Limited has declined from about 
9% to 5% over the last five years. The Committee feel that th e sale of coal to 
non-core sector through e-auction has not yielded the desired results. The small 
and medium consumers, if at all, they succeed in getting coal supply through e-
auction are bound to get the same at higher price thus, putting them at a 
disadvantageous position due to inherent flaws of the e-auctioning. Besides, a 
large number of small and medium c onsumers do not have equal access to 
computer/internet thus rendering the e-auction process discriminatory. The 
Committee, therefore, reit erate their earlier recomm endation that the system of 
linkage including e-au ctioning to non-core small a nd medium sector consumers 
should be reviewed thoroughly so as to facili tate the availability of coal to all 
consumers. The Committee also desir e that wherever the Fuel Supply 
Agreement have been ent ered into with the consumers,  these should strictly be 
adhered to. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The concern of the Committee has been duly noted and Coal availability 
to the non-core sector consumers is being endeavoured to be increased.  Validly 
linked consumers continue to draw coal on the basis of Maximum Permissible 
Quantity(MPQ) of their past linkages on the average weighted e-auction price of 
preceding month.   
 
 In addition, Govt. has earmarked 5 mill ion tonnes of coal per annum to be 
distributed to small and tiny consum ers through State Govt. nominated 
undertakings and M/s NCCF at floor price representing 120% of the notified price 
of that grade of coal. Coal India Limi ted has clarified to the distributing 
undertakings & NCCF that supply should be only to registered small and tiny 
consumers whose requirements do not exceed 500 tonnes per annum.   
 
 The e-marketing was introduced in CIL during the year 2005-06. It was 
decided  initially to sell  10 million tonnes of coal by CIL subsidiaries through e-
marketing for the year 2005-06 on tria l basis which was subsequently enhanced 
to 20 million tonnes based on encouraging response from the consumers. 

 
 During the year 2006-07, the Govern ment has allowed CIL to sell 36 
million tonnes of coal  through E – Marketing,  subject to review after 6 month. 
 
 Fuel Supply Agreements wherever  existing, are being adhered to as 
desired by the Standing Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M. No. 20011/5/2005-IFD/ (Vol V), dated 29.05.2006] 
  
Recommendation (Sl No. 11,  Para No. 5.8) 
 
 The Committee had recommended that 2000 odd linked coal consumers 
should be inspected by physical verification  by the Vigilance De partment of coal 
companies in order to weed out the bogus consumers.  The Mi nistry has stated 
that a verification drive of non-core se ctor industries had been initiated during 
December, 2004 and the same is under proc ess.  The Committee is concerned 
to note that the verification drive of a ll non-core sector industries which was 
started in December, 2004 has not been co mpleted even after the lapse of one 
year which is a reflection of seriousnes s and sincerity on the part of the 
Ministry/Coal India Limited.  The Committee, therefore, desir e the Ministry of 
Coal/CIL to chalk out a time bound programme for verification of remaining linked 
consumers.  The Committee would like to  be apprised of the progress in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The verification process initiated by coal companies is an on going 
process, which the companies resort to on a random basis from time to time.  In 
the beginning of this nation- wide campaign during De cember, 2001, there were 
around 7000 non-core consumers who were  having linkage.  Coal companies 
had issued notices to all the linked non- core consumers and requested the State 
Govts. to conduct the verification and fu rnish a report.  Those units whose 
verification report was found positive continue to receive coal and those 
consumers whose report was found in  negative, got their linkage 
snapped/suspended.  As on 1. 11.2005, a total number of  2706 non-core valid 
linked consumers have been verified by coal subsidiaries of CIL. After 
verifications, supplies to 1073 uni ts have been suspended/snapped and only 
1633 units continue to receive coal. 
 
 
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 20011/5/2005-IFD/ (Vol V), dated 29.05.2006] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 14, Para No. 7.9) 
 
 
 The Committee had recommended that th e system of captive coal mining 
might be thoroughly review ed and remedial measures taken and had also 
desired that further allotment  of captive coal blocks should be put on hold and 
new allotments considered only after the system was fine tuned and existing 
allotments were reviewed.  The Committee are distressed to note that the 
Ministry’s aim seem to be allocating t he coal blocks for captive end use and not 
on early production of coal therefrom.  The Committee are extremely unhappy 
that the Ministry in utter disregard to  the recommendation of the Committee has 
gone ahead and allotted news captive coal  blocks instead of reviewing the 
existing system of captive coal mining.  The Committee, theref ore, reiterate that 
the Ministry should thoroughly review its pol icy in regard to allotment of captive 
coal blocks and take remedial measures.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for non-compliance of their recommendations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It may be stated that considering t he large number of applications per 
block and the decreasing number of blocks available with progressive allocation, 
the Ministry of Coal felt that the pr esent system of alloca tion of coal blocks 
through Screening Committee pr ocess   of selection needs to be reviewed and 
made more objective and transparent.  T herefore, a proposal to introduce a 
competitive bidding process of selecti on as a comparatively more transparent 
and objective process to address the probl em was considered and accordingly a 
meeting of the stakeholders,  industry representatives, representatives of the 
concerned Central Ministries was hel d under the Chairmanship of the then 
Secretary (Coal) on 28.06.2004 to ascert ain the feed-back of  the industries on 
the same.  Following the same, the Ministry of Coal made efforts to introduce the 
competitive bidding process through a Go vernment decision and therefore since 
28.06.2004, no Screening Committee meetings were held till November, 2005.   
 
 In the meantime, there was increasin g pressure from various sectors of 
industries on the Ministry to consider their pending applications in view of 
shortage of coal in the country.  Faced with  the said situation and in view of the 
fact that introduction of competitive bidding process would take time as it 
required amendment to the Coal Mines (Nationalisa tion) Act, 1973, it was 
decided by the Government to clear the backlog of pending applications received 
up to 28.06.2004.  Accordingly, allocations  were decided in th e matter in respect 
of applications received up to 28.06.2004. 
 

 The Ministry has been equally concer ned to see that the blocks allocated 
were brought to production on priority.    In order to ensure this, the following 
measures were taken:- 
i) Coal Controller’s orga nization was asked to monitor the progress of 
coal blocks on six monthly bases. 
 
ii) A system of quarterly review in the Ministry at the level of Additional 
Secretary (Coal) with r epresentative from other Ministries /State 
Governments was introduced to review the progress in the 
development of coal mines as well as the end use projects. 
 
iii) Specific milestones were set with time frame for completion of 
various activities connected with development of captive blocks.  
 
iv) It was decided to issue Geological Reports at a nominal price   in 
order to facilitate preparation of mining plan. 
 
v) It was also decided that financial closure in respect of   end use 
project should be insisted upon at the time of mine opening 
permission. 
 
vi) A system of obtaining bank guar antee was introduced in order to 
ensuring timely development of mines.  If the actual production falls 
short of targeted production as  per the approved mining plan, 
appropriate deduction is effected fr om the bank guarantee.  If the 
guarantee is exhausted on account  of continuous shortfall in 
production, the coal blocks is liabl e to deallocated/ mining lease to 
be cancelled.  
 
 Since the introduction of competitiv e bidding system was likely to take 
time, and there was constant demand for al lotment of new blocks, it was decided 
further to invite applications from interested companies for allocation of 28 fully 
explored coal blocks identified for the pur pose.   The system of allocation of 
blocks was reviewed again at this stage.    In order to bring in more transparency 
and objectivity in the system, it was dec ided to invite applications through a 
public notice, which was publ ished in the national news papers as well as on the 
Ministry’s website.  A detailed applic ation form was designed so that more 
comprehensive information could be obtai ned about the applicant company as 
well its end use project for which coal/lignite   block is sought.   This will facilitate 
a more objective appraisal to determine the inter se  priority amongst the 
applicants. 
 
 The proposal for introduction of compet itive bidding system is also under 
active consideration of the Government.  
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M. No. 20011/5/2005-IFD/ (Vol V), dated 29.05.2006] 

 
Recommendation   ( Sl. No. 22,  Para 9.4 ) 
 
 The Committee were deeply concer ned at the burning problem of 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) in Coal India Limited (CIL) and other coal 
companies and had recommended that the company–wise programme  might be 
chalked  out for solving the  R & R problems on a top priority basis. The 
Committee had also desired  for  early   clearing  of   ba cklog  of  compensation  
cases   by  evolving   a uniform criteria for payment of compensation and 
earmarking adequate funds in this regard.  The Ministry in its reply, had stated 
that the R & R policies  followed by the subsidiaries  have been evolved over a 
period and undergone numerous changes  in response to changing  
circumstances.  The Ministry has further stated  that the amendment in existing R 
& R policy, in tune with the National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation 
(NPRR) 2003,  increasing trust on mechanization as well as competitiveness and 
problems of surplus manpower in some of the subsidiaries is under consideration 
of the Ministry.  The Committee are extr emely dissatisfied wit h the reply of the 
Ministry which shows little concern for the and losers by harping on its old stand. 
The Committee reiterate that the land losers must be adequately compensated 
within the reasonable time period by prov iding them some permanent source of 
income.  The Committee also desire that  backlog in this  regard should be 
cleared in a time bound manner.  Th e Committee hope that the proposed 
amendment in R & R policy wo uld protect the interest s and promote the welfare 
of land losers and Project Affected People. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R & R)  of Project Affected Persons in 
coalfield is a continuous process. Compensat ion of land is inva riably paid before 
physical possession of land, on the basis of uniform criteria as given below: 
  
(i) Market value on  the  date of noti fication under section 4 (1) of  the 
Act. 
 
(ii) Solatium in addition to market value of land @ 30%. 
 
(iii) An escalation @ 12% per annum of the market value of the land for 
the period commencing on the date of notification under section 
4(1) till date  of notif ication under section 9 (1) of the Act  or a 
maximum period of 3 years, whichever is earlier. 
 
(iv) Interest @ 9% per annum for the first year after the date of 
notification under section    9 (1) and @ 15% per annum thereafter 
on the amount of compens ation including solatium till the payment 
is made.   In case where comp ensation is determined on the basis 
of  negotiation, as per provision of section 14( 1) of CBA Act, 1957, 

allowing 30% solatium over and abov e the fair market price, no 
payment  towards escalation or interest is paid as the price being 
paid is not the market price on the date of  notification under 
section 4(1) but the market price on the date of negotiation. 
 
  Compensation for land acquired under Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is 
assessed by Land Acquisition Department of the State Govt. in accordance with 
the provisions of Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
 
           Similarly, R &R is also done in accordance with R&R Policy of Coal India 
Limited. However demand for employment  is a serious problem as coal 
companies are not in position to offe r more jobs. However, efforts are  
continuously made to resolve the R&R issues in consultation with State 
Government. 
 
 
[Ministry of Coal  O.M. No. 20011/5/2005-IFD/ (Vol V), dated 29.05.2006] 
 
 

 
 ANNEXURE  III 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2006-07) HELD ON 14th DECEMBER 2006 IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM ‘A’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1700 hrs. to 1730 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Karuna Shukla – In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj G.Ahir 
3.  Shri D.K.Audikesavulu 
4.  Shri Chandra Shekhar Dubey 
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
6. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
7. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
9. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
10. Shri Surendra Lath 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
13. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
14. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.       Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh  - Director 
3. Shri Shiv Singh - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. Since the Chairman could not att end the meeting, t he Members of the 
Committee requested Smt. Karuna Shukla to  preside over the meeting under 
Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
 
3. At the outset, Chairperson, welcom ed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft 

Reports on Demands for Grant s (2006-07) of the Minist ries of Coal, Mines and 
Steel:- 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fifteenth   Report (Fourteenth  Lok Sabha) of the Standing  Committee 
on Coal and Steel (2005-06) on “Dem ands for Grants (2006-07)” of the 
Ministry of Coal.  
 
(ii) **  **  **  **  ** 
(iii)     **  **  **  **  ** 
 
4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor 
additions/deletions/ amendments. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairm an to finalise these Reports after 
making consequential change arising out of factual verification by the concerned 
Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________. 
**Do not pertain to this Report.

ANNEXURE- IV  
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made     12 
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,  7, 8, 9 and 10) 09 
 
Percentage of total        75 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committ ee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies 
        
(vide recommendation at S1. No. 11)     01 
    
Percentage of total        08 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of whic h replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee       
 
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 6 and 12)    02 
 
Percentage of total        17 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of whic h final replies of the Government  
are still awaited  
 
(vide recommendation at Sl. No.)      NIL 
 
 Percentage of total        NIL 