 
11 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2005-2006) 
 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2005-2006)  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighth  
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
ELEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2005 / Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 

ELVENTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL 
(2005-2006) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2005-2006)  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighth  
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.12.2005 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on  22.12.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2005 / Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 
 

CC&S No. 12  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.24.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110005. 

CONTENTS 
  
 
              
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………………. 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………... …………………………………………. (v) 
 
CHAPTER I 
  
Report   ………………………………………………….. 
 
1 
   
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ………………………… 
 
18
  
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies…………………………………….
 
 
39
  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee…………………………… 
 
 
44
  
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of   which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited……... 
 
48
  
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal  
and Steel (2005-06) held on 21st    December, 2005…………………   52 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal  
and Steel (2004-05)………………………………………………………  54 
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
   
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2005-06)          
 
Shri Ananth Kumar   - Chairman  
  
Members 
            
           Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey  
6. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
7. Shri Sunil Khan 
8. Shri  Faggan Singh Kulaste 
9. Shri Nitish Kumar 
10. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam 
11. Shri  Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta 
12. Shri Hemlal Murmu 
13. Shri Anirudh Pras ad Alias Sadhu Yadav 
14. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste 
15. Shri E. Ponnuswamy 
16. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
17. Smt. Karuna Shukla 
18. Shri Prabhunath Singh 
19. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
20. Shri Ramsewak Singh (Babuji) 
21. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Devdas Apte 
23. Shri Ramadhar Kashyap 
24. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 

25. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad 
26. Shri B.J.Panda 
27. Shri G.K.Vasan 
28. Dr. Swami Sakshi Ji Maharaj 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Secretary 
2. Shri A.K.Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Singh  - Director 
4. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri B.D.Dhyani  - Sr. Com. Assistant  
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present th e Report on their behalf, present this 
Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee 
on Coal and Steel  on “Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Coal”.  
 
2.  The Eighth  Report on the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 26.4.2005. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 25.7.2005.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 21.12. 2005.   
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Eighth Report  of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    ANANTH KUMAR, 
21 December, 2005                                                Chairman, 
 30  Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 

CHAPTER -I  
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with  Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report  (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Coal and St eel on “Demands for Grants (2005-06) 
of the Ministry of Coal” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 26.4.2005.    
 
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorised as follows:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
   
Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 and 24.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Sl.Nos.8 and 19.  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee :  
 
SI. Nos. 10 and 14. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:     
 
   Sl.Nos. 11 and 22.   
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations  accepted by the Government. In 
case, where it is not possible for the Government to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit fo r any reasons, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation.  
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their Recommendations/Observations made in the Eighth Report. 

 
(A) Under Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations 
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.14) 
 
1.5 The Committee noted that the annual plan outlay of the Ministry of Coal 
for the year 2005-06 had been kept at Rs.4 ,001.40 crore as compared to budget 
estimate of Rs.3,339.02 crore and Revised Estimate(RE) of Rs.2,629.35 crore in 
2004-05. The Committee further noted that t he outlays of Coal India Ltd.(CIL), 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd.(SCCL) and Neyveli Lignite Corporation 
Ltd.(NLC) were drastically downsiz ed at the RE stage during 2004-05. The 
Committee were dismayed that the actual utilization of funds had been much less 
than the outlay approved at RE stage. The Committee were pained to find the 
same reasons advanced by the Ministry year after year for low utilization, viz. 
delay in approval of new projects, delay in acquisi tion of both forest and non-
forest land, delay in rehabilitation of villages, delay in procurement of equipments 
and many projects being operated with outsourcing.  
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Gove rnment has stated that in Coal India 
Limited. The actual exp enditure for 2004-05 is provis ionally estimated to be 
Rs.1170.26 crore. The act ual expenditure as percent age of budget provision for 
the year 2004-05 ranges from  above 100% to a level of below 50% across the 
subsidiaries of CIL. Desp ite the best attempts the ut ilization was around 62% of 
revised estimates. Analysis of RE vis-à-vi s actual utilization reveals that while 
WCL has surpassed their budgeted outlay, CCL having achieved almost 94% 
level, ECL, SECL & MCL achieving t he 68%, 64% & 56% respectively, the 
utilization had been around 43% & 36% for NCL  & BCCL respectively. It may be 
noted that NCL which operat es only opencast mines, has  expenditure on Heavy 
Earth Moving Machines(HEMM) as its majo r constituent of capital expenditure. 
Combination of various factors like c ourt cases, change in procurement policy 
and revision of HEMM productivity norms re sulted in considerab ly low utilization 
of HEMM budget and overall utilization of c apital budget. In case of BCCL, delay 
in project implementation coupled with the problems of HEMM procurement due 
to court case had been the major reasons for lower utilization. In case of other 
subsidiaries like ECL, SECL & MCL the utilization had been to a satisfactory level 
for the former two subsidiaries while in case of MCL, the major reason for low 
expenditure had been delay in  implementation of new pr ojects due to delay in 
approval. 
 

1.7 In respect of NLC,  Budget provisions made for new projects like Mine II 
Expansion, Thermal Power Station(TPS) II Expansion and Barsingsar Mine cum- 
Power Projects could not be utilised due to  delay in obtaining sanctions from the 
Government. Provisions made for TPS I Expansion could not be utilised as the 
matter is still under arbitration. Out of t he total outlay of Rs. 267.00 crore for RE 
2004-05 Rs.219.01 crore were provided fo r Mine II and TPS II Expansion and 
Barsingsar Mine-cum Power Projects. Proj ected outlay is essentially to meet 
preliminary expenses, preparation of deta iled feasibility report,  hydrological 
studies, Topo survey, EMP Report and advance payments.  The short fall in 
expenditure has  mostly occurred in Mine II/ TPS II Exp. and Barsingsar Mine –
cum-Power Projects. This is mainly due to delay in project sanction. The projects 
like Mine II expansion, TPS II expansio n and Barsingsar Mine-cum- Power 
Project at Rajasthan were in the process of  sanction for the last three years. For 
Mine II expansion and  TPS II expansion Projects government  accorded 
sanction in October, 2004 and for Barsin gsar Mine cum-Power Project sanction 
was given by the government  in December, 2004. As the projects have been 
sanctioned, expenditure progress is expected to be high in future periods.   
 
1.8 In Singareni Collieries  Company Ltd.,  out of Revised Estimate of Rs.275 
crore in 2004-05, actual ex penditure was Rs. 245 crore.  The main reasons for 
less utilisation of funds are  delay in procurement of open cast mines equipments 
for three projects due to delay in getting forest land and delay in getting revenue 
land for housing and hospital projects in one of the coalfields. 
 
  Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para No. 2.15) 
 
1.9 The Committee were surprised to note t he reply of the Ministry that it was 
very difficult to ensure full utilizati on of budget allocations because many 
activities on which fund utilization depends were beyond the control of coal 
PSUs. The Committee need not emphasis  t hat the Ministry ought not shun its 
responsibilities but take steps, viz. simplification of pr ocedure for project 
approval, secure support from the State Governments in matters of land 
acquisition, the rehabilitation of villages  and removal of im pediments in the 
process of procurement of equipments that would help increase utilization of 
funds. The Committee had serious reservations  about the passive role played by 
the Ministry in not overcoming these problems faced by coal PSUs eventually 
leading to under-utilization of the funds.  
 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3,  Para No. 2.16) 
 
1.10 The Committee, therefore, opined that the budget -making mechanism in 
the Ministry lacked vision and optimism. The under-utilization of funds by the coal 
companies could not be cons idered prudent at a time when investment was of 
paramount importance in view of the need to accelerate the coal production. The 
Committee expected the Ministry to intr ospect and take concrete measures in 
view of the financial implications and losses being suffered on account of less 
investment/ under-utilization and consequent lower production of coal. 
 
1.11 The Government has stated that t he growth in coal production has not 
been hampered due to lower utilisation of  funds.  The coal production has 
increased as compared to the previous years.  In the y ear 2004-05, CIL has 
surpassed the target of 314 million tonne(mt) by producing 323.62 mt.  and they 
expect to achieve more than the target  of coal production during the year 2005-
06.  Thus low utilization of Internal  and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) has 
been overcome through integrated organizati onal effort and its manifestation is 
observed in terms of quantum leap over last few years. 
 
1.12 In NLC, there has not been under utilization of funds which resulted in 
poor physical and financia l performance.  NLC does not draw any budgetary 
support from Government of India.  Al l the projects are funded by internal 
accruals and commercial borrowings.  Se parate Project Officers are posted to 
co-ordinate and monitor all the project re lated activities.  A separate Project 
Monitoring Wing constantly monitors the progress on day-to-day basis.  Issues 
are sorted out at appropriate levels to  ensure smooth implementation of the 
projects. 
 
1.13 SCCL is constantly  pursuing issues pertaining to  acquisition of forest and 
non-forest land  for upcoming mines like Kh airagura OCP, Sathupalli OCP,  RG. 
OCP-I expansion, MNG OC.III etc.  
 
1.14 During 2004-05, t hough an amount of Rs.245 crore is  spent out of RE of  
Rs. 275 crore,  the production of coal  is 35.302 MT which  exceeded the target 
of 35 MT. The under utilization of funds did not affect the production of coal at all.   
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.17) 
 
1.15 The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Coal should revamp 
and strengthen its Budget Divis ion and ensure preparation of realistic budgetary 
proposals. The Committee were extrem ely concerned about the under-utilization 
of funds year after year and, ther efore, recommended that a High Level 
Monitoring Committee might be set up to  review the monthly progress of the 
utilization of funds and to take corrective measures.  
 

1.16 In their Action Taken Reply, the Government has stated that the budget 
making procedure in PSUs passes through several stages right from seeking 
mine/project level proposals to macro leve l issues like future investments in 
mines.  Rigorous follow up action is done  by senior officers  of PSUs.  
Procurement action is initiated well in adv ance and  constantly pursued so that 
the envisaged expenditure gets materialized in the same financial year. Separate 
project officers are posted to co-ordi nate and monitor all the project related 
activities.  A separate project monitoring wing constantly monitors the progress 
on day to day basis. Issues are shorted out at appropriate levels to ensure 
smooth implementation of the projects. 
 
1.17 As far as the Ministry is concer ned, no funds are provided to coal PSUs 
and the funds for the projects are met by the PSUs out of  their  Internal and 
Extra-Budgetary Resources (IEBR). The IEBR proposals of the PSUs are strictly 
scrutinized by the Ministry as per the gu idelines of Ministry of Finance before 
getting the approvals of Ministry of Fi nance and Planning Commission. All efforts 
are made to ensure that no inflated pl an outlays which may pose problems for 
actual expenditure or lower plan outla ys which may affect the progress of the 
PSUs are proposed to the Ministry of Finance. 
 
1.18 Ministry of Coal reviews the progre ss of on-going projects of Rs.100 crore 
and above on quarterly basis under the C hairmanship of Secretary (Coal) in 
Quarterly Performance Review (QPR) meet ing.  Representativ es from Planning 
Commission, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Department 
of Expenditure are also invited in this meeting. Besides, Secretary (Coal) also 
monitors the progress of the projects at his own level by calling fortnightly reports 
from the coal companies.    
 
 
1.19 Since there had been under utilisat ion of funds year after year by 
coal PSUs under the Ministry of Coal, the Committee had recommended 
that the Ministry should revamp a nd strengthen its Budget Division to 
ensure preparation of realistic budgetary proposals  and set up a High 
Level Monitoring Committee to revi ew the monthly progress of the 
utilisation of funds apar t from taking the other co rrective measures.  The 
Ministry in its reply has informed that the budget making procedure in 
PSUs passes through several stages right  from seeking mine/project level 
approval to macro level issues like future investments in mines. The 
Ministry has further stated that the overall fund utilisati on in CIL has been 
around 62% of revised estimates. Wh ereas Western Coalfields Limited 
surpassed their budgeted outlay, Central Coalfields Limited  have achieved 
almost 94% level.  The other subsid iaries – ECL, SECL, MCL, NCL and 
BCCL could utilize 68%, 64%, 56%, 43% and 36% funds respectively. The 
Ministry has further informed that  though high level Monitoring Committee 
has not been set up, their  monito ring wing  constantly monitor the 
progress on day-to-day basis. In addition, the ongoi ng projects worth 

Rs.100 crore and above ar e reviewed at quarterly  meetings chaired by 
Secretary (Coal).  
 
     The Committee are extremely surprised to note that despite  a 
number of stages at which the project  proposals are scrutinized, neither 
the budget proposals are realistic nor th e fund utilisation is satisfactory 
apart from the delays in completion of pr ojects.  It is quite evident from the 
fact that the actual expenditure duri ng 2004-05 has been Rs.1,170.26 crore, 
in respect of Coal India Limited,  which is much less than the budget 
estimates of Rs. 3,339.02 crore  later revised to Rs.2,629.35 crore at RE 
stage.  The Committee feel that despite all the Coal PSUs facing same 
bottlenecks, it was commendable for Western Coalfields Limited to surpass 
their budgeted outlay and Central Coal fields Limited  to achieve 94% 
utilisation.  The Committee entirely di sagree with the view s of the Ministry 
that the growth in coal production has not been hampered due to lower 
utilisation of funds.  The Committe e are of the view that had the 
Ministry/Coal PSUs utilized the entire budget estimates during the 
preceding years, the production would have been much higher.   The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended precisely for these reasons for 
setting up of a High Level Monitoring Co mmittee to review the progress of 
various projects since the existing m echanism  has failed to improve the 
fund utilisation.  The Committee desire the Ministry to introspect and to 
revamp the Project Monitoring Wing in the Ministry/Coal PSUs  to ensure 
full utilisation of the budgetary allo cations and to implement various 
projects as per schedule.   
 
(B) Adequate provision of funds for Underground Mines 
 
 Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No. 3.24) 
 
1.20 The Committee noted that the ratio of coal production between 
underground and opencast coal mines was not very ideal. A huge number of 
underground mines (305 underground mines) at present, produced about 30% of 
coal as against 70% produced by opencas t mines. The Committee further noted 
that an investment of Rs . 679.37 crore would be required for the mechanization 
and modernization of underground mines out  of which Rs.455.12 crore were 
likely to be spent in the Tenth Plan period and the rest in Eleventh Plan. With the 
proposed mechanization, it was expected that there would be an over-all 
improvement and the production from underground mines of Coal India 
Limited(CIL) would increase by about 4.5 million tonne per annum. The 
Committee were of the opinion that t he country had huge untapped potential for 
underground mining with extrac table reserves up to the depth of 600 metre. 
Presently, the mining was being done predominantly by opencast method but the 
reserves available in opencast were fast  depleting. The Committee felt that 
mechanization and modernization of underground mining had become imperative 
in view of their huge potential to boost the production of coal to bridge the gap 

between demand and supply to a large extent. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the Ministry of Coal sh ould not only earmark more funds for 
underground mines but also ensure that the schemes for the mechanization and 
modernization of mines initiated during Tenth Plan were completed in the Tenth 
Plan itself. 
 
 
1.21 The Government has stated that in  order to meet the ever increasing 
demand for coal for the  Power Sector, emphasis in production from Open Cast  
Mines of CIL will  continue,  as with this  method  it is  possible to achieve high 
production with a very  low gestation period. 
 
1.22 However, CIL  appreciates  the nec essity of tapping the potential for under 
ground mines. With that in view a plan  for mechanization/modernization of  
existing under ground mines, wherever  feasible, has already been in place.  
During the last 3 years, 224 nos. of Side Discharge Loaders (SDLs) have been 
introduced in various  under ground mines of CIL . During 2006-07 i.e. terminal  
year of the 10 th plan another 146 SDLs are expecte d to be introduced. Similarly 
during the Xth Plan, 78 nos. of LHDs have al ready been introduced and 21 more 
Load Haul Dumpers (LHDs) are likely to be  added. Contribution  of  mechanized 
production in the overall  under ground production  has been steadily  increased  
during the last few years.  
 
1.23 Over and above, 2 sets  of conti nuous miners presently in operation  - 1 
each in South Eastern Coalfields Limited  and Western Coalfields Limited, a 
programme has been drawn  up  to intr oduce this technology in 3 mines of 
Eastern Coalfields Limited, 2 mines  of  Bharat Coking C oal Limited, 4  mines  of  
and Western Coalfields Limited, and 7 mines of South Eastern Coalfields Limited   
for which necessary action has already bee n initiated. All out  efforts are being 
made to ensure timely implementation of the projects. 
 
1.24 The Committee had recommended th at the Ministry of Coal should 
not only earmark more funds for underg round mines but also ensure that 
the schemes for the mechanization and modernization of mines which were 
initiated during the Tenth Plan are co mpleted before the end of the plan 
period itself as  the ratio of coal  production between underground and 
opencast mines was not very ideal. The Mi nistry has informed  that a plan 
for mechanization/modernization of existing underground mines, wherever 
feasible has already been in place. The continuous miner technology has 
been introduced in some of the underground mines and a programme has 
been drawn up to introduce this t echnology in some other underground 
mines of coal companies. The Co mmittee find that Coal PSUs have 
introduced latest technologies in some  of their underground mines which 
has resulted in steady increase in th e coal production during the last few 
years.  The Committee, therefore, desire  the Ministry to make all out efforts 
to expedite the mechanization/mode rnization of underground mines and 

introduction of continuous miner technology in all the coal mines wherever 
possible.  The Committee would like to  be apprised of the present status 
and time schedule for introduction of continuous miner technology in the 
underground mines of ECL, BCCL, WCL and SECL. 
 
(C) Streamline the System of Linkage 
 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 5.7) 
 
1.25 The Committee observed that the existing system of linkage to non-core 
sector medium and small consumers had not been functioning satisfactorily. The 
Committee further noted that the system of linkage was started in 1970 with a 
view to rationalize coal demand vis-à-vis availability. The other system, viz. Open 
Sales Schemes (OSS), started by Coal I ndia Limited (CIL) to  make coal freely 
available to small industries and other  consumers who did not have linkages, 
also did not function well. The Committ ee found that more recently, the Coal 
India Limited had started a pilot project of  e-auctioning to make the system more 
transparent. While the Committee appreciated the move by Coal India Limited for 
e-auctioning of coal, they had doubts whether the small and seasonal consumers 
who did not have the knowledge and acce ssibility to internet, would be  
benefited. The Committee noted wit h regret that the coal distribution to non-core 
sector consumers was completely in the hands of black-marketeers with the 
result, hundreds of genuine small c onsumers had been forced to close down 
their business due to non-avai lability of coal. The Committee recommended that 
the system of linkage to non-co re sector and seasonal consumers needed to be 
reviewed thoroughly so as to facilitate the availability of coal to all consumers.  
 
 
1.26 In their Action taken reply, the Go vernment has stated that as the top 
priority is granted for dispatch of coal to power utilities. Since the availability is 
limited and there is no provision for issuing of fres h linkage to new consumers or 
restoration of snapped linkage, CIL has embarked upon a c oncept of sale of coal 
through e-auction for non core sector on trial basis. This is an open transparent 
process and any consumer/non consumer willing to take coal, can avail the 
opportunity of e-auction of coal. Already few trials have been made and going by 
the success of the trials, Government conveyed approval for sale of coal to the 
extent of 10 million tonnes. This will be in addition to the quantity which was 
being sold to non-core sector under linka ge system. Another 2 million tonnes of 
coal is being supplied to NCCF, a national level co-operative organization under 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs for distributio n of coal to small and tiny consumers. 
Ministry of Coal has further earmarked 2 million tonnes of coal for State 
Government Undertaking for distribution of coal to small consumers of each 
State. By above process, dispatch to non  core sector has been streamlined so 
that coal reaches to even small and tiny consumers all over the country as per 
their requirement, to the extent coal is available. 
 

1.27 SCCL does not follow the system of CI L with regard to allocation of coal to 
non-core sector industries. Recommendations for coal allotment to non-core 
units are sent by Industries Departments of the respective States. Allotment of 
Coal even upto 100 tonnes is made by t he Industries Department after proper 
verification. Based on such recommendations only, SCCL is issuing coal to these 
units. The units are require d to produce SSI Registrati on Certificate, Sales Tax 
Certificate periodically to ensure that ther e is no diversion of coal and coal is 
properly used. State Vigilance & En forcement Department, Industries 
Department and Commercial Ta xes Department conduct periodical checks on 
the functioning of these units and whene ver any unit is found engaged in 
misutilization of coal, SCCL is advised to stop coal supplies to such units. 
 
1.28 The  Committee had recommended that since the exist ing system of 
linkage to non-core medium and small consumers had not been 
functioning satisfactorily, it was need ed to be reviewed thoroughly.  The 
Ministry has reiterated its stand that  besides sale of coal through e-auction 
to non-core sector, coal is also be ing distributed to small and tiny 
consumers through National Cooperative Consumers Federation(NCCF) 
and State Government Undertakings.  The Committee are distressed to 
note that the share of coal to non-core sector in total dispatch of Coal India 
Limited has declined from about 9% to  5% over the last five years.  The 
Committee feel that the sale of coal  to non-core sector through e-auction 
has not yielded the desired results.  The small and medium consumers, if 
at all, they succeed in getting coal  supply through e-auction are bound to 
get the same at higher price thus, putting them at a disadvantageous 
position due to inherent flaws of the e-auctioning.  Besides, a large number 
of small and medium consumer s do not have equal access to 
computer/internet thus rendering the e-auction process discriminatory.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
system of linkage including e-auctioning to non-core small and medium 
sector consumers should be reviewed thoroughly so as to facilitate the 
availability of coal to all consumers.  The Committee also desire that 
wherever the Fuel Supply Agreement h ave been entered into with the 
consumers, these should strictly be adhered to.   
 
 
(D).  Physical verificati on of linked consumers  
  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No. 5.8) 
 
1.29 The Committee had recommended that  the remaining 2,000 odd linked 
consumers should be inspected by phy sical verification by the Vigilance 
Department of coal companies for which the help of local Polic e and the Industry 
Department of the concerned State Govern ment might be sought so that bogus 

industries/ consumers could be weede d out  and the genuine consumers did not 
find it difficult to get coal.  
 
1.30 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, has st ated that as per 
recommendation of Parliamentary Committ ee of Coal and Steel and initiation by 
Vigilance Department of CIL, a verification drive of all non core sector industries 
had been initiated during Dece mber, 2004. This verification included checking of 
list of statement and papers of the company as well as ph ysical verification of the 
unit and the same is under process. 
 
1.31 Similarly, SCCL had conducted physica l verification of all the consuming 
units in the year 2001. This verifica tion was carried out by Industries Dept. 
involving State Vigilance & Enforcem ent Department and other departments like 
Inspectorate of Boilers. Due to such physical verification, t he number of units 
which were drawing coal had come down by about 33 % (from about 3000 No. of 
units to 2000 no. of units). SCCL has agai n started a fresh driv e in the month of 
April, 2005 to find out bogus units. A Stat e level Task Force comprising officials 
from Industries Department, Commerc ial Taxes Dept. and SCCL, has been 
constituted to conduct physical verification of each and every unit drawing  coal 
from SCCL. 
DETAILS  OF UNITS SUSPENDED 
SI. Year No. of Units suspended as per the advice of Total No. of 
No.  Vigilance and Industries Department Units 
  Enforcement Commercial Tax Dept. Suspended 
  Department and Mines & Geology  
   Dept.  
1 2002-03 17 451 468 
2 2003-04 17 391 408 
3 2004-05 03 304 307 
GRAND TOTAL 37 1146 1183 
 
1.32 In  the last three years, SCCL ha s suspended coal supplies to 831 no. of 
units  based on industries Department recommendation, 37 nos. of units based 
on State Vigilance & Enfo rcement Department and 315 nos. of units based on 
the recommendation of Commercial Taxes Department.  
 
1.33 SCCL has not yet implemented  e-auctioning  of coal and the 
implementation  of this scheme  at other coal companies is being closely 
monitored.  
 
 

1.34 The Committee had recommended that 2000 odd linked coal 
consumers should be inspected by ph ysical verification by the Vigilance 
Department of coal companies in orde r to weed out the bogus consumers.  
The Ministry has stated that a ver ification drive of non-core sector 
industries had been initiated during December, 2004 and the same is under 
process.  The Committee are concerned to note that the verification drive 
of all non-core sector industries whic h was started in December, 2004 has 
not been completed even after the laps e of one year which is a reflection 
on the seriousness and si ncerity on the part of the Ministry/Coal India 
Limited.  The Committee, th erefore, desire the Ministry of Coal/CIL to chalk 
out a time bound programme for verif ication of remaining linked 
consumers.  The Committee would like to  be apprised of the progress in 
this regard. 
 
(E) Allotment of Captive Coal Blocks 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 7.9) 
 
1.35 The Committee noted that under the existi ng   provisions  of Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act,1973, the coal blocks for captive  mining were allocated  to 
public/private  companies  engaged  in manufacture  of iron and steel, production 
of cement and generation of power.  As on date, 143  captive mining blocks had 
been identified for captive mining. The Committee  were constrained  to note that 
some of the captive coal blocks allo tted during the  Ninth Plan had not been 
materialized  as yet. Out of total 79  coal blocks allocated  so far, only 6  
companies had started  mining  in 8 pr operties. The  Committee were unhappy  
to observe  that considerable  time was being taken by the coal block allottees in 
starting mining. The committee strongly  felt that the monitoring   of captive  coal 
mining  in the Ministry la cks strict vigilance  and enforcement. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that the system of captive coal  mining might  be 
thoroughly  reviewed  and remedial  m easures taken. The Committee  desired 
that further  allotment of captive coal blocks should  put on hold and new 
allotments considered only after the system was fine-tuned and existing  
allotments were reviewed. 
 
1.36 In their Reply, the Government has  stated that in order to monitor the 
progress of the captive mini ng blocks allotted to different parties and to ensure 
that allottees strictly adhere to the time schedule approved for development of 
coal mine and end-use project the Coal Controller has been assigned the work to 
monitor the progress of development of coal mine and installation of the end-use 
project as per the bar-chart/schedule of activities given by the company to 
Ministry of Coal  and agreed to by the Ministry to send a six monthly report on the 
progress in respect of allotted captive mi ning block and the end- use project.  On 
the basis of reports furnished by the Coal Controller the, allocatee of coal block 
will be asked to invariably conform to the bar-chart/schedule of activities or 
correct deviations, if any.  If despite persuasion and advice of the Ministry to stick 

to the schedule of development of the end-us e plant and the coal mining project, 
the progress does not become satisfactory, the block will be deallocated. 
 
1.37 A system has been put in place whereby Coal Co ntroller has been 
authorized to monitor all the stipulations incorporated in  the allotment letter of 
captive coal mine block.  The Coal Cont roller has been asked to send a monthly 
status report on the progress in respect of  allotted captive mining blocks.  On the 
basis of reports furnished by the Coal Co ntroller strict corrective measures would 
be taken.   
 
1.38 The system of allocation of captive coal blocks was reviewed in the 
Ministry of Coal and it was found des irable to replace the existing system of 
allocation with auction of captive coal bl ocks based on competitive bidding.  In 
order to clear the backlog of  applications where proj ects had reached advanced 
stage and in some cases investments had also been made in end use projects, it 
was decided to allocate coal blocks through the Screening Committee route.  The 
cut off date for clearing such backlog was 28.6.2004.  Only such eligible 
applications which were received in the Mi nistry of Coal before the cut off date 
were considered and decided upon. Whil e making allocation in these cases 
suitable provisions for taking bank guarantee  for ensuring timely development of 
mines has been included.  A ll further applications ar e proposed to be taken up 
under the auction through competitive biddi ng route.  A Cabinet Note has been 
initiated for decision of the Government in the matter. 
 
1.39 The Committee had recommended that the system of captive coal 
mining might be thoroughly reviewed and remedial measures taken and 
had also desired that further allotment of captive coal blocks should be put 
on hold and new allotments considered  only after the system was fine-
tuned and existing allotments were reviewed. The Committee are 
distressed to note that the Ministry’s aim seem to be allocating the coal 
blocks for captive end use and not on early  production of coal therefrom.  
The Committee are extremely unhappy that  the Ministry in utter disregard 
to the recommendation of the Committe e has gone ahead and allotted new 
captive coal blocks instead of reviewing the existing system of captive coal 
mining.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should 
thoroughly review its policy in regard to allotment of captive coal blocks 
and take remedial measures.  The Comm ittee would like to be apprised of 
the reasons of non-compliance of their recommendations.  
 
(F) Implementation of Captive Coal Blocks 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15,  Para No. 7.10) 
 
1.40 The Committee  had noted that the ma in reasons furnished by the Ministry 
for  delay in  undertaking mining were various  clearances  from different 
authorities. The Committee, th erefore, recommended  that  the Ministry of Coal 

should play  its role of a facilitator  in  obtaining  various clearances  required for 
undertaking captive coal mining for which a nodal officer might be designated  in 
the Ministry. 
 
1.41 In their Action Taken Reply, the Minist ry of Coal has stated that major part 
of delay relate to forest and environm ent clearance and land acquisition on the 
part of allocattee.  Forest and environment  clearances fall under the realms of 
the Ministry of Environment & Forest, whereas the concerned State Government 
is to facilitate acquisition of land.  Ministry of Coal has  a limited role of forwarding 
the environment and forest clearance proposals submitt ed by the allocattee to 
the Ministry of Environment & Forest a fter the mining plan is  approved by the 
Ministry of Coal. 
 
1.42 Since the bottlenecks in obtaining various clearances were being 
attributed as the main reason for delay in undertaking captive coal mining, 
the Committee had recommended that th e Ministry of Coal  should play the 
role of facilitator for which a nodal officer might be designated in the 
Ministry.  The Committee are distresse d to note the evasive reply of the 
Ministry that it has a limited role of  forwarding the environment and forest 
clearance proposals submitted by th e allottees to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests.  The Mi nistry has not acted upon the 
recommendation of the Committee for nominating a nodal officer for this 
purpose.  The Committee feel that the very purpose of  policy would be 
defeated as in most of the cases, th e mining in the captive coal blocks are 
not undertaken in the absence of timely clearances.   The Committee 
expect the Ministry to play a proact ive role and effectively monitor the 
pending proposals sent to various agencies for early clearances.   
 
(G) Rehabilitation and Resettlement(R&R) 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No.22,  Para No.9.4) 
 
1.43 The Committee were constrained to note that the burning problem  of 
Rehabilitation and Resettlem ent (R&R) in Coal India Ltd. and other coal 
companies had remained unresolved  for a long time. It had been brought to the  
notice of the Committee  that adequate  compensation  had not been paid  to the 
losers   of the land  by Coal India Ltd and other coal companies. The Committee  
had desired that  a Company-wise programme might be chalked  out for solving  
the   R&R problems on a top priority basis. The Committee had further desired 
that adequate funds should be made available for accomplishing the R&R   
programmes. The Committee had also desired that the subsidiaries  of Coal India 
Limited  and other  coal companies  should clear  all the backlog  of 
compensation  cases immediately  and evolve a uniform criteria  for  payment  of 
compensation in future.  
 

1.44 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, has stated that the R&R 
Policies followed by the subsidiaries have been evolved over a period and 
undergone numerous changes in response to changing circumstances. As & 
when required, the Centra l or State Governments issued new guidelines for 
resettlement & rehabilitation. R&R Policy of CIL framed  in 1994 was thus revised 
in 2000 stipulating that where State Govt. Policy exists, subsidiary concerned will 
follow State Policy. 
 
1.45 Policy followed in the past by subsid iaries to acquired land and to offer 
employment has resulted in surplus manpower which contributed to heavy losses 
in some subsidiaries. Under the compelli ng circumstances, subsidiaries started 
evolving other ways & means to compens ate land owner and others adversely 
affected by coal mining projects. CIL rec ognizes that only pr oper resettlement & 
rehabilitation will ensure co-operation of  project affected people and make it 
possible for CIL to acquire lands, it needs.  
 
 1.46 Rate of compensation for land per acre  differs from project to project apart 
from State to State for various reasons lik e fertility of land, location of advantage, 
frequent sale transaction at higher rate and determination of la nd value by State 
Govts. (viz. W.B. and  M.P.) under I ndian Stamp Act for the purpose of 
Registration of Sale Deed.  Coal companies pay compensation in the following 
manner under Coal Bearing Areas(CBA) (A&D) Act, 1957. 
 
I. Market value of land (as deter mined by land sale deeds of 
past three years in the area); 
 
II. Solarium @ 30% of the market value ; 
 
III. Escalation value @ 12% for the period from notification u/s 
4(1) till notification u/s 9(1) of CBA Act subject to a maximum 
of three years (under Land Acquisition Act (LA Act) 
escalation is paid from notificatio n u/s 4(1) till date of taking 
over possession;  
 
IV. Interest @ 9% for the 1st year and 15% for the subsequent 
years from the date of acquisition u/s 9(1) of CBA Act till 
date of payment (under LA Act in terest is paid from the date 
of taking possession till date of payment). 
 
 1.47 The valuation of land is assessed by District Authority and payment is 
made through them. Where compensation amount is determined after 
negotiation with land owners, no escalation or interest is payable under CBA Act. 
Adequate fund is arranged by  concerned subsidiaries for payment under CBA 
and LA Act. 
 

 1.48 Whenever interested tenants whose land  is acquired feel that the awarded 
compensation is inadequate, the compensation is rece ived/accepted by them 
under protest and they may prefer appeal to LA Judge for land acquired under 
LA Act and special Tribunal set by Central Government for land acquired under 
CBA (A&D) Act for deciding the fair amou nt of compensation. The order of the 
Court/Tribunal is implemented by the s ubsidiary companies. Still, the most 
common problem i.e. faced by subsidiaries is that land losers  though not eligible 
for employment as per norms, stick to  claim of employment and do not come 
forward to receive compensation.  
 
1.49 Considering the c hange in circumstances in acqu iring land for projects for 
public purpose, Ministry of Rural Devel opment, Government of India issued a 
National Policy on Resettlement & Rehabilitat ion for project affected families in 
2003 to provide different sc hemes of benefit in plac e of employment for the 
betterment of their standard of living. In tune with NPRR -2003 and considering 
surplus manpower in some of the su bsidiaries and increasing thrust of 
mechanisation as well as competitiv eness, CIL has already proposed  for 
amendment of its existing R&R Policy in May, 2005. Propos ed amendments are 
under consideration in the Ministry. 
  
1.50 The Committee were deeply c oncerned at the burning problem of 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) in Coal India Limited (CIL) and other 
coal companies and had recommended that the company-wise programme 
might be chalked out for solving the R&R  problems on a top priority basis.  
The Committee had also desired fo r early clearing of backlog of 
compensation cases by evolving a un iform criteria for payment of 
compensation and earmarking adequate funds in this regard.   The Ministry 
in its reply, has stated that the R &R policies followed by the subsidiaries 
have been evolved over a period and undergone numerous changes in 
response to changing circumstances.   Th e Ministry has further stated that 
the amendment in existing R&R policy, in tune with National Policy on 
Resettlement & Rehabilitation (N PRR) 2003, increasing thrust on 
mechanization as well as competit iveness and problems of surplus 
manpower in some of the subsidiari es, is under consideration of the 
Ministry.  The Committee are extremely  dissatisfied with the reply of the 
Ministry which shows little concern for the land losers by harping on its old 
stand.   The Committee reiterate that the land losers must be adequately 
compensated within a reasonable time  period by providing them some 
permanent source of income.  The Comm ittee also desire that backlog in 
this regard should be cleared in a time bound manner.  The Committee 
hope that the proposed amendment in R&R policy would protect the 
interests and promote the welfare of  land losers and Project Affected 
People. 
 

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
   Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.14) 
 
 The Committee note that the Annual Plan ou tlay of the Ministry of Coal for 
the year 2005-06 has been kept at Rs.4 ,001.40 crore as compared to Budget 
Estimate of Rs.3,339.02 crore and Revise d Estimate of Rs.2,629.35 crore in 
2004-05. The Committee further note that the outlays of C oal India Ltd. (CIL), 
Singareni Collieries Com pany Ltd. (SCCL) and Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. 
(NLC) were drastically downsized at  the RE stage during 2004-05. The 
Committee are dismayed that the actual uti lization of funds has been much less 
than the outlay approved at RE stage. T he Committee are pained to find the 
same reasons advanced by Ministry year a fter year for low utilization, viz. delay 
in approval of new projects, delay in ac quisition of both forest and non-forest 
land, delay in rehabilitati on of villages, delay in proc urement of equipments and 
many projects being operated with outsourcing.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
The actual expenditure for 2004-05 is provisionally estimated to be 
Rs.1170.26 crore.  The act ual expenditure as percentage of budget provision for 
the year 2004-05 ranges from  above 100% to a level of below 50% across the 
subsidiaries of Coal India Limited.  De spite the best attempts the utilization was 
around 62% of revised estimates. Analysis  of RE vis-à-vis actual utilization 
reveals that while WCL  has surpassed th eir budgeted outlay, Central Coalfields 
Limited   having achieved almost 94% leve l, Eastern Coalfields Limited, South 
Eastern Coalfields Limited  and Mahanadi Coalfields Limited  achieving the 68%, 
64% & 56% respectively, the utilization had been around 43% & 36% for North 
Coalfields Limited  and  Bharat Coking Coal Limited respectively. It may be noted 
that NCL  which operates only opencast mines, has expenditure on Heavy Earth 
Moving Machine as its major constituent of capital expenditure. Combination of 
various factors like court cases, change in  procurement policy and revision of 
Heavy Earth Moving Machine  productivity  norms resulted in considerably low 
utilization of Heavy Earth Moving Mach ine  budget and overall utilization of 
capital budget.  In case of Bharat Co king Coal Limited, delay in project 
implementation coupled wit h the problems of Hea vy Earth Moving Machine 
procurement due to court case had been the major reasons for lower utilization. 
In case of other subsidiaries like East ern Coalfields Limited, South Eastern 
Coalfields Limited and  Mahanadi Coalfields Limited  the utilization had been to a 
satisfactory level for the former two s ubsidiaries while in case of Mahanadi 

Coalfields Limited, the major reason for low expenditure had been delay in 
implementation of new projects due to delay in approval. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
Budget provisions made for new proj ects like Mine II Expansion, TPS II 
Expansion and Barsingsar Mine-cum-Power Pr ojects could not be utilised due to 
delay in obtaining sanctions from the Government. Provisions made for TPS I 
Expansion could not be utilised as the matter is still under arbitration. Out of the 
total outlay of Rs.267.00 crore for RE 2004-05 Rs. 219.01 crore were provided 
for Mine II and TPS II Expansion and Ba rsingsar Mine-cum-Power Projects. 
Projected outlay is essentia lly to meet preliminary expenses, preparation of 
detailed feasibility report, hydrological studies, Topo survey, EMP Report and 
advance payments.  The short fall in expenditure has  mostly occurred in Mine II / 
TPS II Exp. and Barsingsar Mine–cum-Power Projects. This is mainly due to 
delay in project sanction. The projec ts like Mine II Expn., TPS II Expn. and 
Barsingsar Mine-cum-Power Project at Rajasthan were in the process of sanction 
for the last three years.  For Mine II Expn. and  TPS II Expn. Projects government  
accorded sanction in Oct., 2004 and for Barsingsar Mine-cum-Power Project 
sanction was given by the government in Dec., 2004.   As the projects have been 
sanctioned, expenditure progress is expected to be high in future periods.   
 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) 
 
 Out of RE of Rs.275 crore in 2004-05, actual expenditure was Rs.245 
crore. The main reasons for  less utilizat ion of funds are – delay in procurement 
of open cast equipments for three projects due to delay in getting forest land and 
delay in getting revenue land for housing and hospital projects in one of the coal 
fields.  
 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)    DATED 22ND  JULY, 2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   
  (Please see Paras 1.19 of Chapter I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation  (Sl.No. 2, Para 2.15) 
 
The Committee are surprised to note the reply of the Ministry that it was 
very difficult to ensure full utilizati on of Budget allocations because many 
activities on which fund utilization depends were beyond the control of coal 
PSUs. The Committee need not emphasis  t hat the Ministry ought not shun its 
responsibilities but take steps, viz. simplification of procedure for project 
approval, secure support from the State Governments in matters of land 

acquisition, the rehabilitation of villages  and removal of im pediments in the 
process of procurement of equipments that would help increase utilization of 
funds. The Committee have serious reservat ions about the passive role played 
by the Ministry in not overcoming thes e problems faced by coal PSUs eventually 
leading to under-utilization of the funds.  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para 2.16) 
 
The Committee, therefore, opined that the Budget-making mechanism in 
the Ministry lacks vision and optimism. T he under-utilization of funds by the coal 
companies cannot be considered prudent at  a time when investment was of 
paramount importance in view of the need to accelerate the coal production. The 
Committee expect the Ministry to introspec t and take concrete measures in view 
of the financial implicat ions and losses being suffered on account of less 
investment/ under-utilization and consequent lower production of coal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Coal and India(CIL)  
 
The growth in coal production has not been hampered due to lower 
utilization of funds. A pr oduction of 306.66 mt was achieved in 2003-04 as 
compared to 290.69 m.t. in  2002-03. In year 2004-05 CIL has surpassed the 
target of 314 m.t. by producing 323.62 m.t. of  coal. CIL to fulfil its mission of 
providing energy security to  the nation, has set a target  of 343 m.t. in 2005-06 
envisaging to record a quantum jump of 20 m.t. over the production of last 
financial year. Thus low utilization of IEBR , though it is a matter of concern, has 
been overcome through integrated organizati onal effort and its manifestation is 
observed in terms of quantum leap over last few years. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) 
 
There is no under utilizat ion of funds which resu lts in poor physical and 
financial performance. NLC does not draw any budgetary support from 
Government of India. All the projects are funded by  Internal Accruals and 
commercial borrowings. Both physical an d financial performance of NLC is 
consistently exemplary and no project/scheme is held up for want of funds. Due 
to delay in sanctioning of the Pr ojects like Mine II/TPS II Expansion and 
Barsingsar Mine-cum-Power Projects, t here was short-fall in  projected Plan 
expenditure. Since thes e two projects have been sanctioned, the Plan 
expenditure targets woul d  be met   in future  year s.  Separate Project Officers 
are posted to co-ordinate and monitor all th e project related activities. A separate 
Project Monitoring Wing constantly monitors the progress on day-to-day basis. 
Issues are sorted out at appr opriate levels to ensure smooth implementation of 
the projects. 
 
 

Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) 
 
  
 SCCL is constantly  pursuing issues pertaining to  acquisition of forest and 
non-forest land  for upcoming mines like Khairagura OCP, Sathupalli OCP,  RG. 
OCP-I expansion, MNG OC.III etc. Cert ain aspects are beyond the control of 
PSUs.  Certain projects like Adriyala Shaft, Shanthikhani Longwall, Peddampeta 
Shaft, Jallaram Shaft are awaiting PIB approval and MoEF clearances. 
 
 As regards Budget making  mechani sm, SCCL follows a well laid down 
procedure.  Budget making mechanism in SCCL is briefly summarized as under. 
 
(a) Item–wise/technology wise/mine wise requirement for existing, 
completed, new  projects is discussed with  mines/projects. 
 
(b) Proposed investment for non- mini ng nature like housing projects, 
medical welfare etc. are taken into consideration. 
 
(c) Spill   over of expenditure is  reckoned. 
 
(d) Sufficient funds are set as ide for meeting emergency and 
unforeseen requirement. 
 
During 2004-05 though an amount of Rs.245 crore is  spent out of RE of  
Rs. 275 crore,  the production of coal  is 35.302 MT which  exceeded the target 
of 35 MT. The under utilization of funds did not affect the production of coal at all.   
 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)   DATED 22
ND
  JULY, 2005] 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
   (Please see Paras 1.19  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation  (Sl.No. 4,  Para No.  2.17) 
 
 The Committee, therefore recommend t hat the Ministry of Coal should 
revamp and strengthen its Budget Divisio n and ensure preparation of realistic 
budgetary proposals. The Committee are extremely concerned about the under-
utilization of funds year after year and,  therefore, recommend that a High Level 
Monitoring Committee may be set up to review the monthly progress of the 
utilization of funds and to take corrective measures.  

 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Budget making procedure in PSUs passes through several stages 
right from seeking mine / project level proposals to macro level issues like future 
investments in mines.  Rigorous follow up  ac tion is done  by senior officers  of 
PSUs.  Procurement action is initiated well in advance and  constantly pursued 
so that the envisaged expenditure gets ma terialized in the sa me financial year. 
Separate project officers are posted to co-ordinate and monitor all the project 
related activities. A separate project m onitoring wing constantly monitors the 
progress on day to day basis. Issues are shorted out at appropriate levels to 
ensure smooth implementation of the projects. 
 
As far as the Ministry is concerned,  no funds are provided to coal PSUs 
and the funds for the projects are met by the PSUs out of  their  Internal and 
Extra-Budgetary Resources (IEBR). The IEBR proposals of the PSUs are strictly 
scrutinized by the Ministry as per the gu idelines of Ministry of Finance before 
getting the approvals of Ministry of Fi nance and Planning Commission. All efforts 
are made to ensure that no inflated plan outlays which may pose problems for 
actual expenditure or lower plan outla ys which may affect the progress of the 
PSUs are proposed to the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Ministry of Coal reviews the progress of on-going projects of Rs.100 crore 
and above on quarterly basis under the Chai rmanship of Secretary (coal) in 
Quarterly Performance Review (QPR) meet ing.  Representativ es from Planning 
Commission, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Department 
of Expenditure are also invited in this meeting. Besides, Secretary (Coal) also 
monitors the progress of the projects at his own level by calling fortnightly reports 
from the coal companies.    
 
[Ministry of Coal  No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)    DATED 22ND  JULY, 2005] 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
   (Please see Paras 1.19 of  Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.18) 
 
The Committee are constrained to not e the decreasing targets in the 
Internal and Extra Budgetar y Resources (IEBR) of all the coal companies during 
the first three years of the Tenth Plan. The IEBR generat ion by most of the coal 
companies has been abysmally  low and discouraging dur ing 2002-03. The IEBR 
has, however, registered improvement during 2004-05. The Committee further 
note that utilization of IEBR  component by most of the coal companies has been 
quite dismal. The utilization of IEBR signifies the progressiveness of any 

company for its growth and sustainability. The Committee express serious 
concern over the negligible utilizatio n of IEBR by coal companies and 
recommend that coal companies which have failed to utilize their IEBR 
judiciously should be taken to task to ens ure that not only the IEBR targets are 
set higher and achieved but their utiliz ation is planned and executed with 
precision.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The matter of low capital utilizat ion has been a major concern for the 
Ministry of Coal and all attempts both at  strategic and operational level are being 
taken to provide an implementable solution to  this issue.  An in-depth discussion 
with the executives of t he PSUs under administrative c ontrol of this Ministry 
reveals the fact that the budgetary esti mates which are made about six months 
prior to the commencement of the year and  made on the basis of requirement of 
capital for all the activities for achiev ing higher targets of the coal production 
envisaged for the year, which may differ in course of actual implementation.  The 
major reasons for low utilization of plan outlay against the target are as under: 
 
(a) Delay in implementation of new projects due to delay in approval and 
clearances i.e. investment clearance, forest land diversion, revenue 
land acquisition and environmental  clearance; and 
 
(b) Delay in procurement of Heavy Earth Moving Machinery. 
 
To expedite clearances, Govt. of  India has appointed a Committee called 
Govindarajan Committee.  The report of  the Committee is approved by the 
Government. The report specifies time frame for each stage of all the clearances.  
It is necessary to bring in place a mechani sm to enforce the time frame by all the 
Departments of the Government. 
 
[Ministry of Coal  No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)   DATED 22ND  JULY, 2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 3.23) 
 
The Committee note with serious concern the yawning gap in demand and 
production of coal in the country which was 24.75 m.t. in the beginning of the 
Tenth Plan, i.e.  2002-03 and is likely to reach t he alarming proportion of 51.68 
m.t. in 2006-07. The Commi ttee note that the production of coal during the same 
period will increase from 341.23 m.t. to 421.50 m.t. w hereas the demand will 
grow at much higher pace from 365.98 m.t. to 473.18 m.t. The Committee further 
note that to bridge the gap between the dem and and supply, the import of coal 
has been the only alternative due to not much increase in indigenous production. 
It was in this context that custom duty on  import of coal was drastically reduced. 
However, with substantial increase in in ternational prices, there is huge pressure 
for supply of indigenous coal. The Committee are pained to point out that the 

country which has one of the largest coal reserves in the world, has been brought 
to a situation where it is required to spend precious foreign exchange on 
avoidable imports primarily  due to faulty planning and extremely reprehensible 
execution of the projects. The Committee strongly feel that boosting of coal 
production through technological up-gradati on of coal mines should have been 
the main thrust of successive plans. Ho wever, the Committee are constrained to 
note that neither any signifi cant measures were taken nor any concrete action 
plan was prepared in this di rection. The Committee appr ehend that if no sincere 
efforts are made, this gap in demand and supply is likely to widen further. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should activate its machinery 
and prepare a contingency plan. The Committee desire that  the Ministry should 
review the progress of all the on-going projects on monthly basis and compress 
the period of their completion to the extent possible.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The coal demand in the terminal year of X th  P l a n  i.e. 2006-07 is now 
estimated to be 473.18 Mt against earlier projection of 460.50 Mt. There has 
been an incremental demand of  12.68 Mt, out of whic h around 5.50 Mt is the 
increase in coking coal demand an d the balance for non-coking category. 
Keeping in view the increasing c oal demand, CIL has enhanced its X th  P l a n  
terminal year production target by 13 Mt. to produce 363.00 Mt. in 2006-07 as 
against its earlier projection of 350 M.t. k eeping in view t he increasing coal 
demand, SCCL has also drawn up 13 open cast and 10 open casts projects 
which are in various stages of Govern ment clearances. The monthly physical 
performance review of the coal PSUs incl uding all the on-going projects in the 
Ministry of Coal is regular feature.  A Sub-Group has also been constituted 
comprising representatives of Ministry of  Power, Ministry of Railways, Central 
Electricity Authority to draw contingency Plan from time to time. 
  
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)    DATED 22ND  JULY, 2005] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No. 3.24) 
 
The Committee note that the ra tio of coal production between 
underground and opencast coal mines is not very ideal. A huge number of 
underground mines (305 underground mines) at present, produced about 30% of 
coal as against 70% produced by openc ast mines. The Committee further note 
that an investment of Rs. 679.37 crore will be required for the mechanization and 
modernization of underground mi nes out of which Rs.455. 12 crore were likely to 
be spent in the Tenth Plan period and the rest in Eleventh Plan. With the 
proposed mechanization, it is expected that there will be an over-all improvement 
and the production from underground mines of  Coal India Limited (CIL) will 
increase by about 4.5 million tonne per annum. The Committee are of the opinion 
that the country has  huge untapped potential for underground mining with 

extractable reserves up to the depth of 600 metre. Presently, the mining is being 
done predominantly by opencast method but the reserves available in opencast 
were fast depleting. The Committee feel that mechanization and modernization of 
underground mining have becom e imperative in view of  their huge potential to 
boost the production of coal to bridge the gap between demand and supply to a 
large extent. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Coal 
should not only earmark more funds for underground mines but also ensure that 
the schemes for the mechanization and moder nization of mines initiated during 
Tenth Plan were completed in the Tenth Plan itself. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to meet  the ever incr easing demand for coal for the  Power 
Sector, emphasis in production from Open Cast  Mines of CIL will  continue,  as 
with this  method  it is  possible to achieve high production with a very  low 
gestation period. 
 
However, CIL  appreciates  the necessity of tapping the potential for under 
ground mines. With that in view a plan for mechanization/modernization of  
existing under ground mines, wherever  f easible, has already been in place.  
During the last 3 years, 224 nos. of SDLs have been introduced in various  under 
ground mines of CIL . During 2006-07 i.e. terminal  year of the 10 th plan another 
146 SDLs are expected to be intr oduced. Similarly during the 10 th Plan, 78 nos. 
of LHDs have already been introduced and 21 more Load Haul Dumpers (LHDs) 
are likely to be added. Cont ribution  of  mechanized pr oduction in the overall  
under ground production  has been steadily  increased  during the last few years.  
 
Over and above, 2 sets  of continuous  miners presently in operation-1 
each in South Eastern Coalfields Limited  and Western Coalfields Limited, a 
programme has been drawn  up  to introduce this technology in 3 mines of 
Eastern Coalfields Limited, 2 mines  of  Bharat Coking Coal  Limited, 4  mines  of  
and Western Coalfields Limited, 7 mines of South Eastern Coalfields Limited   for 
which necessary action has already been init iated. All out efforts are being made 
to ensure timely implementation of the projects. 
 
Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)    DATED 22ND  JULY, 2005 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see para  1.25  of Chapter I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 4.6) 
 
The Committee note with anguish that  new projects at Neyveli Lignite 
Corporation (NLC) viz. Mine-II Expansion (4.5 MTPA) and Barsingsar Thermal 
Power Station (250 MW) which were init iated during Ninth Plan were sanctioned 
during Tenth Plan and are expected to be completed in Eleventh Plan. The 

Committee are extremely unhappy that t he projects which should have been 
completed in 4-5 years, would take more  than a decade involv ing manifold cost 
escalation. They, therefore , feel that had these projects been completed in Ninth 
Plan itself, their benefits would hav e been reaped by now. The Committee are 
pained to find that most of the projec ts have the similar fate resulting in 
enormous loss to the national exchequer. The Committee are least convinced by 
the reasons advanced by the Ministry and feel that Ministry has  grossly failed in 
its primary responsibility of balanced and judicious development of the coal 
resources of the country and meeting t he requirement of the coal consuming 
sectors. The Committee, therefore, re commend the Ministry to set up a High 
Powered Committee with repr esentatives of concerned agencies to oversee the 
entire gamut of project conception to th eir execution ensurin g minimal cost and 
time overrun.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The projects like Mine II Expansion, TS II Expansion and Barsingsar Mine 
and Thermal which were in the process of  sanction for the last three years have 
now been sanctioned viz. For Mine II Ex pansion and TPS II Expansion projects 
Government has accorded the sanction on18.10.2004 and for Mine cum Power 
Station at  Rajasthan, Government has  accorded sanction on 15.12.2004. For 
the above projects, advance tendering activities took place in order to reduce the 
lead time. For Mine II Expansion, Letter of Awards (LoA) for Main Mining 
Equipments were already issued. For TP S II Expansion, price bid for the Main 
Plant Package was already opened and LoA is expected to be issued shortly.  
 
Barsingsar Mine cum Power Project is under implementation. Site 
activities has already commenced. Bids  are under evaluatio n. All the above 
projects are expected to be commissioned without any time/cost overrun.  
 
Ministry of Coal has proposed to constitute an Empowered Committee 
(EC) for appraisal of coal and lignite projects costing Rs.100 crore and above 
comprising of Secretary (Coal) – Chairm an, Secretary (Expe nditure), Secretary 
(Planning Commission), Secretary (Powe r) and Member Traffic, Railway Board 
and to be convened by Financial Adviser, Ministry of Coal.  The committee would 
examine all aspects of project appraisal at single window eliminating the need of 
separate ‘in principle’ approval from Planning Commission and appraisal of the 
project at pre-PIB, EFC/PIB levels. Ministry has finalized the   note for Committee 
of Secretaries in this regard  and it has been circulated 
 
Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)    dated 22nd  July, 2005 
 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No. 6.14) 
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that proven  coal reserves in the 
country are 92,960 million tonne as per the  findings of t he Geological  Survey of 
India and other agencies.  A big  chunk of c oal resources i.e. is about 47%, falls  
in the indicated  categor y  and about 15%  is in inferred category out of 
cumulative total of 2,47,847 million tonne of coal resources  estimated  in the 
country as on 1 January 2005.  The Committee note that the Ministry  expect  the 
coal reserves to last for the next 350 year s. In any case, the  presently  proved 
reserves will last for more than two centur ies if the production  continues at the 
present pace of nearly 400 million tonne per annum. The Committee feel that in 
two centuries the face of the earth  will change beyond recognition and its energy  
requirement would be altogether  different  from the present days  which may not 
have any place for the coal as we use it today. The  Committee, therefore, are of 
the view that we have to make best use of  our coal reserves as early as possible 
so as to ensure a big jump for the  country  with the state of the art infrastructure  
and power sector. The Committee, therefore,   stress that much higher level of 
efforts should be made for the explorati on and increased production  of the coal. 
The Committee, in this context, feel that the budgetary provisions for Promotional  
and Detailed exploration which  were  Rs.43 crore during 2004-05  and increased  
to Rs.49.88  crore in 2005-06 are grossly  inadequate in t he long-term  interest  
of the country. The Committee, therefor e, recommend  that the  budgetary  
provision for the exploration  of coal and lignite  should be increased  further and 
GSI and other concerned  agencies geared up   to accelerate the pace  of 
exploration  so as to convert  more and mo re  inferred  reserves  into indicated  
category  and   indicated  reserves  into proved category. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The approved scheme Promotional Explor ation for coal and lignite for X th   
plan envisaged exploratory drilling of 6 lakhs meters in coal and lignite areas. In 
the Mid Term Appraisal of the Scheme of Promotional Exploration, the quantum 
of exploratory drilling has been enhanced to 6.90 lakhs meter.  
 
The scheme for Detailed Exploration in Non-CIL block for X th  plan was 
approved for Rs.70.66 crore for taking up 2.13 lakhs meter of exploratory drilling. 
On account of additional requirement of drilling in priority captive mining blocks, a 
Revised Cost Estimate of Rs.93. 84 crore has been pr epared and is under 
process for approval. The quantum of ex ploratory drilling has been enhanced to 
2.65 lakhs meter for the X th  plan. It is expected that a total of 5.39 Bt of coal 
resources will be established u nder proved category during X th  plan as against 
3.64 Bt envisaged earlier.  
 
In addition, detailed exploration is al so being taken up in CIL areas during 
Xth   plan and total of 7 lakh  metre of drilling is proposed  to be taken up at a total 

outlay of Rs.300 crore. A total of 6.98 Bt  of coal reserves is expected to be 
brought under proved category. 
 
As may be seen the quantum of  exploration for the X th Plan has been 
increased in both the schemes  i.e. Promotional  as well as Detailed Exploration. 
To intensify the exploration activity in subsequent plans, the exploration 
programme will be drawn up in due course of time. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)   Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 13,  Para No. 6.15) 
 
The Committee are constrained  to note that 23 blocks for Promotional 
Exploration  which were ta ken up during the Ninth Plan  had  spilled over to 
Tenth Plan and still there is no sign of their completi on. Similarly, detailed  
exploration  in 9 blocks which were tak en up during Ninth Plan also spilled over 
to Tenth Plan. The  Committ ee  express   their anguis h over the dilly-dallying  
manner  in which the coal and lignite exploration is  being carried out. The 
Committee strongly feel that in view of th e low availability of superior   grade of 
coal and depleting reserves   in the existing  mines, it becomes all the more  
essential  to speed up the exploration  efforts in proving  superior grade coal 
resources.  
Reply of the Government 
 
           During IX th Plan Promotional Exploration was taken up in about 95 
different coal and lignite blocks within the approved scheme. Exploration in 23 
nos. of blocks which were ta ken up during last phase of IX th  Plan could not be 
completed during the Plan perio d and exploration in these blocks spilled over to 
Xth  Plan.  Out of the 23 blocks, expl oration in 19 blocks has already been 
completed so far, and in the remaining blocks it is expected to be completed 
during 2005-06. 
 
            Detailed Exploration in N on-CIL blocks was tak en up as a separate 
government funded scheme during IXth  Plan.  Exploration was taken up in 26 no. 
of blocks out of which exploration could not be completed in 9 no. of blocks. Out 
of these 9 blocks, 3 blocks have been trans ferred to CIL and the drilling in these 
blocks will be completed by 2006-07 under CIL funding.  Of the remaining 6 spill-
over blocks, exploration in 2 blocks has already been completed and is expected 
to be completed in the remaining 4 blocks  during 2005-06. Exploration in these 4 
blocks had to be rescheduled on account of  higher priority given to 15 captive 
mining blocks. Greater emphasis is being gi ven for identifying the potential areas 
having superior grade coal reserves par ticularly in Sohagpur Coal Field where 
number of blocks have been identified to be taken up during X th  Plan under 
Promotional Exploration. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) Dated 22nd July, 2005] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No. 7.10) 
 
The Committee  further  note that the main reasons furnished by the 
Ministry for  delay in  under taking mining are various  clearances  from different 
authorities. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that  the Ministry of Coal 
should play  its role of a facilitator  in  obtaining  various clearances  required for 
undertaking captive coal mining for which a nodal officer may be designated  in 
the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Major part of delay relate to fo rest and environment clearance and land 
acquisition on the part of allocattee.  Forest and environment clearances fall 
under the realms of the Ministry of  Environment & Forest, whereas the 
concerned State Government is to facilitate acquisition of land.  Ministry of Coal 
has  a limited role of forwarding the env ironment and forest clearance proposals 
submitted by the allocattee to the Minist ry of Environment & Forest after the 
mining plan is approved by the Ministry of Coal. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) DATED 22ND JULY, 2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 16, Para No. 7.11) 
 
The Committee  also note  that a show  cause notice  is issued  in case no 
mining activity  has been carried out in fi ve years. The Committee feel  that this 
period  is too long for issuing   show caus e notice. By implication, the allottees   
of captive coal  blocks are allowed five  years period  for completing  pre–mining 
formalities and undertaking actual mining in captive coal block. The Committee, 
therefore,  recommend that a time-frame may be prescr ibed for completion  of 
various formalities  before undertaking  mi ning activity  in the captive  coal 
blocks.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been decided in the Ministry of C oal that the allocattee of a block 
should commence production from the captiv e mine within 36 mo nths if the area 
is not in forest land and is proposed to be worked through open cast mining, 
whereas 42 months time has been allowed for commencing production if the 
area is in forest land. In case of under ground mine a time limit  of 48 months for 
commencing production from the coal mi ne and another 6 mont hs (i.e. upto 54 

months) has been allowed in case the land is forest area.  These are being made 
parts of the conditions in the letter  allocating the coal mine for captive mining.  
Further, in an effort to tie up the development of coal mine to a time frame the 
allocation letter, as a condition, requires the allocatee to purchase the Geological 
Report of the block within six weeks of  the date of allocation and to submit a 
mining plan for approval by the competent authority within   six months from the 
date of the letter of allocation. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 17,  Para No. 7.12) 
 
The Committee  also desire  that coal produced  by the  captive coal block 
users in excess  of their captive  r equirement  should be given to the coal 
companies and a provision to this effect may be made in respective  rules and 
also incorporated in the guidelines framed for  allotment  of captive  mines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To ensure timely commencing of end use project, the Government has 
decided to allow early development of as sociated captive coal mining block so 
that by the time the end use project is ready in stages the coal mine attains 
stipulated coal production to meet the full requirement.  Since development of the 
captive mine to its rated capacity take s place over a period of time, coal 
produced during such development period when the end-use plant may not be in 
position to receive and consume the coal needs to be disposed of by the mining 
company.  Since storing of coal for long  period is hazardous and has impact on 
the economic viability of the project, it has been decided to  allow the allocatee to 
transfer the surplus coal produced dur ing the development period to the 
subsidiary coal company of Coal India Li mited operating in the area at a price to 
be determined by the Government.  Accordingly, a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Coal ) comprising experts in the relevant 
fields has been constituted to determine the transfer price from time to time.  
Coal produced in excess of the assess ed capacity requirement has also been 
permitted to be handed over to the local Coal India Limited subsidiary at a 
transfer price to be determined by the above Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 18,  Para No. 8.20) 
 
The Committee note that it is the pr incipal responsibility  of a coal  
company to develop  the roads  and railw ays in coal mine areas which are 

extensively  used for evacuation of coal   from the mines and also transporting 
men, materials and equipments. For undertaking  the above works, coal 
companies had allocated Rs.19.96 cror e during 2002-2003, Rs.50.94 crore 
during 2003-2004 and Rs.59. 09 crore  during  2004-2005  which were fully 
utilized. The Committee  note that with th e availability  of meagre funds, the 
required  development in coal bearing  areas has not taken place   causing  
hardship to workers  and inhabitants in general. The Commi ttee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry of Coal should make adequate  fund allocation  so that 
the development / construction and main tenance  of roads and railways are 
undertaken and completed  by the coal companies  in a time –frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Principally coal companies are responsible for developing Road and 
Railway infrastructure in their Coalfield. However, partial assistance is provided 
to them through CCDA fund for the pr ojects/schemes approved by Coal 
Conservation and Development Advisory Committee (CCDAC). 
 
The demand of funds is estimated based  on the requirement projected by 
coal companies, which is considered and approved by the CCDAC. Almost all 
the requirement raised by coal compani es in the past has been met by the 
Government In the 58th M eeting of CCDAC held on 6 th June 2005, the 
Committee recommended Rs.60 crore for Road/Rail infrastructure. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 20, Para No. 8.22) 
 
The Committee observe that there is ac ute  shortage of drinking water in 
BCCL and SECL areas  thus making the life of the people of the area quite  
miserable. The basic  infras tructure facilities  are also non-existent in peripheral 
areas in most of the coal companies  especially in BCCL and SECL. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to provide  the basic  infrastructure  facilities, viz. 
roads, power, schools, drinking water and stat e-of- the-art  hospitals in the coal-
bearing  areas where subsidiaries  of Coal India Limited are operating.     
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal companies including BCCL & SECL are undertaking developmental 
activities which are basicall y infrastructure building fo r the growth of community 
at large under Community Development Programme in the following areas: 
 
(a) Health – Health Camps, pr omotion of small family norm, 
Inoculation, distribution of medicines and general health awareness 
programme.  

 
(b) Education - Providing assistance for improvement in the existing 
educational facilities to children and adult education through 
teaching aids, furniture and fitti ngs, books, laboratory equipment 
etc. improving the infrastructure facilities by construction of new 
buildings or expanding the existing school building. 
 
(c) Water Supply - Provision of drinking water by sinking wells, 
installation of hand pumps, deepening and development of existing 
ponds and their repairing. 
 
(d) Community facilities - Construction/ repair of Community Halls, 
rural link roads, culverts, bridges, bus stand/ yatri shed etc. 
 
(e) Sports and Cultural activities- Organizing sports and culture in the 
adjacent villages with the help of local people/ club, providing 
sports materials like football, volleyball etc. 
 
(f) Promoting self employment and training scheme like tailoring, 
driving. and other misc. works.  
 
Company-wise amount spent on undertaking various Community 
Development activities in different areas  of the subsidiary companies during 
2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 are given below :                                                        
(Rs. In Lakhs) 
Company 2001-02 
Expenditure 
2002-03 
Expenditure 
2003-04 
Expenditure 
1 2 3 4 
Eastern Coalfields Limited 49.28 50.93 75.42 
Bharat Coking Coal Limited 21.65 43.41 31.11 
Central Coalfields Limited  50.34 61.51 39.43 
Western Coalfields Limited 66.72 76.29 108.44 
South Eastern Coalfields 
Limited 
352.68 551.00 392.17 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited 270.38 466.31 365.32 
North Coalfields Limited 376.23 178.96 219.97 
NEC 15.73 8.08 9.31 
TOTAL 1203.21 1436.49 1241.17 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 21, Para No. 8.23) 
 
  The Committee also  note that  Coal Conservation and Development 
Advisory Committee (CCDA)  is  entrusted  with the conservation   efforts of coal 
companies by undertaking stow ing operation  for safety  in  coal mines and 
protective works.  The Committee note t hat in spite  of liberal financial  
assistance being provided  for sand stowing  and protective  works in coalfields 
area, much remains to be done. The Committee are surprised to note that less 
than 40% funds  allocated  for the protective works during the first  three years  of 
the Tenth Plan have been utilized  by the coal companies. The Committee  
recommend that the funds earmarked for sand stowing and protec tive  works be 
released  and utilized in full. The Committee further recommend that the 
Government  should ensure that all the schemes approved by CCDA Committee  
are completed in a time bound programme.               
 
Reply of the Government 
 
From CCDA fund assistance is provi ded to coal companies for sand 
stowing and protective works @ 60%  & 75% of admissible expenditure 
respectively. The BE for CCDA fund is based on proposals submitted by the coal 
companies. In the past coal companies we re not able to achieve their projected 
target.  As a result the actual re-imbursement was less.   
 
The main reason for slow progress and less achievement by coal 
companies are as under: 
 
• Initially 100% expenditure is to be incurred by coal companies and after 
the job is done, re-imbursement is made up to the admissible limit. 
 
• Unforeseen mining hazards during actual implementation of PW schemes. 
 
• Delay in finalization of contract due to various reasons. 
 
• Delay in obtaining statutory permission for the protective works. 
 
• Irregular availability of sand/earth materials. 
 
CCDAC generally approves  reimbursement of all the admissible claims 
put up by the coal companies . Therefore utilization of allocated fund is full. 
Schemes taken for CCDAC assistance are scrutinized by the Sub-Committee in 
each half year meet and the coal companies are pursued to complete the 
schemes within the time frame indicated by  them while submitting applications to 
CCDAC seeking assistance for the said purpose. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol.IV) Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No. 23,  Para No. 10.8) 
 
The Committee are dismayed  to note that over the years, the utilization of 
funds for  Research and Deve lopment (R&D) activities have  been dismal. In the 
year 2003-2004, the allocation  was Rs.22. 48 crore, later revised to 10.04 crore 
at RE stage but  t he actual utilization was Rs.6.57 crore.  Similarly  during 2004-
2005, Rs. 9.88 crore were  allocated  wh ich were increased  to Rs.12.43 crore 
but the utilization  was barel y  Rs.9.88 crore. The Committee note that for the 
year 2005-2006, an amount  of Rs.20.08  crore has been allocated for R&D.  The 
Committee  are extremely  concerned  t hat the R&D  activities have been 
neglected  by the Ministry  thereby  retard ing  the  progress  of the coal industry 
and feel that the  reasons given by the Ministry of lower allocation and even 
lesser utilization are not convincing.  The Committee  stress that R&D are 
investment for future  in  order to  realize  the potential and harnessing the coal 
resources  of the country. The Committee, therefore, desire that   the sufficient  
funds should be allocated  for R&D  acti vities  and corrective  measures  be 
taken to ensure  their full utilization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The actual disbursement of fund during the year 2003-2004 was Rs.9.82 
crore. Actual disbursement of fund during the year 2004-2005 improved 
substantially and the actual figure stands at Rs.12.35 crore (un-audited). 
 
The actual utilization is less because of  slow progress in some projects 
mainly due to delay in procurement of equipments as thes e equipments are not 
readily available in the market.  However, BE for 2005-06 has been assessed as 
Rs.20.08 crore which is subs tantially higher as compared to actual disbursement 
during 2004-05.  
 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 24, Para No.10.9) 
 
The Committee note that 56 Research  and Development (R&D) projects 
were sanctioned during the Ninth  Plan but only 30 projects  could be completed, 
5 were  terminated and 2 spilled over to  the Tenth Plan. During the Tenth Plan, 
36 projects  have been  sanctioned so fa r but none of them could be completed 
as yet. The Committee are surprised to  note the erratic time schedule for 
completion  of R&R projects which ex hibit lack  of seriousness and urgency  on 
the part  of the Ministry. The Committ ee have serious  appreh ensions that in 
case the Ministry does not gear up, the  R&D  projects   sanctioned  during the 
Tenth Plan may spill over to the  Eleventh Plan resulting  in avoidable  cost and 
time overrun. The Committee,  therefore, recommend that  the  causes  for the 

tardy  progress of the  on going R&D  coal projects  are ascertained  and 
corrective  steps taken thereon to facilitate   timely completion of the  projects. 
The Committee also desire that  there should be  a mechanism  in the Ministry to 
review  the progress  of such  projects  periodically on a regular basis.   
 
Reply of the Government 
Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
Break up of sanctioned R&D projects  in the first three years of X th Plan is 
as follows 
 
   2002 – 03  - 12 
   2003 – 04  - 16 
   2004 – 05  -   8 
 
Out of the 36 projects approved so far during the Xth  Plan 3 no. of projects 
have been completed. 
 
The project duration normally varies fr om 2 – 4 years.   There are some 
projects, which have duration of up to 5 years also.  The projects sanctioned 
during later half of a Plan period spill over to next plan without any time over run.   
 
Causes of tardy progress:  The following causes ha ve been identified as the 
main reasons for tardy progress of S&T projects: 
 
i) Delay in procurement of equipment  is one of the major reasons for 
slow progress of projects.  This happens mainly due to time taking 
administrative procedures required to  be followed by the implementing 
agencies, specially for imported equipment. 
  
ii) Several research projects involve pilot scale studies.  The experimental 
set-up are required to be fabricated which are not readily available in 
the market.  Repeated tenderings are often required to be floated to 
achieve a satisfactory re sult.  This procedure takes much longer time 
than expected originally. 
 
iii) In some cases, the study depends on progress of mining activities like  
depillaring of a underground panel wh ich are some times delayed due 
to delay in getting statutory permissi on /environmental clearances etc.   
As a result the research projects also get delayed.  
 

Steps taken to facilitate timely completion of projects:  
 
The following steps have been taken to  facilitate timely completion of 
projects.  
 
Progress of R&D projects is monito red by CMPDI and reviewed by SSRC 
regularly.  
 
To obviate the delay in field trials due to non availability of mining faces/ 
sites, CMPDI extends help to implementing agencies in selecting alternative sites 
for field trial.  
 
Mechanism of monitoring S&T projects: Procedures have been laid out 
in the “Guidelines for Implementing Coal Research Projects”  to monitor the on-
going projects. CMPDI, as a nodal agency follows the procedures.  Progress 
report (both physical and financial) are re ceived from implem enting agencies on 
a quarterly basis and reviewed by CMPD I.  Different Sub-Committees of SSRC 
are informed about the status of each on- going project during  its meetings.  The 
causes of delay, if any, are discussed in detail and remedial measures are 
suggested. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 

CHAPTER  III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No. 4.5 ) 
 
The Committee note that Coal India Ltd. has planned to invest  
Rs.10,975.11 crore during Te nth Plan for increasing the production of coal. The 
Committee further note that the progress of implemen tation of the various 
projects for development of coal resour ces has been far from satisfactory. The 
Committee regret to note that  out of six on-going proj ects costing Rs.100 crore 
and above, the Jhanjhra Ph ase-I under Eastern Coal fields Ltd. is being 
foreclosed as the project has suffered from  fund constraints, agei ng of long wall 
and development equipment, etc. after incurring a huge expenditure. Another 
project, viz. Pootkee Ballihar under Bharat Coking Coal  Ltd. has also not been 
able to achieve the desired level of produc tion due to several constraints. Some 
other projects too, sanctioned as early as 1997 and 1998 could be completed 
only during 2004 after long gestation perio d. The Committee take a serious note 
of the fact that Jhanjhra Phase-I project under Eastern Coalfields Limited had to 
be foreclosed after making a huge ex penditure of Rs.363.08 crore. The 
Committee are at a loss to understand as to  how this project was conceived and 
taken up without having any techno-economi c feasibility report. The Committee 
consider this a serious lapse on the part of the Ministry for its failure to exercise 
prudence in implementing the projec t. The Committee recommend that a 
Departmental Inquiry may be instituted to  go into the details of case and fix 
responsibility for the lapses accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Out of 37 nos. of ongoing projects (costi ng more than Rs.50 crore) there 
are only 4 Mining projects (Jhanjra Ph-I UG, ECL, Sarpi UG, ECL, J.K.Nagar UG, 
ECL, Pootkee Balihari UG, BCCL) which are delayed beyond their schedule date 
of completion. Out of these delayed Projects only two projects (viz; Jhanjra Ph-I 
UG, ECL, Pootkee Balihari UG, BCCL) are costing more than Rs.100 crore 
 
As per directive of Board of Directors, CIL, in its meeting held on 12.02.04 
a Committee consisting of CMD, CMPDI, Ranchi, Director (O), ECL & BCCL was 
constituted so as to make a study for finding out lapses, on the part of all 
involved in formulation and implementation of  the projects (costing Rs.50 crore & 
above), causing delay in completion of them.  
 
The Committee studied & reviewed in  details various projects, under 
construction, costing Rs.50 crore & above to find out lapses on the part of all 
involved in formulation and implementation of the projec t causing delay in their 
completion and submitted its report in t he month of July, 2004.  The same report 

containing the reasons for delay, lapses  in formulation and implementation was 
put before 218th Meeting of Board of Directors of CIL held in November, 2004.  
 
Comments with respect to reasons of delay and lapses as per studies 
made by the Committee and recommendations in respect of Jhanjra Phase–I and 
Pootkee Ballihari are enumerated below: 
 
Jhanjra Ph-I UG, ECL : RCE for Jhanjra UG Ph-I for 2.00 Mty with capital 
investment of Rs.386.24 crore (excluding Rs.17.72 crore for Advance Action of 
Ph-II) was sanctioned by Govt. in Au g’95 with scheduled date of completion in 
Mar’98. Achieving target production of  2.00 Mte was not possible due to old 
Longwall equipment, delay on the part of contractor (M/s. TSL and M/s BGML) in 
erection / commissioning of h eadgear and winder structur e at shaft ‘A’ because 
of their financial problem, delay in getting the grant from UK for refurbishing of 4th 
Longwall set, slow progress of UG mine development because of non-availability 
of adequate road headers due to fund crunc h and inadequate support resistance 
for working full thickness of R-VII A & R-VI.  
 
Following recommendation of  Technical Committee af ter deliberation on 
03.01.02, comprising of Director (Tech), CIL, CMD, CMPDIL and CMD, ECL a 
foreclosure report for production capacit y of 1.03 Mte and capital of Rs.386.44 
crore was approved by CIL Board on 19.0 7.02 and is under process of approval 
at Ministry of Coal. Once this foreclos ure report is approved (P IB Meeting held & 
CCEA approval awaited), the project will st and completed on the basis of actual 
performance in the year 2000-01 and there wil l be no delay as per schedule of 
completion shown in the foreclosure report.  
 
Comments on Lapses: 
 
a) As stated above, the delay in co mpletion of Jhanj ra Ph-I UG, RCE 
(August, 95) which was scheduled for completion in March, 1998, was 
mainly due to techno-economic r easons as stated above, and no 
individual can be held responsible for this. 
 
b) The Standing Committee, chaired by  Addl. Secretary (Coal), examined 
the project on 19.08.03, for fixing re sponsibility for time and cost over-
run occurred in the project, did not hold any person responsible. 
 
Pootkee Balihari UG, BCCL :  The project was originally sanctioned by the 
Government in   December, 2003 for 3. 00 Mty with capital investment of  
Rs.199.87 crore and was subsequently de-rated to 0.68 Mty with a capital 
investment of Rs.182.60 crore. The de-rating was done due to following reasons: 
 
a. Insufficient geological data ava ilable during project formulation 
(based on poor borehole density of 5 per Sq.Km), and the same 
could not decipher the geological complexities of the project 

area. Consequently, the technology  was to be changed from 
PSLW to Mechanised B&P with SDL.  Even this technology did 
not yield good results because of very adverse and 
unpredictable geo-mining conditions. 
 
b. Acute fund crunch, which furt her worsened after withdrawal of 
budgetary support w.e.f. 1996-97. 
 
c. As directed by Secretary (C oal) in the meeting held on 04.02.04 
CIL constituted a committee co mprising of CMD, CMPDIL, 
CMD, BCCL and Director (T& O), ECL to look into the problems 
of the projects and to examine whether some technology could 
be brought, avoiding further expendi ture and for achieving the 
production target.  
 
As per recommendation of this co mmittee the present production level 
may be increased up to 1900 TPD by 06-07 wi th further investment of Rs.9.94 
crore (with total investment being Rs. 181.66 crore) and anticipated date of 
completion as 2006-07.  
 
Comments on Lapses: 
 
a) In absence of adequate geological exploration data as well as 
acute fund crunch prevailing in BCCL the schedule of 
completion as March, 2003 s eemed to be very optimistic. 
However keeping in view the adverse geo-mining conditions, 
acute fund crunch and report of the committee as stated above, 
the  anticipated project completion as March, 2007 for the de-
rated project appears to be realisti c and no individual can be 
held responsible for delay in completion  of the PR beyond 
March, 2003 for the RPR approved in April, 2003.  
 
b) The Committee, chaired by Addl . Secretary(Coal) noted that the 
project was not delayed due to non av ailability of infrastructure 
facilities or due to inadequacy of monitoring mechanism. The 
Sub-Committee reached a consensus  that the time over-run 
had been mainly due to inordinate delay caused by 
implementing agencies viz: KO PEX, CEMENDIA, TSL, HEC 
etc. in execution of works & also due to fund constraint.  
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para No. 8.21) 
 
The  Committee  further note that  t he coal companies  are also required 
to undertake community development works, viz.  development/construction of 
bridges, schools, colleges, hospitals, community centers and other peripheral 
works. The Committee have been  informed that the Neyveli Lignite Corporation 
(NLC) has not been  taking up community  development works in its right earnest 
resulting in poor condition of roads,  schools, hospitals, drinking  water  and other  
infrastructure  facilities. The Committee, therefore, desire that NLC  should given 
top priority to the community developmen t works for which sufficient  funds be 
allocated  and released during the year 2005-06.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  As a responsible corporate citiz en, NLC strives for development of 
community in and around Ne yveli. Salient features of various community 
developmental activities undertaken by NLC are as under :- 
 
i) NLC runs 16 schools and the pupils are provided with free education.  
Further, children studying in I to V standards are given free uniform 
and footwear.  Out of 13000 pupils studying in these schools, about 
82% are from nearby villages. 
 
ii) Private agencies also run schools and a college in Neyveli to which 
NLC extends support as and when required.  Out of 27000 students 
studying in these schools/colleges , about 45% are from peripheral 
villages.  
 
iii) NLC runs a General Hospital with 369 beds and 5 peripheral 
dispensaries providing allopathic and ayurvedic treatments.  Free 
outpatient treatment is provided not only to employees but also to 
general public.  In-pati ent treatment  are also  extended to general 
public on chargeable basis.  
 
iv) For the benefit of people living in peripheral  villages, NLC organizes 
various medical camps.  Recent ly a camp for orthopaedically 
challenged persons was organized and more than 1000 persons were 
provided with free calipers and artificial limbs.  
 
v) In order to take care of the needs  of the peripheral villages, NLC has a 
programme titled “Peripheral Deve lopment Scheme”.  Under this 
scheme, NLC undertakes infrastructu ral developmental works such as 
providing drinking water facilitie s, construction of bridges, school 
buildings and laying of roads, etc.  A committee under the 
chairmanship of District Collector examines the various proposals 
relating to development of neighbor ing villages an d identifies the 

projects to be undertak en under the Peripheral Development Scheme.  
Such identified developmental activities are implemented.   
 
vi) For the period 2003-05, the commi ttee headed by the District Collector 
had identified 41 works at a total co st of Rs.227.35 lakh.  Works for 
about Rs.124.85 lakh have been comple ted, works for Rs.67 lakh are 
under progress and works va lued at Rs.35.50 lakh  are in tendering 
stage.  NLC has undertaken about 88 works sinc e 1998-99 at a total 
value of Rs.374.88 lakh.  
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) Dated 22nd  July, 2005] 
 
 

CHAPTER  IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para No. 5.2) 
 
The Committee observe that the exis ting system of linkage to non-core 
sector medium and small consumers has not been functioning satisfactorily. The 
Committee further note that the system of linkage was started in 1970 with a view 
to rationalize coal demand vis-à-vis ava ilability. The other system, viz. Open 
Sales Schemes (OSS), started by Coal I ndia Limited (CIL) to  make coal freely 
available to small industries and other  consumers who did not have linkages, 
also did not function well. The Committee fi nd that more recently, the Coal India 
Limited has started a pilo t project of e-auctioning to make the system more 
transparent. While the Committee appreciate the move by Coal India Limited for 
e-auctioning of coal, they have doubt s whether the small and seasonal 
consumers who do not have the knowledge and accessibility to internet would be  
benefited. The Committee note wit h regret that the coal distribution to non-core 
sector consumers is completely in the hands of black-marketeers with the result, 
hundreds of genuine small consumers have been forced to close down their 
business due to non-availability of c oal. The Committee recommend that the 
system of linkage to non-core sector  and seasonal consumers needs to be 
reviewed thoroughly so as to facilitate the availability of coal to all consumers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Share of dispatches to non-core sect or in general and li nked industrial 
consumers is getting reduced due to in crease in demand from core sector 
particularly power utilities. Top priority is  granted for dispatch to power utilities. 
Over last 5 years, the s hare of non-core sector in total dispatch of CIL has 
declined from about 9% in 1999-2000 to about 5% in 2004-05. Since the 
availability is limited and there is no provision for issuing of fresh linkage to new 
consumers or restoration of snapped li nkage, CIL has embarked upon a concept 
of sale of coal through E-auction for non-core sector on trial basis. These 
schemes have been extend ed to all consumers whether linked or non-linked, 
traders who can purchase coal at a market driven price by bidding process. This 
is an open transparent process and any co nsumer/non-consumer willing to take 
coal can avail the opportunity of E-aucti on of coal. Already few trials have been 
made and going by the success of the trials, Government conveyed approval for 
sale of coal to the extent of 10 m illion tonnes. This will be in addition to the 
quantity which was being sold to non-core sector under  linkage system. Another 
2 million tones of coal is being supp lied to National Cooperative Consumers 
Federation (NCCF), a national  level co-operative organization under Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs for distribution of coal to  small and tiny cons umers. Ministry of 

Coal has further earmarked 2 million ton nes of coal for State Government 
Undertakings for distribution of coal to small consumers of each State. By above 
process, dispatch to non-core sector has been streamlined so that coal reaches 
to even small and tiny consumers all over the country as per their requirement, to 
the extent coal is available. 
 
SCCL does not follow the system of CIL with regard to allocation of coal to 
non-core sector industries. Recommendations for coal allotment to non-core 
units are sent by Industries Departments of the respective States. Allotment of 
Coal even upto 100 tonnes is made by t he Industries Department after proper 
verification. Based on such recommendations only, SCCL is issuing coal to these 
units. The units are require d to produce SSI Registrati on Certificate, Sales Tax 
Certificate periodically to ensure that ther e is no diversion of coal and coal is 
properly used. State Vigilance & En forcement Department, Industries 
Department and Commercial Ta xes Department conduct periodical checks on 
the functioning of these units and whene ver any unit is found engaged in 
misutilization of coal, SCCL is advised to stop coal supplies to such units. 
 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)    Dated 22nd July, 2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation  (Sl.No.14, Para No. 7.9) 
  
The Committee  note that under  the existing   provisions  of Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act,1973, the coal blocks for captive  mining are allocated  to 
public/private  companies  engaged  in manufacture  of iron and steel, production 
of cement and generation of power.  As on date, 143  captive mining blocks have 
been identified for captive mining. The Committee  are constrained  to note that 
some of the captive coal blocks allotted during the   Ninth Plan have not been 
materialized as yet. Out of total 79 coal blocks allocate d so far, only 6  
companies have started  mining  in 8 properties. The  Committee are unhappy  to 
observe  that considerable  time is bei ng taken by the coal block allottees in 
starting mining. The Committee strongly  feel that the monitoring   of captive  coal 
mining  in the Ministry la cks strict vigilance  and enforcement. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the system of captive coal  mining may  be thoroughly  
reviewed  and remedial  measures taken.  The Committee  desire that further  
allotment of captive coal blocks should  put on hold and new allotments 
considered only after the system is fine-tuned and existing  allotments are 
reviewed. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
In order to monitor the progress of the captive mining blocks allotted to 
different parties and to ensure that allotte es strictly adhere to the time schedule 
approved for development of coal mine and end-use project t he Coal Controller 
has been assigned the work to monitor the progress of development of coal mine 
and installation of the end-use project as per the bar-chart/schedule of activities 
given by the company to Ministry of Coal  and agreed to by the Ministry to send a 
six monthly report on the progress in res pect of allotted captive mining block and 
the end-use project.  On the basis of reports furnished by the Coal Controller the, 
allocatee of coal block will be asked to invariably conform to the bar-
chart/schedule of activities or correct deviations, if any.  If despite persuasion and 
advice of the Ministry to stick to t he schedule of developm ent of the end-use 
plant and the coal mining project, the pr ogress does not become satisfactory, the 
block will be deallocated. 
 
A system has been put in place w hereby Coal Cont roller has been 
authorized to monitor all the stipulations incorporated in  the allotment letter of 
captive coal mine block.  The Coal Cont roller has been asked to send a monthly 
status report on the progress in respect of  allotted captive mining blocks.  On the 
basis of reports furnished by the Coal Co ntroller strict corrective measures would 
be taken.   
 
The system of allocation of captive coal blocks was reviewed in the 
Ministry of Coal and it was found des irable to replace the existing system of 
allocation with auction of captive coal bl ocks based on competitive bidding.  In 
order to clear the backlog of applications where pr ojects had reached advanced 
stage and in some cases investments had also been made in end use projects, it 
was decided to allocate coal blocks through the Screening Committee route.  The 
cut off date for clearing such backlog was 28.6.2004.  Only such eligible 
applications which were received in the Mi nistry of Coal before the cut off date 
were considered and decided upon. Whil e making allocation in these cases 
suitable provisions for taking bank guarantee  for ensuring timely development of 
mines has been included.  A ll further applications ar e proposed to be taken up 
under the auction through competitive biddi ng route.  A Cabinet Note has been 
initiated for decision of the Government in the matter. 
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) DATED 22ND  JULY, 2005] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see para 1.40 of Chapter I of the Report)

CHAPTER  V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No. 5.8) 
 
The Committee further recommend that  the remaining 2,000 odd linked 
consumers should be inspected by phy sical verification by the Vigilance 
Department of coal companies for which the help of local Polic e and the Industry 
Department of the concerned State Government may be sought so that bogus 
industries/consumers could be weeded out  and the g enuine consumers do not 
find it difficult to get coal.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per recommendation of Parliament ary Committee of Coal and Steel 
and initiation by Vigilance Depar tment of CIL, a verificati on drive of all non-core 
sector industries had been initiated duri ng December, 2004. This verification 
included checking of list of statement and papers of the comp any as well as 
physical verification of the unit and the same is under process. 
 
Similarly, SCCL had conducted physical verification of all the consuming 
units in the year 2001. This verifica tion was carried out by Industries Dept. 
involving State Vigilance & Enforcement  Department and ot her departments like 
Inspectorate of Boilers. Due to such physical verification, t he number of units 
which were drawing coal had come dow n by about 33% (from about 3000 No. of 
units to 2000 No. of units). SCCL has again  started a fresh drive in the month of 
April, 2005 to find out bogus units. A Stat e level Task Force comprising officials 
from Industries Department, Commerc ial Taxes Dept. and SCCL.., has been 
constituted to conduct physical verification of each and every unit drawing  coal 
from SCCL. 
 
DETAILS  OF UNITS SUSPENDED 
 
SI Year No. of Units suspended as per the advice of Total No. of 
No.  Vigilance and Industries Department Units 
  Enforcement Commercial Tax Dept. Suspended 
  Department and Mines & Geology  
   Dept.  
1. 2002-03 17 451 468 
2. 2003-04 17 391 408 
3. 2004-05 03 304 307 
GRAND TOTAL 37 1146 1183 

 
 In  the last three years, SCCL has suspended coal supplies to 831 no. of 
units  based on industries Department recommendation, 37 no. of units based on 
State Vigilance & Enforc ement Department and 315 no. of units based on the 
recommendation of Commercial Taxes Department.  
 
 SCCL has not yet implemented  e-auctioning  of coal and the 
implementation  of this scheme  at other coal companies is being closely 
monitored.  
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV)   Dated 22nd July, 2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 1.43 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 22, Para No.9.4) 
 
 The Committee were constrained to note that the burning problem  of 
Rehabilitation and Resettlem ent (R&R) in Coal Indi a Ltd. and other coal 
companies had remained unresolved  for a long time. It had been brought to the  
notice of the Committee  that adequate  compensation  had not been paid  to the 
losers   of the land  by Coal India Ltd and other coal companies. The Committee  
had desired that  a Company-wise programme might be chalked  out for solving  
the   R&R problems on a top priority basis. The Committee had further desired 
that adequate funds should be made available for accomplishing the R&R   
programmes. The Committee had also desired that the subsidiaries  of Coal India 
Limited  and other  coal companies  should clear  all the backlog  of 
compensation  cases immediately  and evolve a uniform criteria  for  payment  of 
compensation in future.  
 
The Government in their Action Taken Reply, has stated that the R&R 
Policies followed by the subsidiaries have been evolved over a period and 
undergone numerous changes in response to changing circumstances. As & 
when required, the Centra l or State Governments issued new guidelines for 
resettlement & rehabilitation. R&R Policy of CIL framed  in 1994 was thus revised 
in 2000 stipulating that where State Govt. Policy exists, subsidiary concerned will 
follow State Policy. 
 
Policy followed in the past by subsidia ries to acquired land and to offer 
employment has resulted in surplus manpower which contributed to heavy losses 
in some subsidiaries. Under the compelli ng circumstances, subsidiaries started 
evolving other ways & means to compens ate land owner and others adversely 
affected by coal mining projects. CIL rec ognizes that only pr oper resettlement & 
rehabilitation will ensure co-operation of  project affected people and make it 
possible for CIL to acquire lands, it needs.  

 
  Rate of compensation for land per acre differs from project to project apart 
from State to State for various reasons lik e fertility of land, location of advantage, 
frequent sale transaction at higher rate and determination of la nd value by State 
Govts. (viz. W.B. and  M.P.) under Indian Stamp Act for the purpose of 
Registration of Sale Deed.  Coal companies pay compensation in the following 
manner under Coal Bed Area (CBA) (A&D) Act, 1957. 
 
I. Market value of land (as deter mined by land sale deeds of 
past three years in the area); 
 
II. Solatium @ 30% of the market value; 
 
III. Escalation value @ 12% for the period from notification u/s 
4(1) till notification u/s 9(1) of CBA Act subject to a maximum 
of three years (under Land Ac quisition  Act (LA Act) 
escalation is paid from notificatio n u/s 4(1) till date of taking 
over possession;  
 
V. Interest @ 9% for the 1st year and 15% for the subsequent 
years from the date of acquisition u/s 9(1) of CBA Act till 
date of payment (under LA Act in terest is paid from the date 
of taking possession till date of payment). 
 
 
  The valuation of land is assessed by District Authority and payment is 
made through them. Where compensation amount is determined after 
negotiation with land owners, no escalation or interest is payable under CBA Act. 
Adequate fund is arranged by  concerned subsidiaries for payment under CBA 
and LA Act. 
 
  Whenever interested tenants whose land  is acquired feel that the awarded 
compensation is inadequate, the compensation is rece ived/accepted by them 
under protest and they may prefer appeal to LA Judge for land acquired under 
LA Act and special Tribunal set by Central Government for land acquired under 
CBA (A&D) Act for deciding the fair amou nt of compensation. The order of the 
Court/Tribunal is implemented by the s ubsidiary companies. Still, the most 
common problem i.e. faced by subsidiaries is that land losers though not eligible 
for employment as per norms, stick to  claim of employment and do not come 
forward to receive compensation.  
 
 Considering the change in circumstances in acquiring land for projects for 
public purpose, Ministry of Rural Devel opment, Government of India issued a 
National Policy on Resettlement & Rehabilitat ion for project affected families in 
2003 to provide different sc hemes of benefit in plac e of employment for the 
betterment of their standard of living. In tune with NPRR -2003 and considering 

surplus manpower in some of the su bsidiaries and increasing thrust of 
mechanisation as well as competitiv eness, CIL has already proposed for 
amendment of its existing R&R Policy in May, 2005. Propos ed amendments are 
under consideration in the Ministry. 
  
 
[Ministry of Coal No. 20011/5/2005-IF (Vol. IV) DATED 22ND   JULY, 2005] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para 1.51 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    ANANTH KUMAR, 
21 December, 2005                                                Chairman, 
 30  Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. 

ANNEXURE I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL ( 2005-06) HELD ON 21 st DECEMBER, 2005 IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1700 hrs. to 1730 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Ananth Kumar-In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya  
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan  
5. Shri Chandra Sekhar Dubey   
6. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam  
7. Shri  Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta  
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste  
9. Shri E. Ponnuswamy  
10. Smt. Karuna Shukla  
11. Shri M.Anjan Kumar Yadav 
12. Shri Vidya Sagar Nishad  
13. Shri B.J. Panda  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Director  
3. Shri Shiv Singh  - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following 
Draft Reports: 
 
i) Action Taken Report on the recomm endations contained in the Eighth   
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2004-05) on 
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Coal;  
 
ii) **   **  **  ** 
 
iii) **   **  **  ** 
 
 
 
 
** Does not pertain to this Report.  

3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports with minor 
additions/deletions/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairm an to finalise these Reports after 
making consequential change arising out of factual verification by the concerned 
Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE II  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made      24  
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  
G o v e r n m e n t :           1 8  
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,  9, 12, 13, 15,  
16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 and 24) 
 
Percentage of total         75%  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies:     2  
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 8 and 19) 
 
Percentage of total         8.33%  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:           2  
(vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos.10 and 14) 
 
Percentage of total         8.33%  
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:       2  
(vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos.11 and 22) 
 
Percentage of total         8.33%  
 
 
---- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 